
Tuesday, 29 September 2009

Parliament met at 10.22 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. As I indicated last week, we have quite a lot of work to do; but I have been informed that the Cabinet will be going for a retreat. So, I would like to ask Members to apply themselves today and tomorrow diligently to enable our colleagues go and do their other work.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT BORROW TO SDR 17.6 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING PHASE II OF THE LAKE VICTORIA ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PROJECT II

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Finance.

10.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (MICRO FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I would like to present a request from government to this august House to allow it borrow SDR 17.6 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for financing Phase II of the Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it is.

MS NANKABIRWA: “WHEREAS a financing agreement for SDR 17.6 million is to be concluded between the International Development Association of the World Bank Group and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for purposes of financing Phase II of the Lake Victoria Environment Management Project;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(2) of the said Constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirement, Government has laid, before this Parliament, the terms and conditions of the stated loan for its approval and authorisation;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the government is hereby authorised to secure the said financing or SDR 17.6 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group upon the terms and conditions therein stated.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, chairperson of the committee – yes, hon. Kamya.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a mater of procedure and guidance perhaps. I would like to know whether it is possible for us to debate and pass this request in the absence of quorum?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are we – are we taking the vote? Please, proceed with the report. I gave notice that we would sit this morning at 10 O’clock. Please, proceed with the report.

10.26
MR FREDRICK MBAGADHI (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the request for government to borrow SDR 17.6 million, which is an equivalent of US $27 million, from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing Phase II of the Lake Victoria Environment Management Project. The report is about 12 pages, but in the interest of time, I will not delve into the nitty-gritty of it.

In the introduction as reflected on page 2, it is indicated that this request was presented to this House by the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and referred to the committee for consideration in accordance with Article 159 and rule 152(2)(b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. I would like to report that the committee considered and scrutinised the request and begs to present its report.

In the methodology, I would like to say that the committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance, the Minister of water and Environment and technical staff from the Lake Victoria Environment Management Project (LVEMP). 

We also studied and made reference to the documents that are listed; we had a brief from the minister, the national implementation under LVEMP 1; the implementation completion and the national implementation for LVEMP II and the loan financing agreement. And here with me is a file containing copies of all the documents that were submitted to the committee. Allow me lay them on the Table.

Madam Speaker, the committee also undertook field tours on the shores of Lake of Victoria, in a bid to assess the performance of the Lake Victoria Environment Management Project I and to appreciate the challenges faced by the Lake Victoria Basin. 

The committee visited several sites among which were: Kasensero Landing Site, the fish handling facility in Rakai, Bukoba Irrigation Plant, and Bukoba Water Works in Tanzania. 

The committee also visited Shinyanga, the Model Natural Forest in Kisumu, Lake Victoria Environment Project Site at Jinja, Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation Headquarters in Jinja and the National Fisheries Resources Research Institute.

On page 3, we have the background. I will only read the first paragraph to enable Members get acquainted with what the LVEMP entails.  

The Lake Victoria Management Programme is a comprehensive programme aimed at rehabilitating the lake eco-system for the benefit of the people who live in the basin, the national economies of which we are part; and the global community. 

The Lake Victoria Management Programme has broad ambitious objectives of enhancing sustainable benefits to riparian communities; conserving diverse bio-diversity and providing riparian communities with harmonised and shared tools to regulate and manage the lake. 

The Lake Victoria Management Project phase I was essentially an information and data generation phase in preparation for more tangible interventions under phase II. Below that we have the specific objectives and, Madam Speaker, allow me to read the three of them:
    1.  To provide the necessary information needed to improve the management of the lake eco-system.
    2. To establish mechanisms for co-operative management by the three countries.
    3. To identify and demonstrate practical self-sustaining remedies while simultaneously building capacity for eco-system management. 

In that case, LVEMP I project was the first step in a long term process towards the achievement of the long term goal of the LVEMP programme. Its outputs and lessons from its implementation are inputs into the formulation of LVEMP II. 

We have the rationale for the bank involvement on item 4 although we can move on to page 4, item 5.

Programme Overview 

The higher development objective of the proposed LVEMP II is to contribute to the East African community’s vision and strategy framework for management and development of the Lake Victoria basin. 

The project will contribute to broad based poverty alleviation and improvement of livelihoods of people by supporting sustainable management of shared natural resources of the Lake Victoria basin which many communities depend on. This will be achieved by supporting:

    i. Institutional capacity development. 

    ii. Community-driven sub-project developments, investments in participatory water shed management and the combined effects of these interventions will bring about improvement in the livelihood of participating communities. The participatory watershed management will include: support to natural resources, conservation, and community’s livelihoods improvement.

We now move on to page 5, item 6 where we have the project components. The project will comprise four components:

    i. Strengthening institutional capacity for managing shared water and fisheries resources. Basically, this component will focus on strengthening the existing institutions to improve the co-operative management of shared trans-boundary natural resources of the Lake Victoria basin and hence contribute to the achievement of the first development objective. 

Underneath we have the objectives and maybe to summarily peruse through them, the objectives are to: 

i) 	Improve the effectiveness of key regional and national institutions through harmonisation of national policies, legislation and standards. 
ii) 	Develop options for long term mechanism for financing natural resources management interventions.
iii) 	Develop regional frameworks for the management of key trans-boundary natural resource waters and fisheries. 

There will be two sub-components:

    i) The harmonisation of policy, legislation and regulatory standards.
    ii) The eco-system monitoring and applied research.

Sources Pollution Control and Prevention

The main objective of this component is to reduce within the lake and littoral zone environmental stresses through the implementation of mitigation and prevention measures thus contributing to the achievement of the second PDO. It will finance investments aimed at reducing point sources of pollution in priority hot spots identified during LVEMP I. These investments will compliment ongoing activities supported by the other bank funded projects in water and sanitation and we have this component three. We can now move on to page 7, item 3.

Watershed Management

This component seeks to reduce environmental stresses from the lake basin through the implementation of non point sources, pollution mitigation and prevention measures thus directly contributing to the achievement of the second PDO. 

The reduction of the non point sources of pollution like sediment loads, nutrients and agro chemicals by scaling up successful models of water shared management practices piloted under LVEMP I will improve water use efficiency and generate positive downstream externalities. 

The project will support community driven investments in rehabilitating priority degraded sub catchments of Lake Victoria. In Uganda, this will be the Katonga River catchment, which is estimated to be 15,244 km long. This component will have two sub-components:

    i) Natural resources conservation and livelihoods improvement.
    ii) Community capacity building and participation. 

Project Coordination and Management

This component will provide resources necessary for the effective co-ordination and communication, monitoring and evaluation of the project activities.  

At regional level, these tasks will be carried out by the Lake Victoria Basin Commission, while at the national level it will be the responsibility of the National Project Co-ordination teams. This component will also have two sub-components:

    i) The project co-ordination and communication.
    ii) Monitoring and evaluation.

Below that we have the financing of the components in a summarised form but since we all have copies of this report, the first column is about the component and the second column we have sub-components and the third column we have the amounts. 

When we move on to page 8, we have a grand total of US $27.5 million. Item 7, on page 8, we have the loan terms and conditions and as usual, these are highly concessional and quite friendly. I request that with the terms and loans, Members can peruse through and we move on to page 9 where we have the project implementation, item 8.

It is expected that the project will be supported by a partnership of development partners including the World Bank, IDA, GEF and SIDA. Uganda as a borrower will provide counterpart funding and the total cost of LVEMP II Adaptable Programme Lending for Uganda is about US $55.1 million. 

The total national IDA support to the programme will be US $47.80 million; SIDA will provide US $3.2 million and Uganda as the borrower is expected to provide a total of about US $4.5 million in counterpart funding. The project implementation will be carried out mainly by public institutions but in partnership with the private sector, NGOs, CBOs and the civil society. 

The protocol for sustainable development of the Lake Victoria Basin enjoins partner states to undertake certain crucial steps regarding the management of the basin. States are required to develop national strategies, plans or programmes for conservation and sustainable use of the resources of the basin or to adopt existing strategies, plans or programmes to this end. 

Partner states are also encouraged to integrate as far as possible and as appropriate, the conservation and sustainable use of the resources of the basin into relevant sectoral or cross sectoral plans, programmes or policies.

Madam Speaker, the overall regional co-ordination of LVEMP II will be entrusted to the Lake Victoria Basin Commission. It will operate under the Regional Policy Steering Committee made up of the five permanent secretaries of each of the five partner states that is Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania Rwanda and Burundi. 

The Regional Policy Steering Committee shall provide the overall policy guidance to ensure that project components and activities are implemented nationally so as to fulfil the regional objectives of LVEMP II. 

At the national level, the co-ordination of LVEMP II will be located in the Ministry of Water and Environment and its Directorate of Water Development and Water Resources Management. 

The Ministry of Water and Environment is responsible for the project policy and overall implementation through the focal point office and the project co-ordination team. The project co-ordination team office will be situated in the Department of Trans-boundary Affairs. The implementation of LVEMP II will be carried out by the relevant sector ministries and agencies, local governments, NGOs, CBOs and communities. 

The roles and operations of the National Policy Steering Committee, the National Technical Steering Committee and the National Coordination Team will be critical for the success of the implementation of the project. 

Observations

    i) Most of Uganda’s lakes are cross boundary and are facing challenges almost similar to those of Lake Victoria and these challenges have an impact on other lakes although government seems to be concentrating more on Lake Victoria. 
    ii) The water hyacinth problem seems to be never ending in spite of government’s concerted efforts to rid the lakes of it, hence the need for government to concentrate more on combating it from the source.
    iii) With the various problems caused by the mushrooming settlements along the lake shores, there is inadequacy in the law to guard against solid waste disposal directly into the lake.
    iv) LVEMP I concentrated more on training, capacity building and research. In this regard, the committee raised concern over the project’s ability to retain the professionals trained under this project. 
    v) The committee raised concern over government’s ability to put in place mechanisms that will ensure sustainability of the interventions under LVEMP II when it comes to a close.
    vi) Concern was raised over the project’s omission to guide investments around the lake and foster co-management so that riparian communities own the lake. 

Recommendations

    i) The committee recommends that government should come up with comprehensive mitigation measures to curb the challenges being faced by other water bodies in the country before their management gets out of hand.
    ii) Government is urged to come up with measures of combating the water hyacinth from the source in order to create a lasting or long-term solution to the weed.
    iii) Government is further urged to come up with legislations to combat the solid waste disposal within the Lake Victoria Basin and also to guide investments around the lake shore.
    iv) Government should institute mechanisms - financing and environmental - to ensure project sustainability of the underlying interventions when the project closes under LVEMP II. 

Conclusion

The committee has noted the socio-economic and ecological importance of Lake Victoria and the continued threats and challenges facing the Lake Victoria Basin. 

The committee further noted the achievements of LVEMP I, the challenges to be addressed and the steps to be taken in preparation of LVEMP II taking into account that Uganda had been party to the preparation process of LVEMP I alongside other partner states of the East African Community,  for example Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda, Tanzania and Burundi; and that Lake Victoria is a trans-boundary lake and interventions to stop and reverse environmental degradation in the Lake Victoria Basin will only bear fruit with the involvement of all the partner states. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee supports and recommends to this House to approve a request by government to borrow US $17.6 million Special Drawing Rights, which is an equivalent of US $27 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing phase II of LVEMP. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the Committee on National Economy. I direct that the clerk ensures that the full text of the report is reproduced in the Hansard in addition to the presentation by the committee.
 
(Full text of the report to be found in Annex II of Issue 30)

10.46
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for scrutinising and presenting the government’s request. I wish to be on record that I recognise the importance of this Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project. 

Indeed when I was still working as a Director of the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre in Entebbe, I was a member of the Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project, which had a very big membership in Entebbe. So I am fairly familiar with the importance of this programme. But I have a few broad concerns in the manner and in our attitude of borrowing as a country. 

It is well-known right now that the credit crunch that has nearly brought the world to its knees is largely attributable to indiscriminate borrowing and indiscriminate credit. Uganda has borrowed and borrowed. My view is that until we begin to manage this country as we manage our own businesses or as we manage our own homes, we are going to plunge this country in a very deep pit. 

In your own business, do you borrow every time you want something? Is it possible every time you want something you check your pantry and if there is something missing, you go and borrow? Every time you need something in your business, do you go and borrow? Is that how we run our businesses? I know that we do not. We do not run our businesses that way. Now if we do not run our businesses that way, what do we do when we have need? We sacrifice, we tighten our belts, we postpone, we review, we prioritise, we wait and we even forego in many cases in our businesses until we are able to afford this borrowing. Why do we do for our country what we cannot do for our businesses and what we wisely do not do for our homes? 

There is a lot of room in this country to save money, to tighten our belts. There is a lot of squander and we squander money officially and unofficially. Records are there of about Shs 500 billion that you lose per year in corruption. Even officially we squander. Ministers in Uganda and other public officials drive the most expensive cars in the world —(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my friend hon. Betty Kamya for giving way. I want to give you information to the effect that this financial budget we have just passed as Parliament has 33 percent of a deficit, which we must finance through borrowing. It is part of that 33 percent, which this country must find, but we are not borrowing 100 percent for everything missing in the pantry.

MS KAMYA: I take your information with respect, my friend hon. Mukitale but my point is we can do better. We do not have to spend the 33 percent just because it is in the budget. We spend a lot of money on things that we do not need to spend money on.

There is a great story told by one time World Bank President Robert McNamara. He told a story, which I read in a World Bank publication. He was going to the World Bank coming from Nigeria and he shared a plane with some African ministers who were actually going to the World Bank to borrow money from him but they did not know each other until they got there. They travelled I think in first class, he travelled business class and they passed each other. They met him the following day, they had come to borrow money but they had travelled first class. That is the story of Africa. I think as a country we ought to search our hearts; there is a lot of saving that we can do. Hon. Mukitale we do not have to spend the Shs 33 billion just because it is in the budget and we budget for Shs 100 billion, which we can save on maintenance of vehicles. Why don’t we look into things like that? 

Coming to the programme itself, because of the time limitation, I am limiting myself to that but I am sure that the point is taken. I have some statistics, which I will bring here at an appropriate time. I can show that we can save up to 10 percent of the national budget if we applied it well ourselves, very slightly -(Member timed out.)

10.52
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to hon. Betty Kamya’s and thank the committee for a report on this important loan that we are seeking to approve this morning. 

I have read the report and there are a number of interesting proposed interventions on the Lake Victoria project for which I support. However, I have a small concern about something on page 6. 

The committee pointed out four project components among which there is one point on non source pollution, control and prevention; and among the sub-components there is one on habitation of waste treatment facilities and the other on promotion of cleaner production technologies. I would have liked the committee to help us understand which waste treatment facilities are going to be rehabilitated. 

As you know hon. Members, this is an area that we should take a lot of interest in. Waste treatment management is a key intervention in maintaining our environment. Just stating it that, “We are going to have rehabilitation of waste treatment facilities”, without telling us which ones I think leaves a lot to be desired. I would like to know which these are.

Two is promotion of cleaner production technologies. What are these technologies? I would have liked to interest myself in what these technologies are. Probably this Parliament would be able to have a good input and probably counsel the committee before we pass this budget.

Secondly, the committee has rightly observed that a lot of projects that are supported by the loans that we pass here are left hanging without sustainability and they pointed out one in particular, LVEMP I, which concentrated mainly on training, capacity building and research. I guess that is why we are going in for a second loan to help it again be on its feet. 

They propose that government must find money to finance sustainability of LVEMP II and I think this was a good observation. However, the committee would have gone further to suggest to us how we do this after all we have a loan here; there is money we are passing. I thought we would have found money within this particular loan to help this project get sustainability for some time. 

I have seen US $4 million on contingency; I have seen US $1.2 million on monitoring and evaluation. I thought we could have found some money at least to - because my fear is that you find a project like this, the offices are shut and again they wait for another loan to be passed in this Parliament. I would have liked the committee to help us find ways of how to sustain this project. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the committee.

MR MUKITALE: I think it is important that I give this information. The committee is urging Parliament and government to finance through the Budget and not wait for loans. When this loan support is over, should we have our own means, from our own resources, to make sure the protection of the lake basin continues even if we do not have to borrow?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Had you completed? Did you receive information or you had completed?

MR BALIDDAWA: I take the information in good faith.

10.56
MR TOM KAZIBWE (NRM, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this important report regarding our Lake Victoria. I fully support the loan request because this project is in two phases and we have already got a loan for the first phase. Therefore, if we reject the second phase we would have wasted the first phase. We have to complete the project by embarking on the second phase and then later on the country can budget for sustainability using its own resources. So, it would not be prudent to turn down the request because that would be wasting the first money.

Secondly, this is a trans-boundary activity involving other countries of the East African community and so, we as a partner state cannot refuse to work with the other states. If other countries have taken up the loan and have implemented the project and we do not take up the loan, the activity will flop. We have to work together with other countries and accept the loan. 

However, all said, I have some few remarks. On page 8, there is a component on water shed management. It talks of natural resource conservation and livelihood improvement. This means that we have to conserve all natural resources around Lake Victoria. 

However, the Executive has never come out openly on Mabira Forest and yet it is part of the natural resource conservation. Whenever His Excellency talks of Mabira Forest he says it is hon. Beatrice Anywar who was agitating against giving away Mabira. So, why can’t they come up openly and say, “We have given up Mabira Forest because it is part and parcel of water shed management?” They are keeping quiet about it and after passing the loan they will come up and say, “For the sake of investment and employment creation, we are giving Mehta so many hectares of Mabira Forest.” They should come up and put it on record that government has given up Mabira Forest because it is part and parcel of natural resource conservation. Otherwise, it will be lip service.

Madam Speaker, allow me to comment on the contents of page 9. It says that non withdrawn financing balance shall be 0.5 percent per annum. This means that if you take a loan, you will pay 0.75 percent of the money you withdraw and what will remain, you will pay 0.5 per annum. However, the common characteristic we have seen about these loans is that we request for a loan and then it takes a lot of time before the money is utilised and we continue paying interest on non withdrawn balances. This has been raised by the Auditor-General on many occasions in his report when he asks why we take up loans when we are not ready to implement projects.

Furthermore there is counterpart funding by government. We do not know how prepared the Government of Uganda is for counterpart funding. We have taken loans on water management and government has failed to fulfil its obligations. As such, you find that the impact of the project is seriously eroded because government fails to fund its part. I do not know how prepared they are or whether they have budgeted for counterpart funding so that we are well assured that the project will go on as planned.

And lastly, on these nice recommendations made by the committee, I do not know if the government is responding to these recommendations. The committee has made good recommendations which if not implemented the project will be in jeopardy. How are they committing themselves to these recommendations? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

11.01
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am not so sure that the committee did a good job. Some of us who are worried -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not, Mr Speaker. 

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, some of us who are worried about the state of our water bodies and some of us who know that the next world war will be about water sources, want to move very seriously as far as our water bodies are concerned.

Lake Victoria Environment Management Project Phase I had only three objectives. One was to provide the necessary information needed to improve the management of the lake’s ecosystems. I want to ask the committee to provide to this House and to tell us whether this necessary information was generated as a result of the Lake Victoria Environment Management Committee. Where can I find the information? I would like you to lay that information on the Table. 

The second objective was to establish mechanisms for co-operative management -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the committee. 

MR MUKITALE: Among the documents laid on the Table is this yellow book entitled, “Lake Victoria Environment Management Project Implementation Completion Report”, clearly showing outputs. It is already on the Table, hon. Kibanzanga.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much. The second was to establish mechanisms for corporate management by the three countries. I hope this mechanism is in that big book and I would like to ask whether this mechanism can be used to resolve the Migingo business. It is a mechanism by the three countries over waters and Migingo, I understand, is down there. 

Then, three, was to identify and demonstrate practical self-sustaining remedies while simultaneously building capacities for eco-system management. Where can we find these people who built their capacity so that we can consult them?

When you look at the recommendations of the committee, they move as if Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project (LVEMP) has never been in place, because what do you mean by recommendation no.1: “Government should come up with comprehensive mitigation measures to curb the challenges being faced by other water bodies in the country before their management gets out of hand”. Don’t you think the comprehensive mitigation is in that report? Now what do you want Government to do? I would have expected you to ask government to seriously implement and enforce mechanisms proposed from LVEMP (Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project).

When you look at your recommendation No.2, Government is urged to come up with measures. Why do you urge Government when we have borrowed money to come up with that research? Simply ask Government to implement and enforce the recommendations of this research. We did not borrow this money to go and eat.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. You have just read that the committee recommends Government to come up with comprehensive implementation measures to curb the challenges being faced by the other water bodies not L. Victoria. Because the first project was a research finding - information gathering, this was to identify the problem; now the information is available, but for the other lakes, including your very good ones like Edward, George and Albert, has recently conceived another project under the LVEMP. This is the kind of recommendation that we were talking about. Now, what of Kyoga? What happens to the other lakes?

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, all the water bodies of Uganda are facing similar challenges. I do not want you to go borrowing and duplicating projects. You borrow money for L. Victoria, but L. George and L. Albert are facing the same challenges. The same recommendations can be used to resolve the problems of L. Albert, yet you go and borrow more money. I had wanted the committee to simply urge Government to read LVEMP Phase I and make sure that they implement and enforce those recommendations.

11.08
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): I would like to find out from the committee how much financing went into Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project, Phase I, and when you borrowed that money? Because looking at phase II, by the time we are supposed to be finishing the repayment of that money - if I am fortunate to be alive; I will possibly be about 82 years old. Because if you borrowed for phase I recently, and the money has completely been used, and in this phase II we are going to finish the money in the shortest time and the repayment, many of us in this House may not be alive to repay, it raises concerns about our continuous borrowing over long periods of time. I would hate to saddle my children with debt, and if the results do not come out, it will be a very unfortunate situation. 

On the second point, we should stop looking at the hyacinth as a menace. If we really look at the properties of the water hyacinth, there is a blessing. We worry about soil conservation and erosion and the loss of nutrients; the hyacinth collects those nutrients from the water. If we are able to harness the biomass, release the biogas from that hyacinth and use it in the soil, we will be hitting several birds with one stone. Those would be some of the projects which could actually make the management of hyacinth something positive. Because from it, you can generate fodder, research has been done on fodder - you can generate biogas and you can also generate organic fertilizers, which you can feed back to the soil. 

But if we keep looking at it as a menace which should be destroyed, and the projects are all out to destroy, why don’t we harness the positive attributes of hyacinth. Because once the nutrients have been lost from the soil and are in the water, they will end in Egypt or in the Mediterranean. But if we are able to harness it through the hyacinth, we can still make use of it.

Then the fishing communities which live around the water bodies; most of them are cut off the energy grid. With the generation of the biogas, you can actually run facilities that can make their communities more sustainable and also be able to store the fish. So, we need to look at this in a more holistic method, whereby the hyacinth can actually play a key role in a sustainable clean method of handling our water bodies, and not just looking at it as a menace which has to be gotten rid of.

11.12
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for this report. I have a number of concerns: First, the committee; I do not know whether by design or by default, have chosen to be silent on page 1 of this project. I thought it was important for them to have given us this information. It is true we procured a loan for the first phase, but I thought it would be prudent enough for you to have clearly spelt out how this phase I facility was utilised, because the same committee goes on to raise its concerns on what I see as observations. 

When it says the water hyacinth is still a problem; it is never ending. So, for instance, I thought that it would have been important for the committee to have informed this House on why this problem of the water hyacinth, which Phase I should have handled, is never ending; and is still a problem. 

The committee continues to lament that there are mushrooming settlements along the lake shores; it is telling us that phase I does not seem to have attained the objectives for which it was procured. 

It also doubts Government’s ability to put in place mechanisms that will ensure sustainability of the interventions under phase II. So, this actually puts us the Legislature –(Interruption) 

MR MBAGADHI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to my colleague and I actually appreciate the concerns that he is raising because he says that the committee should have dwelt more on issues to do with LVEMP I in this report. 

I would like to refer the hon. Member to page 3 where we have the background information. It is said in paragraph 2: “Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project Phase I was essentially an information and data generation phase in preparation for more tangible interventions under Phase II.” And the committee went on to say, “LVEMP I was, therefore, the first step in a long term process towards the achievements of the long term goal of LVEMP programme. Its outputs and lessons from its implementation are inputs into the formulation of LVEMP II.” 

Madam Speaker, with this kind of information, it is actually very clear that we have all the information of the outputs of LVEMP I in one of the documents which has been laid on Table, that is, the implementation completion report. It is quite detailed; it is a report of 153 pages. So, out-rightly, what the hon. Colleague would have loved to hear concerning LVEMP I is clearly embedded in that report. Thank you. 

MR EKEMU: Thank you, hon. Member. You have raised this as a report of the committee and it is your concern. You are actually saying that water hyacinth, for example, is still a problem; you are saying that there are mushrooming settlements along the shores; you are saying Government’s ability to put in place mechanisms that will ensure sustainability of the interventions are doubted. And according to you, phase I has not achieved these expectations. 

My concern ultimately is that the cost of borrowing the US$ 27 million, which you are talking about, is a lot of money. Who is going to pay it over that long period as has already been raised by other Members? So, I am simply saying that we need to take precautions, especially when we are trying to throw good money to add to what has already been spoiled. Because I am not yet convinced that phase I has been properly accounted for and has done what it is supposed to attain, since you have been lamenting in the observations of your own report that you have presented.

So, I would want you to interpret for us what the cost implications of capital are as given on page 8 of this report, under loan terms and conditions. There is a lot of technical language that may not ordinarily be understood by the ordinary person. But the financial implications in terms of cost of capital; in terms of commitment charges et cetera - what is the actual cost that the ordinary Ugandan is going to suffer in this second phase if this money is actually borrowed again? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, would you like to respond; because you have not indicated who is going to speak first?  Okay, Minister for Water.

11.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, the Minister of Finance, for presenting the loan. I equally want to thank my other colleagues for the remarks made, and the committee for the report. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to respond to some of the issues that have been raised by my colleagues. The first one was by hon. Baliddawa about the water treatment facilities. You are aware that as a ministry, we have done our best to provide water to most of the urban centres, but we have had a challenge of the waste sewerage treatment plants which we are looking at as one of those that are going to help us handle this challenge. 

Basically, what we are going to do is to provide centres that surround the lake with waste treatment plants. Gaba trading centre is one of them, but we are also looking at Jinja; as much as the town has a sewerage plant, we have to expand it in order for it to serve the purpose.  

Looking at cleaner production, we have many factories and hotels that surround the lake, but which are not compliant as far as solid waste or effluent treatment is concerned. So, we are looking at working with these factories to ensure that they pre-treat their waste before they discharge it into the lake. Many of them eventually discharge their waste into the lake, which is being done in an incompliant way. So, we are also looking at this project in order to help us handle this bit. 

Madam Speaker, there was an issue of training, capacity building and research, where colleagues were wondering where the people who have been trained are; we have them serving at regional level. Like Dr Tom Okurut, who was trained under this facility, is the Executive Director for Lake Victoria Basin Commission based in Kisumu. But we also have researchers in NARO who have been trained under the same facility - LVEMP I. And some of these scientists are working with my ministry in the Water Resources Department; some of them are here and all of them have been trained. 

What we are saying is that having built the capacity of these scientists, we can still use phase II to make sure that we do the implementation of the project using the same people; they are available and they are still with us. 

Hon. Kazibwe was concerned about the conservation of natural resources and was wondering what is happening to Mabira Forest. As the custodian of the forest, I want to assure this House that as far as I am concerned, Mabira is safe, and if it is to be de-gazetted, honourable members, you know that the law demands - that it is Parliament to do it. So, we shall all be part of the process, if it is to be de-gazetted. But as far as I know, it is safe. 

Colleagues were again wondering about the counterpart funding. This is normally done through our budget process, and I want to assure colleagues that we are already providing for it under our normal budgeting process as a ministry. 

About the commitment to the recommendations, we definitely cherish the advice from Parliament, and as a ministry and Government, we are going to strongly ensure that we take up the recommendations from the committee and see to it that they are implemented.  

Hon. Kibanzanga, about the information which was generated, has already been answered, and many of the documents were laid here. I will encourage colleagues to look through them – actually there was a lot of information generated under LVEMP I, which we are actually basing on to make sure that we protect the lake.

About Migingo, I would like to say that this is not part of what we are doing. Migingo is being handled in another way. So, I don’t want to tell Parliament that this is the mechanism that will sort out Migingo issues. But I am aware that the two countries are handling the Migingo issues. 

About other water bodies facing the same challenges like Lake Albert, Lake Edward and Lake Kyoga, as a ministry, we have come up with different programmes to ensure that the lakes are supported. For example, Lakes Albert and George are shared with our neighbours and under the Nile Basin Initiative we have a programme which is supporting the conservation of those lakes with our neighbours. 

Equally, on Lake Kyoga, we have a programme under the Basin Catchment Management where we have even mobilised the districts that share Lake Kyoga under LAKIMO, to make sure that we conserve that lake. So, we have not left chances for any water body to be left out. We have programmes for every water catchment in this country.

About generating biogas from hon. Akena, this is a good idea and I believe that it is one of the issues that we can explore to see to it that we support our people. 

How was LVEMP I utilised?  That one I have already responded to, Madam Speaker. But on why the issue of the water weed is not yet sorted out, I would like colleagues to appreciate that most of this weed comes through River Kagera from Rwanda. And the beauty with the current programme – LVEMP II - is that Rwanda and Burundi are going to be part of it because they are part of the East African Community. But they are not part of this loan because they came in a bit late, much as some of the money has been reserved for them. After fulfilling issues to do with the East African Community, they will also be given money, which will, therefore, make it easy for us to work together in order to eradicate the weed. So, we are handling it as the five countries. 

Honourable members, I thank you for the support and I beg that we support this loan so that our people can benefit from it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want you to join me in welcoming the children of Victoria Wing Primary School from Mukono, up there. (Applause)  They are represented by hon. Bayiga and hon. Nalugo. You are welcome! (Applause) But I see only boys; okay, there are some girls.

11.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (MICRO FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleague, hon. Namuyangu, in thanking Members for their contribution. I have a few remarks to make. 

The Hon. Beti Kamya is worried about the kind of borrowing that my government is doing. She called it “indiscriminate borrowing,” and I just wanted to assure Hon. Beti Kamya through you, Madam Speaker, that before we bring the loan requests to Parliament, we go through a process which evaluates and analyses how indebted we are; how important the loan request is right from Cabinet to a committee of Parliament, and then to the plenary. 

You remember where we have come from in 1986 when our budget was funded from outside -(Hon. Beti Kamya rose_)- I thought I was clarifying you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are not going to encourage dialogue; conclude.

MS NANKABIRWA: And I think we have to understand the concept of borrowing because she also asked whether this is how we are doing our business – borrowing, borrowing! 

Madam Speaker, if there is a facility to be utilised by countries which feel that they need the service, let those countries utilise these services. I have high hopes that as we move in identifying the correct stimulus for our economic development, then we shall see our budget funded majorly from the domestic collections.

Hon. Tom Kazibwe was worried that we take loans when we are not ready, and at the end of the day, end up not utilising the money. Let me inform Parliament through you, Madam Speaker, that the implementation of these loans we present to Parliament is part and parcel of the negotiations of the loan. This is a requirement that the Ministry of Finance put in place for line ministries, for these loans to have the implementation plan embedded throughout the negotiation process; that the committee finally scrutinises the implementation and then finally when ministries present their policy statements every year, they are supposed to give an account of how these loans have performed, to the committees of Parliament, and then finally to the plenary.

Lastly, on the issue of Migingo. Hon. Namuyangu has given information. I would like to add that this issue is not an environmental management problem; it is territorial and, therefore, it touches on boundaries. The committee that was set up from Uganda and Kenya is comprised of the ministers of Lands, Internal Affairs, Foreign Affairs and East African Community, and we hope that they are managing because it touches on territories. However, the loan that we are requesting for concerns environment management around Lake Victoria, and the Migingo problem is not part of it. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that this House authorise the loan as requested.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 4.5 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON AFRICA AND GUARANTEE ANOTHER LOAN OF US$ 3 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK TO UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK LIMITED

11.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE, MICROFINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to present the request to this Parliament for Government to borrow US$ 4.5 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) for a line of credit to Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDBL) and for Uganda Development Bank to secure US$ 3 million from the Islamic Development Bank as a line of credit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker: “WHEREAS a loan agreement for US$ 4,500,000 is to be concluded between the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) and the Government of the Republic of Uganda, for purposes of financing the line of credit to Uganda Development Bank Limited; 

AND WHEREAS under Article 159 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions;

AND WHEREAS under the same Article 159(2) of the said Constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirements Government has laid before this Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for their approval and authorisation; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that Government is hereby authorised to secure the said loan of US$ 4.5 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development on Africa (BADEA) upon the terms and conditions therein stated, and to issue a letter of comfort to the Islamic Development Bank for their line of credit of US$ 3 million to Uganda Development Bank.” 

I beg to move.

11.35
MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow US$ 4.5 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa and a guarantee for Uganda Development Bank to secure a loan from the Islamic Development Bank as a line of credit.

Before that, I would like to lay on Table the minutes of the meetings of the committee of 19th May, 25th May and 19th June 2009 as well as the Uganda Development Bank lending guidelines, the UDB strategic plan, the UDB financial statements for the year 2007, and the Arab Bank for Economic Development Bank in Africa general conditions.

In the interest of time, I will not read the report word for word to this House, but I will try to pick out key points without distorting the purpose of the report.

The request to this House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was referred to the committee under Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The committee synchronised the report and now begs to report as follows. 

We had different methodologies of compiling the report. We interacted with the Minister of Finance and the technical staff of the Uganda Development Bank. We also made reference to a number of documents among which were the audited accounts of the bank for the year 2005/06 and 2006/07 and the income statements for the same years. The committee also made spot visits to the projects financed by the Uganda Development Bank Limited namely; Mutume Commercial Agencies – (Interruption)

MR OCULA: Madam Speaker, it was not my intention to interrupt the presentation of this report, but I see the chairperson of the committee is around, as well as the vice chairperson. Also, the person who is presenting this report on behalf of the committee has not signed it. Does he believe in the report he is presenting, and why are the chairperson and vice chairperson of the committee just sitting there? Why have they delegated to someone who has not even signed the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, all the Members of the committee are Members of this House. I don’t know about the signing, but if he distorts the report then you can complain. Also, I think it is important to build capacity and decentralise power. Proceed.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We visited a number of projects supported by this bank and as I was saying, namely: Mutume Commercial Agencies in Iganga District; Landmark Hotel Limited in Soroti; Budadiri Arabic Coffee factory in Sironko; Kumi Hotel Limited in the district of Kumi; and Mayi Kiyagi Hotel in Mbale District.

Background of this bank

The Uganda Development Bank Limited is a successor to the Uganda Development Bank, which was restructured in 1997. The restructuring was aimed at re-organising the bank and returning it to profitability. The performing part of UDB was retained and the non-performing part was transferred to the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust. The performing portfolio was retained and taken over by the Uganda Development Bank Limited.

Rationale for the borrowing

It is the objective of the government to significantly increase the capacity of UDBL to provide long-term development finance to the private sector. The existing level of capitalisation is only slightly more than a half of the authorised share capital. This limits the bank’s ability to carry out its core business of long-term lending to the private sector. The amounts of the loans the bank lends range from Shs 3.5 billion to Shs 50 billion, and are held for five years before being retired. 

The existing Shs 53 billion capitalisation is small since the bank is experiencing high demand for long-term financing, a facility, which is not adequately available in the banking sector in Uganda.

For UDBL to have adequate resources for its business, the government needs to continue capitalising the bank using its own resources, which it has done adequately. This is to be supplemented with borrowing on concessionary terms from external sources such as the banks that we have mentioned.

The loan will be utilised for project finance in the private sector and 10 per cent of this loan will be used for lending to qualifying micro-finance institutions. The loan’s utilisation will give priority to value-addition in agriculture and to enhance exports. The two banks will provide full backing to UDBL at concept stage, design, financing modalities and supply of equipment, and where necessary, it will also provide the technical personnel.

On page 6, the terms and conditions of the loan - it is important that Members continue to appreciate the terms and conditions of the loan. For the loan from BADEA, the maturity period will be four years, and the interest rate 2.5 years with a grace period of three years.

For the guarantee of the loan from the Islamic Bank, the maturity period will be 19 years, with a grace period of three years, and administrative charges will go up to 0.75 per cent of the loan amount.

The other conditions are in the papers laid down on the table.

I want to beg that we move to the observations of the committee.

The committee observed that UDBL has a capital base estimated at US$ 35 million, with a total loan portfolio of Shs 37 billion. This is equivalent to US$ 22.4 million. The major source of capital for its financial operations is the government through budgetary provisions. The budgetary provisions, over the years, have been too small for UDBL to make substantial loan extensions to its clients. 

UDBL did not benefit from the Apex funds due to its bad financial status at the time. Also, it could not meet the criteria and guidelines that had to be met by any lending institution before accessing the Apex funds. At the time when the Apex funds were available, UDBL was a sinking institution with no signs of recovery. The recovery of most debts was doubtful and a big portion of its loan portfolio had been placed under the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust. It was found to be unwise to inject in more capital.

The committee also observed that the restructuring of UDBL has resulted into a reduction in its debt portfolio and enabled it to get back on track towards recovery. The bank is now on a recovery trend and shows signs of sustainability, especially if critical interventions like this can be made through capitalisation. 

UDBL undertakes limited lending because of financial limitations. The main source of its financial operations, as we said, are through budgetary allocations by the government.

UDBL requested for more than US$ 4.5 million in the request to this Parliament earlier, but then the state of its balance sheet was not healthy enough to get more than what it is being requested for by the minister.  The committee took note of this state of affairs, but observed that the amount requested for is too small if the bank is to extend meaningful loans to projects that require high amounts of capital like mining, agricultural processing and manufacturing.

The committee also observed that the maximum loan amount given to an enterprise by UDBL is Shs 2.0 billion. This amount is too low and not worth a bank of this nature, whose main aim is to provide development finance, which cannot easily be sourced from other commercial banks.

Some of the businesses in agro-processing, especially cotton sector, were facing difficulties in servicing their loans and could go into receivership if special interventions are not made. 

Some of the factors that the committee discovered were responsible for these difficulties were: 

    1. The drastic drop in world cotton prices resulting into low farm prices. This has made farmers abandon cotton production and stifled factories of the much-needed raw materials. 

    2. The companies are getting little revenue because of the reduced volume of cotton exported and the low export prices. This has curtailed the capacity of such companies to service their loans with UDBL. 

    3. Some of the companies in this industry have limited capital to purchase machinery that would further add value to their products. It was observed that whereas lint was going for between US$ 0.8 and US$ 0.9, cotton yarn was fetching up to US$ 3. To finance this value addition, a company would require between US$ 400,000 and US$ 500,000 to secure the required machinery for value addition. 

The interest rate of 19 percent is too high for businesses in the agricultural sector. The sector is also faced with stiff competition from imported inferior garments from Asia and dumping of second hand clothes. 

The UDBL loan period is five years; this period is too short for long term investments. In essence, UDBL provides short term financing for long term projects. This mismatch of the project gestation vis-à-vis financing arrangement impacts negatively on long term investment with long payback periods. It is therefore difficult to have financial flows within a five year loan period to service a loan of this nature.

The committee made several recommendations. I beg to mention a few of them: 

    1. On page 11, UDBL should be mandated to administer the trust funds and lend out the funds subject to the general conditions as stipulated in the UDBL lending and investment policy guidelines.
    2. UDBL should be supported with adequate funds to enable it extend funds to projects that are long term and require substantial investments. Such a loan should attract low interest rates, in any case, not at the rates prevailing in commercial banks. As observed, the interest rates of up to 19 percent are too high for the agricultural sector.
    3. Government should interest itself in the cotton sub-sector especially the textile industry with a view of designing a strategy on how best it can be protected from being out competed in the local market. 
    4. The bank should be further capitalised to meet the bigger need of development financing in this country. 
    5. There is need for government to design strategies of marshalling internal funds for long term financing. 

In conclusion, the committee recognises the need for cheap and long term financing for our investors especially the indigenous ones. It is important for us to revive development banking in this country as a channel through which strategic interventions in this critical area of our economy can be made by availing the necessary funds to the private sector at an affordable rate. 

The committee supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by government to borrow US $4.5 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa for a line of credit to Uganda Development Bank Limited and a guarantee for Uganda Development Bank to secure a loan of US $3 million from the Islamic Development Bank as a line credit. I beg to report. 
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

11.51
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to make a contribution to the motion. I wish to thank the committee for the report they have brought to this House. 

I would like to observe that the committee in carrying out its work visited some of the projects that were financed by the African Development Bank Limited. It is my thinking that this was meant to portray the good work done by the bank and therefore these could be successful projects. 

I would like to testify that in my view, Kumi Hotel Limited, which is situated in my constituency, is actually doing well. However, for some reason best known to the presenter of this report, he decided to omit observation No. 8. He just skipped it and that rang a bell in my mind. I do not know why hon. Bahati deliberately skipped observation eight on page 10. But my suspicion is that it is an item that addresses a problem that has existed in our private sector where government gets involved and it is something that has caused big losses to our country. When you talk about Phenix Logistics, Apparel Tristar, Jinja International Textile Corporation; all these organisations have caused big losses having taken loans from government. It is evident from this observation that government has been giving trust funds earmarked for specific enterprises like the ones I have noted. 

Based on this, I would also like to comment on observation two where it is clear to me that apex funds were not given to UDBL because there were no signs of recovery of this institution. So based on No. 8 and this observation, even having at the back of my mind that fact that there has been some bit of restructuring, how do we guarantee that government this time is not going to be giving trust funds to institutions that they are not sure about and, therefore, causing losses to this country? How are we going to mitigate these risks? What has changed in government so that we may conclude that this time they are not going to drive this country into muddy waters? I would like guarantees from the Minister of Finance and from the committee before I commit myself by voting for this loan. 

My suspicion is that these funds will be given to individual organisations that are friendly to government and this may result into huge losses. And so the penalty does not go to government, it comes to this House because it is us who commit the government on behalf of the people of this country. I want that guarantee. I have expressed my doubts and it looks like UDBL is on the path to recovery. It has not fully recovered and now you would like us to appropriate this huge amount of money to this institution? Why don’t we wait until UDBL has fully recovered? This is a sick institution in the opinion of the committee, but you are insisting that we should put money into such an institution? 

Those are the two questions I would like to put to the committee. My questions are about whether we can guarantee that government is not going to mess up this loan and whether UDBL has recovered sufficiently enough for us to give it more money. I thank you.

11.57
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Madam Speaker, I am not sure whether I should support this motion or not. Anyway, I rise on a very important point. 

When I look at page 11, I notice that the committee has rightly observed that UDBL’s loan period is five years. I would like to say this period is too short for long term investment. I wonder whether the ministry can clarify to this House that it has the ability to direct or redirect UDBL to provide a longer period. I am saying this because if the grace period is five years with a maturity period of 19 years and we are paying it in the range of 24 years – when I looked through the committee report; I noticed a lot of inconsistencies. 

I would have expected them to do recommendations in line with these such that people who are going to benefit from this loan are given a longer period to pay. This is not profitable at all. I thank you.

11.59
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to seek clarification from the committee on one of the three companies that are supposed to have received money from the Uganda Development Bank Limited. I think this should be Jinda International Textiles Corporation (JITCO) and not Jinja. 

In the same vein, I would like to say that it is JITCO that took over the spinning mill in Lira not Jinja.

And when you look at the last two – Apparel Tri Star and Jinja International Textile Corporation, you realise the reasons given in paragraph nine of the report do not quite touch the realities of what caused these companies to fall.

I would like to say I am more familiar with JITCO – I just wish to point out that I do not really look at the drop in cotton prices as one of the major causes.

Further to that, I would like to say that when JITCO was still under Lira Spinning Mill, it received equipment worth US $4 million, which on privatisation was sold off. All the equipment was removed, yet they were supposed to be replaced. At the moment, JITCO is under receivership from one of the commercial banks for other loans taken. So I think the justification that is being used here is not helping to bring out the cause. And to be put that the interest rates are not conducive for agro-processing – I think we need to be serious by looking exactly at the problem in respect to specific companies.

Also, the government’s position of directing where the money should go may be part of the problem. We should try to set the guidelines as to how and where the money should be utilised. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.02
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. On what hon. Jimmy Akena said about JITCO, I would like to say that the committee should have been concerned about how some of these companies are accessing loans and how they are paying them. It is a shame that when you go to Lira, you realise that after being given the Uganda Spinning Mill, they sold what had been in that factory.

What I would like to know is: I have noticed that much as the committee made reference to UDBL documents, they are not telling us the position of statements, audit reports and so on. Were these good or not? We have no information on that to enable us approve the next loan for them. Also, we needed information on how these companies are managing funds that they receive. 

My other concern is about the ISBD loan. Are we going to guarantee this loan without interest rates; or we will get to know it after being given the money? What is the interest rate against which we are going to approve this loan?

I am concerned about the cotton business. When the report tells us that cotton prices are declining throughout the world, I think that is not correct. This decline is only for Uganda’s case and that is what should be addressed. In other countries people still produce a lot of cotton with farmers being given some subsidies. I would like to inform you that the cotton farmers in Uganda are left to work on their own. So when the cost of the inputs rises, they just fall out. But that should not be the reason for not producing more cotton.

Madam Speaker, in my constituency people still produce organic cotton, which is very lucrative, but I can tell you that government has never taken any serious steps to encourage these farmers in producing such cotton. It is also surprising to learn that now there is going to be competition in buying organic cotton during the coming season. I read about a certain company in the Bukedde newspaper that is coming into the market and the one that has been organising the farmers has been complaining and I think the complaints have reached the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. This matter should be solved because it is of great concern otherwise my farmers are complaining and they will soon abandon the production of organic cotton which will be very unfortunate. If we are considering the production of cotton, the farmers and those who gin should be considered for this loan otherwise on their own, they are unable to do much. Those are the areas of my concern. Thank you.

12.06
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you. I would like to again thank the committee for this report. I want to raise a concern on the recapitalisation of UDBL. Much as we do appreciate that a restructured UDBL will enable our local investors whether in agro-processing or other sectors to access cheaper sources of long term financing, but this is after the committee has again given the background of the bad track record of funds - what it is calling trust funds that were previously under Uganda Development Bank (UDB). It is not clearly telling us how the restructured UDBL is going to perform any better than Uganda Development Bank, which still leaves us under those same fears that this money may play the role of patronage or meeting the interests of some individuals who may want to peddle influence. 

The committee has correctly cited three firms that previously benefited from trust funds and the same UDBL is seeking mandate to manage these trust funds and yet there are no guarantees that even in their restructured form, they are going to be any better. So in as far as the recapitalisation is concerned, it is still being pursued through long term borrowing. What this means is that in terms of borrowing, we expected the committee to have clearly come out and stated that, “This is what the Government of Uganda has marshalled or mobilised as internal funds or equity capital versus what we intend to borrow”. Unfortunately, it has been very silent on that and yet we know that what it is calling the capital base of UDBL is US $35 million and the loan portfolio is US $22.4 million. It does not tell us what the Government of Uganda has raised as internal funds. Although somewhere at the beginning of the report, it does say that up to the period 2001, UDB accumulated some profits and probably those profits were converted into retained earnings and could have contributed to the recapitalisation that we now see here. 

It is misinforming and misleading to any concerned Ugandans to say you want to borrow and yet you are not sure what your equity contribution as the Government of Uganda is to show the commitment to the people and the taxpayers because this is purely borrowing and hiding the contribution that this government is making. I would have loved to have those clarifications from the committee chair because whether it was by omission or commission, he did not mention it and yet it is important.

12.10
MR SIMON TOOLIT (FDC, Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you. I also have some few queries to be answered by the Minister of Finance and the committee. The first is about the interest rate. We are told that we are borrowing at 2.5 percent and we are going to lend it at 19 percent. If Uganda Development Bank Limited has been restructured to actually cater for the private sector, then I think this difference in the interest rate is too big. 

The committee has not told us whether all the money is going to the agricultural sector or microfinance institutions because they have talked about arrears which they are going to Finance. I think it is very critical for us to know which areas or sectors are going to benefit because if you have seen from the list, the companies that the committee has visited are five, which are all from one region: the eastern region. I wonder what criterion was used in selecting these firms that benefited from the first project –(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: I thank you for giving way. I would like to first give information to the House that this Committee on National Economy has a delegated function from the plenary. When we observe that the interest rate is high and the borrowing rate is low, we do make recommendations because we know we have our own committee of finance responsible for running this bank. We are also recommending to the ministry. So our role is to make sure that we remind them, which we have done. We have talked to the finance committee and they are going to make follow-up visits and actually the extra visits to Lira Spinning Mill, the Northern route and the south west will be guided not by the Committee on National Economy but that of Finance. 

Basically, the findings we give are for the other committee of Parliament responsible for the daily running of the sessional committees responsible for the daily running of Parliament. The sessional committees should make a follow-up and we agreed with the Chairman of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development that we are going to make extra visits. I do encourage all other committees to follow-up these loans when they are passed. 

MR TOOLIT: I thank you. Since you have already made a report, even when you make recommendations, they should be here. If in your committee you suggest that this rate of 19 percent is very high, then what do you recommend? We need to know why you have recommended the 10 percent because 19 percent is really too high as you have already put it in your suggestion. 

This is a very serious issue because this is a bank that has been restructured to cater for our private sector and yet they are now setting very high interest rates. They are almost like the commercial banks, which may even have better terms. 

My colleague, hon. Franca Akello, talked about the duration of the loan. We are getting this loan for 24 years yet the bank is giving the private sector only five years to pay back. That is unreasonable. If construction of a hotel can take about three years and you are supposed to pay back the loan within five years, the two years will not be enough for you to pay back because you will not have got enough funds through the operation of the hotel. I think the committee should have recommended to the relevant committee that the duration of payment be extended maybe to 10 years or even 20 years; equivalent to the grace period of the loan. That can be fair. Although we are passing the loan, these inner issues, which have not been brought out very clearly, should be identified so that when signing the final documents, this position is clear.

The administrative charge of 0.7 percent of the loan amount translates to US $22,500 and I do not know who is going to benefit from this charge. Why should you put a charge on a loan? Is this the final payment that we are going to make to the bank that we are borrowing from? The committee has not come out very clearly on this. Thank you. 

12.15 
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the request by government to borrow this money from the Uganda Development Bank. However, there are serious concerns of a practical nature that I want to point out and one of them is equity. When figures are presented or given in percentage terms and you translate them into practical and operational law issues, you find a big difference. I state this with a practical example. 

We worked out a project in which we wanted to raise money to do processing and value addition on Irish potatoes. We needed Shs 2 billion and we had all the requirements that the bank needed. The commodities were local, the labour was local, we had power and water and the internal rate of return was extremely good - more than 15 percent as required by any project. But when it came to equity, they required and stated that we must have equity of 40 percent. If you calculate, 40 percent of Shs 2 billion is Shs 800 million. Which local community or microfinance is going to raise Shs 800 million in order to meet the equity required by this Uganda Development Bank? So, these percentages must be translated into practical terms in order for them to be meaningful to borrowers and this is the concern that I wish to raise. My suggestion is that much as we recommend that government borrows this money, let the bank go back and work out the equity contribution required by the various borrowers so that the whole thing can become practical. I thank you. 

12.18 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I support the request to finance this vital bank. In fact the request is overdue. For any economy to flourish there should be sources of capital financing since commercial banks by their very nature will not finance long term projects because they are controlled by their own shareholders who need their money quickly and with high profits. 

We are worried about the interest rate of 19 percent but that is how the consortium of banks thinks they can make their profits and you cannot rush there to request for funds which have a long term grace period. If you go quickly, then you must pay quickly. If you do not, they take you to the courts of law. All over the world, these sources of finance for development are there – even in China, Japan and others. We need this very critically because of our need to develop. 

This bank had faced some problems which some of you have already mentioned, but it is being restructured so that it is controlled properly and addresses our developments, which will have backward and forward linkages, like into cotton. If you have this money, you can give it to the farmers and they produce cotton and then you can know where to go and process this cotton so everybody can benefit from the money. If we really want to revamp and revitalise our economy, this bank is needed and government had to think critically about it and now that this money is about to be got, we should urgently approve the loan so that we move forward. We should mobilise our people and get all these raw products processed with this kind of money. 

Dear Members, some people are very much reluctant to approve the loan because this bank faced some problems. Well, in management there can easily be problems but once you design a programme properly, restructure and bring in good management, things can move. We do not have to retrench everyone all the time. If anything comes and you abdicate it, it is not the best way of managing the affairs of any institution. We have been discussing this bank and some of us are very strong in saying this bank must be revived so as to help us in every sector.
 
It will be a waste of time to wait because we need this money. You should go and mobilise your constituents and say that there is money, get vital projects, which can be appraised and once approved you manufacture whatever you want in order to boost the economy of our country to become competitive all over the world. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know I appreciate that we need this money very quickly but I wish someone could address the issue raised by hon. Franca Akello about the five years. We can borrow money but I do not think we want to cripple ourselves and our people. I wish someone could address the five years’ issue!

12.23
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairman for the presentation of the report and I am here to support this motion. When you see what is happening in the world now with the credit crunch, with the loss of jobs, factories closing, it has proved to those developed countries that we cannot depend entirely on the private sector and hence the capitalisation of this bank to me is very important.

Yes, hon. Amuriat has talked about the Phenix Logistics, Tri-Star and others which might have not performed well. I agree with him but what is important here is the credible policy line government is taking in having government participate in the economy of this country, which I support. 

BADEA says they are going to fund projects which are going to create many jobs and as we know, we are sitting on time bombs about jobs. Our youth are not employed; graduates are not employed so if this one is going to create jobs, I think it is good enough for us to support the loan request with all our efforts.

It is disturbing that year in year out when we come here, our GDP growth has always been five plus but when you go to any constituency in Ugandan, everybody is asking for money. You give just Shs 1,000 and people want to kneel down. The GDP is very high but the per capita income is very low. We must address that and in my view we can use this bank to invest so the per capita income can go up and this is in the field of agriculture where 80 percent of our people are participating.

I am appealing to government to put this money into agriculture so that the per capita income goes up in line with the GDP. That will bring stability in this country. I thank you.

12.25
MR TOM KAZIBWE (NRM, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Although I agree with the loan request, I regret to say that the committee did not do a thorough job. The committee was after seeing that this loan goes through Parliament because they hid a lot of information from us.

If you go to page 3, the committee made on spot visits to the projects financed by UDBL but the committee does not give us it findings from those enterprises. They keep quiet. Why did they go there in the first place? They do not mention the amount given by UDBL to these enterprises. They tactfully keep quiet.

Thirdly, they mentioned other companies, which were given money by UDBL, like Phenix, but they conveniently dodged to visit these enterprises. Why didn’t they go there? They mentioned that they were doing very badly but they decided not to visit them. 

I know Mutume Commercial Agencies is a briefcase company. I do not know where they found it because they sometimes gin some cotton in hired factories in Bulawoli then they go to Soroti and now they are doing chicken feed in Natete. All this should have been in their report.

I want to refer you to page 7. They say that UDBL will take necessary measures to augment its management and accounting information systems so that its operations and financial affairs can be more efficiently monitored. This should first be put in place before we get the money. Now we are requesting for the money when the accounting system is poor, which means when this money goes down the drain, they will say our accounting systems were not up to date.

On page 9, they say that US $4.5 million is too small because the maximum UDBL can loan out is Shs 2 billion. The committee noted that this maximum amount is too small and not worth a development bank which means this Shs 9 billion can be given to about four people. Why do you bring it for sanctioning if it is too small? Let UDBL look for US $20 million - you have said it is meaningless and yet you are requesting us to sanction it!

Furthermore, there was a very bad precedent by the government whereby -(Mr Mukitale rose_)- I think the chairperson will be responding at the end so he should allow me to build my point very well. Sorry, next time.

On page 10, the government put money in UDBL under the guise of increasing capital but this was not the case. They gave money to UDBL under instructions that, “Pass over this money to Phoenix Logistics, Apparel Tri-star, and Jinja International Textile Corporation”, and none of these refunded the money. The bank never did the feasibility study. It was not allowed because it was under instructions from the Ministry of Finance and none of these people is ready to bring back this money.

I wonder why the committee never mentioned the amounts involved. They kept quite. How much did Phenix and Apparel Tri-star take? You are telling us that they are unable to pay back, but we need to know that amount so that we can judge whether we can give US $4.5 million to UDBL.

Because of collective responsibility, I accept that the loan be taken.

12.31
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Bulambuli County, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank honourable members. I support the motion but if you look at page 10, observation No. 8, they have said money was given to those companies and yet they went ahead to say that the above three loans are non-performing. I do not know what is happening now if they are not performing and yet we are granting more money; there is a problem!

There is a factory in Mbale called African Textile Mills (ATM) and it is currently under receivership. Patel, the owner, is from Sironko but has moved to all these offices and banks; he wants a bail out but the government says, “No”. He even went to this bank - Uganda Development Bank - but they said they cannot finance such ventures. Since the loan is now for agro-processing, I beg the honourable minister to help ATM because it used to employ many people from the east. You have clearly said that the drastic drop in cotton prices was as a result of - no, it is because they have closed ATM. African Textile Mills used to serve Pallisa, all those Bukedi areas, parts of Bugisu and Teso. It is in Mbale.

The minister read from the Budget Speech that some money was supposed to be advanced to commercial banks for agriculture at 10 percent and this bank is one of the beneficiaries. If that 10 percent is for agriculture and this one is 19 percent, how are you going to harmonise the interest rates? Are you going to subsidise? Recently, the African Import and Export Bank gave this bank some money. We want to know at what rates they are also lending because there was money given.

Hon. Franca Akello talked about the repayment period. It is a big problem. Among the projects, which are listed here, I know one of the beneficiaries and he is a member of this House - chairman, you are aware of it - but he was given one year’s grace period. He was still constructing the hotel and they wanted him to pay the money, so he had to go to another bank and he actually got a salary loan to repay the loan. We have to look at the repayment period more critically. Otherwise, I support the motion but we have to make those corrections.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you respond to some of these critical areas.

12.35
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will just make a few observations and the minister will probably conclude.

I want honourable members to differentiate between two things. We have UDBL as a company owned by government and we have clients of that company. So, the loan we are seeking is for UDBL, the company owned by government, and not for the clients. Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDBL) has good clients, like the hon. Member for Kumi has said, and they are doing well. It also has others who are doing poorly. So, it is in business and it is making progress. 

The hon. Member for Kumi put a question to this House that shouldn’t we wait for UDBL to first recover fully and then we capitalise it? Whenever an individual or an organisation is financially stressed, there are a few things that happen. One is that probably you cannot meet your obligations as and when they happen, but you also need capital to generate revenue so that you can meet those obligations. 

Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDBL) is recovering progressively, and I want to tie into hon. Ekemu’s question. In 2007, according to the Auditor-General’s report, it made a profit of Shs 1.9 billion. It is coming out of a stressful moment and the best way to do this is to capitalise it so that we give it more money to make more revenue so that it can recover fully. If a patient is sick, you cannot stop giving them medicine. In this case, capital injection is part of the medicine to make it recover.

They have raised a question of the interest rate of 19 percent being high. I have said it here before, and I did it in the committee and the committee raised it, I think it is time our government really thought seriously about the cost of capital in this country. The commercial banks have always argued that they cannot intervene because we have a policy of liberalisation and privatisation. I think with our own bank, we can reduce the interest rate so that we help the clients since they are mainly in agriculture, so that they can be able to finance their projects and be able to make profits. 

With an interest rate of above 15 percent, I have said it here before, there is no company or individual that will make profits enough to finance the interest rates, expenses and then be able to progress with this kind of interest rate. So I agree with you, and this was an observation of the committee.

We visited these companies but I think an honourable member was asking why we did not put anything on record. Actually, we have observed why some of these companies in the cotton industry are facing difficulties. We have also put these things in the minutes and in the report that we laid on the Table. It is true that we visited these companies and we made some observations. Some of them are in our report and others are in the minutes.

Why should we borrow small amounts like US $4.5 million? That was also a question that the committee raised. I think given the experience of this bank and the fact that it is recovering, but has not fully recovered, it is better we become prudent and cautious and start borrowing in bits as it progresses, to avoid some business risks.

The period given to the clients of the bank is also an issue that the committee raised. As I said, this bank is in business. If it borrows money for 24 years, it also thinks that if it gives money for five years it will be able to generate money before the 24-year period expires so that it can pay back the money it has borrowed. I think it is important that we give sufficient grace periods to the clients of the bank, but I think this is a question for the minister. I hope the minister will be able to add something to that. Thank you.

12.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (MICRO FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank Members of Parliament for their contributions, advice and observations. I want to assure you that I have taken note and we shall continue negotiating.

Hon. Amuriat I think is the one who wanted me to assure him and this august House that this time round government will not interfere and we shall not see a repeat of what happened. I only have this to say: history is our best teacher and I think government is learning from history everyday. With the current arrangement, I want to assure honourable colleagues that UDBL, which is under the direct supervision of Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank, is now going to make sure that they monitor the monies that they lend to enterprises. Originally, monies were borrowed for onward lending to enterprises and UDB did not have direct control over them. However, during the restructuring we made sure that we put provisions in place so that UDBL has control over such enterprises. 

We want UDBL to really recover and -(Interjections)- I do not have any other assurance apart from this. Given the capacity of UDBL, the mandate that has been given to them, the experience they have gone through and the progress they are making, I am sure that they would not want to go back where they came from. Of course we shall be monitoring - you and I, the Members of Parliament, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Finance. Like hon. Bahati has said, to say that we wait for UDBL to recover fully will be denying them an opportunity to develop. Let them take the mantle. I think this will be part of the recovery period.

Hon. Franca Akello, my sister, raised a very pertinent issue. She wanted to know whether we have the ability to direct UDBL to extend the period. Again, I will say that this is an issue for negotiation. Issues of the length and issues of the interest rate are issues that are being negotiated even at the World Bank level. We are lending out monies at cheaper and affordable interest rates, which the World Bank is not agreeing to, but we are saying that people are poor and if we are engaging them in commercialised agriculture we need this kind of interest rate. 

We have come up with other arrangements to save the farmers. For example, the Micro Finance Support Centre Ltd is a government company, which was established to bail out commercial farmers. They deal with micro finance and they developed a product called the guarantee loan, which farmers can use in case they are faced with such a problem. We want to come up with a collaborative body to co-ordinate all the bodies that are lending out money to farmers to see how we can help them; MSL must collaborate with UDB and they must collaborate with other bodies. The objective is to make sure that the commercial farmers, to begin with, are bailed out.

I have noted the issue raised on equity by hon. Bucyanayandi and hon. Ekemu and I promise to carry it forward to the Ministry of Finance for further debate. I know that one day I will be requested to explain to this august House, so I am taking that as a special undertaking.

Hon. Byandala, it is true that GDP is high but per capita income is low. I think the spirit of Prosperity-for-All is to make sure that per capita income is high. We want the four pillars to help our people. The target on production and productivity, value addition and marketing and microfinance to farmers will help us to make sure that per capita income increases. 

Hon. Kazibwe raised an issue from page 7 of the report that UDBL had not taken measures to work on their management and accounting information system. This is a process, which is being undertaken by many ministries, departments and companies. You have to keep on checking, especially with this new challenge of globalisation and ICT. The minister is here and he can bail me out, you have to check on your systems as a continuous process. We cannot wait for this to be concluded so that we can help UDBL. 

Lastly, on the African Textile Mill, I will consult. To be sincere, I cannot assure my colleague. In fact when you talked about ATM, I was thinking about the usual ATM -(Laughter)- I got lost, so I beg for your indulgence, hon. Mudimi. I will see which relevant ministry to consult so that this issue is also dealt with. 

Thank you very much, honourable colleagues, for your support. I would like to assure you that we shall make sure that we effectively and efficiently implement the programme. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you too. Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do authorise the government to borrow US $4.5 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) and guarantee and guarantee another loan of US $3.0 million from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) to Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDBL).

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have some other business this afternoon. This House is suspended until 2.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 12.47 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.30 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

12.47
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Madam Speaker, I beg to make a statement to Parliament concerning the riots that took place from 10th to 12th September over the Kabaka’s planned visit to Kayunga District –(Interruption)

MR NDEEZI: Madam Speaker, we are receiving a very important statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs. I feel it is important for us to have copies as per our Rules of Procedure so that we can be able to follow the debate properly and provide our input. Is it in order for us to proceed with the debate without copies? May I beg the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs to share with us copies of his report?

MR KIVEJINJA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry for the hiccup but the copies were actually sent and they are ready. Every Member can now have a copy.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, this is a report on the situation as of Monday, 21 September 2009 regarding the events that took place in the Buganda region from Thursday to Saturday.

In the wake of the riots that took place in the Buganda region, the Police Force, in accordance with the sole responsibility entrusted to it by Article 212 of the Constitution, swung into action to control the situation. 

The damage caused has been assessed including apprehending and prosecution of the suspected offenders. The CID in particular opened full scale investigations in the areas that were affected by the violent riots such as Kampala Central, Katwe, Nateete, Wandegeya, Kawempe, Kajjansi, Kayunga, Mukono, Masaka, Mpigi, Kalisizo, Lugazi and Wakiso. There has been progress with regard to investigations because the public has generally been responsive in giving relevant information.

Confirmed Deaths

The confirmed number of people who have so far died as a result of the riots is 27. I would like to ask the members to get the details from the document I am going to lay on the Table. We are yet to get detailed post mortem reports from Mulago. Twenty (20) of the dead are suspected to have been among the rioters while seven were victims, including a two and a half-year old baby.

Number of People Injured

On the other hand, the number of those identified to have been injured is so far 82. Some of the injured are still in critical condition. Details are contained in Appendix B, which I am laying on the Table now.

Persons Arrested and Taken to Court or Still Being Held at Police Stations
Out of a total number of 846 people so far arrested in connection with the riots, 745 have already appeared in court. The majority of those taken to court so far have been charged with inciting violence, participating in unlawful assembly, causing destruction during riots, and terrorism. The list of those arrested and those taken to court and remanded is hereby laid on the Table as Appendix C.

Damaged Property

The list of damaged property confirmed is also hereby laid on the Table as Appendix D.

Released Persons

There has been a screening exercise for all suspects that were arrested. Some of those who were confirmed not to have been part of the rioters have been released. The details are also in Appendix E, which is hereby laid on the Table. Indeed, some of these people were just caught up in the riots while they innocently moved to their lawful places of business and other destination.

Missing Persons

I would like to report that the police have so far not received any report of anybody missing as a result of the events of 10th to 12th September 2009.

Conclusion

The general situation has normalised although we continue to receive information that there are people who are still planning other ways of causing further disturbances. The security agencies are, therefore, keeping vigilance and wish to warn those people that once identified, police will move on them as per the law provided. Thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, I now take this opportunity to lay the appendices on the Table. Appendix A has names of persons confirmed dead as a result of the riots. Appendix B has the list of established injured persons as of 14 September 2009. Appendix C has information about persons arrested, taken to court and remanded and those still in police custody. Appendix D has the list of property confirmed damaged during the riots of 10th to 12th September 2009. Appendix E has the names of persons released from the various police stations after screening them. I beg to end here, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. Hon. Members, as you are aware we have a statement from His Excellency the President touching part of the issues in this statement as delivered by the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs. You have had time to look at it, we have issued the Hansard and you have also listened to the minister’s statement. So I urge that you address both statements at the same time in your contributions.

MR WILLIAM OKECHO: Madam Speaker, this statement is quite timely and it seems to have a lot of details, which are contained in the appendices. I would like to request that copies of these appendices be distributed to us so that we can have a full report. I am saying this because the names of the people contained in those appendices could be of value to many of us who may not have seen some of our relatives for a long time ever since this incident happened. So, it is important that the Minister of Internal Affairs avails us some of these appendices so that we can have a full report. Thank you very much.

2.39
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Christopher Kibanzanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. As I discuss the two statements, one from the Minister of Internal Affairs and the other from the President touching the issues of these riots, I have three points to make. One is about the Constitution, the second one is on national integration and the third is about leadership.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not Mr Speaker.

MR KIBANZANGA: I am sorry, with due respect. (Laughter) The statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs has left out a lot of issues. I do not think this is what we wanted as Parliament. I would like to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell us what happened to make the police and other government agencies shoot live bullets at unarmed civilians. What exactly happened? Under what provisions of the law did our forces use live bullets against the civilians and who ordered this? Was it the Inspector-General of Police? Was it the Commander of the Land Forces? Who really did this? Mr Speaker –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kibanzanga, you should be here more often so that you can distinguish between Mr and Madam Speaker.

MR KIBANZANGA: I am sorry, Madam Speaker. What I am saying is that both these statements do not address the cause of these riots. What really caused the riots? Through the rumour mill, we were told the riots were sparked off by the blocking of Kabaka’s access to Bugerere in Kayunga District.

Our Constitution is very clear about cultural institutions. Government should be aware of what it gave to cultural institutions. Government should know that cultural institutions know what they received from government. However, instead of government explaining what it gave to these cultural institutions, it is now enforcing orders from ordinary civilians. The order that came from Kayunga that Kabaka should not visit that area, if you read our Constitution, was unlawful. 

Despite that, what did we expect as Ugandans? We expected government to enforce the law because first and foremost, the Kabaka of Buganda is a citizen of Uganda. If he is a citizen of Uganda, he has all the rights to visit any area in this country. So, what do we expect from government? It is to protect such a lawful citizen by enforcing the law. Instead, we saw our government enforce orders from an ordinary citizen restricting another citizen. This is what caused the riots. If government had not unleashed all the machinery that we saw on the streets to bar citizens from visiting Kayunga, I think we would not have gotten into all these problems.

National Integration

National integration is at stake. If we have a government that will enforce unlawful orders from unlawful citizens infringing on the rights of other citizens, then we have a problem. 

Yesterday I was discussing with some ministers and they said there was an order that the king should not go to Kayunga. I asked, “By whom?” They said that it is by Kimeze Baker. Now, what will happen if Kibanzanga says that hon. Nankabirwa should not visit Kasese? Will government come and enforce my orders? (Interjection) Yes, you will confront the ADF but you will not take my orders. 

When I asked why they were killing people, the reply was that because someone did not pick someone else’s calls! If we are to help this country, we should uphold the law; government agencies should be seen to enforce the law at any cost. Government was enforcing unlawful orders. The cultural leader of Kayunga was giving unlawful orders and government enforced these unlawful orders. How do you run a country like that? You expect ordinary citizens to continue giving orders to government! Are you going to manage? Are you not defeating the essence of government? 

The other day it started in Kibale when people elected the chairman. Government went against the demonstrators who opposed the illegally elected chairman. Now it is in Buganda and it has caused chaos. Can you go back to the law? We need national integration.

Leadership

I thank the Kabaka for having offered leadership in this confusion because the country was at stake. If he had become myopic like other people and said, “I must go to Kayunga”, there would not be Kampala. But in this fracas, where we were in a total leadership crisis, the Kabaka said he was not going to Kayunga and the riots reduced. 

I know he was humiliated. I know he was right in desiring to go to Kayunga. He had the constitutional right to go to Kayunga but he chose to be humiliated by healing society and taking leadership and choosing not to go to Kayunga. He took the pain and I thank him for that. 

Leadership requires that we do not use our anger to enforce government orders. You do not have to address the public and say, “As a leader …” because you are annoyed. It was very unfortunate for Uganda to be told that we lost all that property and human beings simply because two leaders failed to talk on phone. This was very unfortunate. You cannot lead a country that is motivated and driven by anger, hatred and malice. Those motivated by anger, hatred and malice will never build justice for those under them and that is what we saw.

We need serious leadership in this country, and the only serious leadership we can see in this country is leadership that will go back to the Constitution when it is faced with a crisis, leadership that will have in mind our cardinal role of national integration. Believe it or not, Uganda is a country by mistake. We have different nationalities in this country therefore what will help us is respect for one another. I respect your background, I respect your culture, I respect where you come from and we live together and move forward as a country. All these issues were resolved in the Constituent Assembly.

Our Constitution is very clear about cultural institutions. I am about to get mine and I do not want people to come and confuse me. We must respect the Constitution as we execute our cultural mandate and we also expect government to do the same. But if you think we are going to be motivated by anger, hatred, malice and history, we are in trouble. Let us respect the law. Uganda is a very fragile country. We cannot all be insane. We are on a highway to insanity and some people must be saved. I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That was the response from the Opposition. The rest will speak for five minutes each.

2.50
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, let me begin by responding to some of the issues that were raised by the honourable Minister for Internal Affairs. I want to put it to him that in my view, government over reacted to what should have been a peaceful situation. 

I want to say that his statement has not told us how the army came to get involved. He has reported as though firing bullets on the streets of Kampala was purely the business of the Police Force and yet everywhere we went in Kampala that day there was the presence of military deployment. Who was in charge? Who was commanding the situation? It is until we are told who was commanding the various people on the streets of Kampala that we would be able to appreciate how the so many deaths occurred. 

Who ordered, for instance, the use of live bullets? It looks to me that the Minister of Internal Affairs either has deliberately avoided talking about the role of the army or he is just being dodgy on the matter, knowing that a lot of havoc was created in the confusion that arose from command and control.

Secondly, the minister says in his statement that they are continuing with matters of screening. I would like the honourable minister or Government at large to tell me what happened to the CCTV cameras that were in Kampala. This House passed money during CHOGM, over Shs 9 billion, to put cameras all over the city. I am aware that the cameras are not working. If the cameras are not working, who should be held accountable? Because most of the people you are now screening are people whom you just found on the streets; some of them businessmen and women doing their normal business and they were arrested. If you had these cameras functioning, definitely you would have got footage that would have showed you that so and so was involved; he broke in a shop, and burnt tyres; but you did not have even a single camera working. So, what is the role of these CCTV cameras? Who ate the money - because these should have empowered the Ministry of Internal Affairs to work in a more precious manner rather than guessing and screening? [Mr Matia Kasaija: “Information”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the Minister of Internal Affairs -

MS ALASO: I will take that information. 

Now, you are saying that there were people who were killed innocently. Are you going to screen the dead? You suspect that some of the dead were innocent. What is going to happen? Did you talk to the ones who were dead and some of them said that they were actually involved or some of them said they were not involved? Because without a more scientific way of getting information, you render very many people on the streets of Kampala vulnerable. Let me take that information.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you very much, hon. Alaso. The information I want to give is that first of all, the cameras are working, but they are not everywhere in the city. They are just in the central business district. But we are all aware that riots spread up to Kawempe, Entebbe and Wakiso where there are no cameras. So, to argue and say we should have cameras to have seen each and everybody who was involved in the riot, is to say the least, that actually we are not well informed on this matter. That is the information I wanted to give.  

MS ALASO: I do not know whether to thank the minister for that information. However, I want to put it to him that up to now, you cannot produce any of those suspects whom you found on camera. Either the cameras are located badly, if they are working, or the cameras are actually not working. I insist on this. 

Let me go to the special address by the President. First of all, the President made his opening remarks by blaming the Opposition as though it was the Opposition that wanted to go to Kayunga. Throughout his address, the President did not mention anything to do with the Kabaka’s journey to Kayunga. He only made mention of the riots and I found this very diversionary. I believe and we in the Opposition strongly believe that there are some legitimate claims that Buganda has for which the Central Government must dialogue with Buganda. Talk to Buganda instead of trying to blame it on people or anybody who has said, “Yes, Buganda you are right to talk.” 

As the Opposition, we stand firm and we will champion and promote the culture of peaceful co-existence and dialogue. That is what we stand for. So, if we find anybody in this country whose rights are being infringed upon by the Central Government, we will stand with that person and say, “but our Constitution provides that you can freely move to Kayunga and come back from there.” If anything, it was the duty of the Central Government – instead of deploying all these hundreds of troops in Kampala; instead of upsetting business and tourism in this country; I believe the Kabaka only needed 15 policemen to get to Kayunga and come back. Why is it that the Central Government was more inclined to causing chaos in the city than escorting the Kabaka to Kayunga? We find this very diversionary and as the Opposition, we are concerned about people’s freedom of expression, to associate and to move freely in this country. Today, it is the Kabaka, tomorrow it will be the Emorimor; the next day it will be the Kyabazinga or anybody. As long as the Central Government does not want them to move, they will create reason for them not to move. 

So, we treat with contempt these attempts to be very diversionary instead of promoting peaceful co-existence. I believe that the Central Government could have even called the Banyala leader and told him, “We are escorting the Kabaka to Kayunga and you will also be escorted to Kampala if you want.” The Central Government has the business to protect individual Ugandans and their property and that is the job that the Central Government absconded. 

In addition, the level of intolerance that was exhibited is worrying. That Members of Parliament, radio presenters, ordinary citizens are being hounded and arrested and being charged just because you commented on city riots - you commented on the intolerance exhibited by the Central Government; you commented on the heavy handedness with which the Central Government treated the situation - we find that level of intolerance very worrying.

Madam Speaker, if this country has to move on even towards 2011, we want to caution the Central Government and tell Government that if you do not exercise more tolerance and allow people to freely express themselves, this country is going into very embarrassing levels. 

You know, we can talk here because we have Parliamentary immunity, but who knows, if we were outside this Chamber because we would be immediately arrested for sedition. This country is headed for difficult times if you are going to approach peaceful demonstrations and dissent the way you are approaching it now. (Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, is Hon. Alaso in order to say that these were peaceful demonstrations; that Police went to disturb peaceful demonstrations when actually people were riotous; they destroyed property and lives? Is she in order?    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if they started peacefully, they ended up being riotous and that is why Police intervened. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will say they started peacefully and then it became very bad. I agree with that. The visit to Kayunga was a peaceful one and then it turned into – actually it is us who turned them into riots. (Mr Peter Ochieng rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, you know you have five minutes and I do not know whether – 

MR PETER OCHIENG: I just wanted to seek clarification from hon. Alaso. When she says that they started peacefully, yet we know how peaceful demonstrations are carried out in this country, and we have provided for ways and means of carrying out the same; could we find out and get to know from hon. Alaso whether these means were followed and who were the leaders of these peaceful demonstrations? Everybody seems to be interested in knowing all this. I thank you. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I have argued that the visit was peaceful and it was supposed to be a youth day celebration. If my honourable colleague does not know that, he might as well go back and look for that information. I have talked about the level of intolerance and it is that intolerance that has caused the closure of private radio stations because they articulate a different view. We would like to call upon Government to revisit this position because we think it is unhealthy for the democratic co-existence of Ugandans. 

Lastly, listening to the President that day, I heard him say that he was asking the Judiciary not to grant bail to these suspects and I found it totally disturbing because Article 128 of our Constitution provides that the courts shall exercise their mandate without any direction from individuals or organisations. But if the Chief Executive of this country can stand up and direct them not to grant bail, it is a very disturbing development. We are already aware of people in this country who have been charged and framed for treason; they have been called suspects, charged for terrorism and rape, even when the State cannot sustain the charges against them. 

Therefore, to direct that people be held without bail - what happened to the presumption of innocent until the courts prove you otherwise? We should care to defend the Constitution but also, there should be a demonstrated political goodwill that we want to co–exist as a country. Otherwise, we tear Uganda apart. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please Honourable members, five minutes.
 
3.04
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you. I would like to start by extending my condolences to the families of those who lost their dear ones in the course of the riots that nobody would want to see happen again. The statement of the minister is so narrow that it does not reflect the reason for the spark-off of the riots. In my honest opinion, I would advise that he should be more detailed next time because this crisis has destabilised the country and everybody is interested in knowing why the riots happened all of a sudden. He should have brought the background – and from what is appearing and what has been reported in the media, it looks like the whole thing was triggered by the Police because had it not been for the deployment in Kayunga, these riots would not have taken place. 

I think that as a country, we must own this mistake. Buganda kingdom could have had their problems, but the way the government also reacted to this crisis has exposed the government’s response to a crisis even beyond the mistake that was assumed to have been developed within the Buganda kingdom. I think we must take on this matter very seriously. 

I want to join my colleague Hon. William Okecho to demand that the minister supply this Parliament with copies of the names of the suspects in prisons, the names of those who lost their lives in the riots, and the details of the property destroyed because this is going to help in the accountability process. What we have been watching on the television stations about the riots that took place in Kampala was that most of the victims were mainly innocent people who never even participated in the riot. How are we going to account for these people who lost their lives in the hands of the reckless people who are purported to have been protecting and providing security? How are we going to account for that? I watched with a lot of tears when a parent who was actually collecting his children from school was removed and his children caned thoroughly by the military people -(Interjections)- yes. We can retrieve that recording for your consumption, Mr Minister, so that we take you on as the responsible minister to account for this kind of reckless behaviour. 

Somebody who was trying to offer parental protection to his children from school – even not involved in the riots - how do you end up beating such a person without mercy? I think we really need to be serious. I would like to marry this statement with the President’s State of the Nation Address. On page 7, he said, “Some of the Kings have been, contrary to our original agreement, giving an in incomplete view of our history….” and so forth, without quoting any of the kings that are heading our cultural institutions. I think the President should be bold enough to speak his mind. If he has any problem with Oyet who is a cultural leader of his clan, he should be straight and say, “Oyet is meddling in politics,” so that tomorrow he is quoted to have denounced and condemn such kind of behaviour. But you are the whole head of State and you keep talking and beating about the bush and also linking the Opposition to the Mengo kingdom without even mentioning the political party which was involved in meddling in politics with Mengo kingdom. I think these are very bad remarks we cannot take lying down, and it is my hope that Government will avoid any situation that will trigger the masses to cause another kind of riot, because even the close of this radio alone is not going to help the government. I want to advise the government to let the radio to be on air; leave this radio station to operate with all its programmes because that is the avenue where people are going to express their grievances and that is where you are going to pick the message. But now people are keeping it to themselves and time will come when this thing will explode and we shall all be here to witness and be held accountable for something we could have corrected - (Member timed out_)

3.09
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was not around when the riots were taking place. If I had been around, I would have participated -(Laughter)- because of the following reasons -(Laughter)- no, I would have and on that one, I can assure you honourable minister because of the following reasons. 

I am not in any way supporting incidences of looting shops, burning Police stations, and pushing the military so hard on the wall to make them overreact, but the reason I, Odonga Otto, would have participated in the demonstrations is that the Baganda have a legitimate claim. Their grievances are clear and suppressing them will not solve the problem. President Museveni is properly insulated with all his security apparatus, but if you move down to Kisekka market, Katwe or to Najjanankumbi where I stay, there is a general feeling that the way the government is being run is in a sectarian manner. It is not even about the Mengo establishment. 

So, people just got an opportunity to behave the way they did. Kayunga just availed them an opportunity; Mabira demonstration just availed them an opportunity, and for any opportunity which will prevail, you will still see bigger numbers on the streets because the way the government is being run is sectarian. (Interjections) If you do not want to listen, at least I have my minute as a Member of Parliament. 

As a political scientist, I do not see any distinction between President Museveni and the Kabaka. President Museveni heads a highly sectarian Government and the Kabaka also heads a tribal government. They are just similar. (Laughter) What makes me sad is, I have friends from Western Uganda and when the demonstration started, hon. Bernard Mulengani’s mother-in-law was going back to Western Uganda. He called her from the airport and advised her to remove the Kinyankole wrappers because he thought she could be attacked and that was the level of issues. 

People were checking and looking at people’s legs; people were rehearsing the Ekitiibwa Kya Buganda; and that was the level at which certain people were being deliberately targeted for faults that are not of their own making. So, if we do not address the root cause of these problems of how we can divide the resources equally - then I would say the only difference, between Joseph Kony and those who rioted is that Kony can sustain his for 20 years and the rioters cannot sustain it for two days. That is the only difference but they seem to be targeting the same kind of discontent. (Laughter)

I want to appeal to my Buganda colleagues that we all have property here. Let us make this country a nice place for all of us to live in. While I was away, there were also some tires burnt on the road to my home. I do not know if it was because I live there or if it was part of the mobilisation. We have to make this country user-friendly for all of us and I appeal to them that well, there are a few sectarian people in Government, but it is not true that everyone from Western Uganda is benefiting from this Government. The earlier we make this clear distinction, the better it will be for this country, to avoid genocide. 

Lastly, in the President’s Address, I was so disappointed that a whole Head of State came to address this Parliament, but did not appeal to this country to be calm. At least he should have said, “Let us be calm; let us be united; the past is the past; let us forge a way forward.” The only thing that he came to tell us was about the Runyankole dictionary - sectarian talks. At the height of a national problem, you come and talk about your village dictionary. I think we should learn to be serious. You have closed the FM stations and people cannot talk anywhere. I go to Ekimeeza every Saturday. When people talk and express their grievances, they will go and have pork and a bottle of beer and they will say, “I said it”. It helps to contain the public sentiments. Now we have no where to talk from and we shall look for any opportunity; maybe in Church. So, you better think hard and open those FM stations and hold individuals who make sectarian statements accountable for their actions because if you do not want to hear what I say, the next thing you will hate is to see me. A man who is not talking is more dangerous than the one who is talking. So, we better sober up. 

I appeal to people to be calm; I appeal to this Parliament that let us handle the root cause of these problems – the sectarian and the partisan way of distributing resources where 60 percent of the national budget goes to one region; where 80 percent of the Generals are from one village; where the government, the civil service and the parastatals are owned by people of the same species and yet the country has 56 tribes. (Laughter)  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

3.14 
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will be very brief. It is not time for me to make political statements and take political advantage, but to contribute towards the reality of what happened and send a message for all concerned to learn. In situations of this nature, sentiments are high and I get surprised when I see people craving to make political capital out of this. Let us talk about riots and maybe before I talk about them, allow me to send condolences to the families of those who died on account of the actions of different players. 

In particular, you may have heard that two people were killed and that they were Bakiga. They were not killed because they were rioters, they were not killed by the live bullets they are alluding to, they were killed because they could not sing the Ekitiibwa Kya Buganda and because they had been identified to be Bakiga and that the policeman who was at Ssezibwa Bridge – Turyagumanawe – is a Mukiga and so, they were paying for the duties of a police officer. 

Someone talked about tolerance - we need to learn about the heterogeneous nature of Uganda. History has told us that homogeneity, be it in culture or identity, is not in any way a guarantor of peace and Rwanda is an example. There is a very thin difference between the Tutsi and the Hutu but we saw what happened. We have been enjoying the diversity of our heterogeneous nature, but when we want to exploit this for different political interests, it should be condemned. That is why we need to look at what brought the riots. Someone was talking about the Kabaka going to Kayunga. If a government cannot protect the minority, who will protect them? If a government cannot protect law and order - the question was not about stopping the Kabaka from going to Kayunga; the point was, let us harmonise and make sure that when the Kabaka goes to Kayunga, there are no animosities, there is no discomfort. 

The other day, I read in the Sunday Vision that the Kabaka intends to visit the North and Mr Mao, the LCV Chairman was being quoted that he has already communicated to the Paramount Chief to grant the visit. So, if that can be there, why not in Kayunga? Let us get politics out of this. 

Finally, time is catching up with us. We should commend the President on two points. One, he came to brief Parliament; we have always castigated the President for not briefing Parliament on many things we consider important. He came to brief Parliament -(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you. Gulu is not part of Buganda. So, when the Kabaka is going to Gulu, there is need to have that courtesy arrangement and when –(Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: I have got your point and my time is running. The Constitution is clear on recognising traditional institutions and we have a Ssabanyala who was recognised by the people of Kayunga. The question is, what percentage of the Ugandan population do the Banyala constitute? They may be a minority but it is the responsibility of this government to protect them, just like someone would ask, “what is the percentage of the people of hon. Kibanzanga who want the Rwenzururu?” Whether you are a minority or a majority - even the Baganda are a majority in Buganda, but a minority in Uganda - it is the responsibility of Government to regulate a condition where all will co-exist. 

We should thank the President for promoting dialogue all through. It is not right to say that he was motivated by anger. The people who exhibited anger and the people who promised tsunamis were rejected by Ugandans twice in the elections that we have had. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

3.19 
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The address by the President and this statement by the Minister of Internal Affairs are a very clear reflection of the government’s commitment to ensuring a high level of responsibility and accountability in the management of the political affairs of this country. For this reason, I honestly thank you for this level of responsibility and accountability to our people, and I hope that you maintain the same sprit. 

Secondly, many accusations have been pointed here and there especially in relation to our security agencies and our policemen. I would like to use this opportunity to thank our humble police officers and security agents who ensured that this riot was successfully put down, and restored law and order in this country. I believe, without their humble contribution, we would not be enjoying the peace and security we are enjoying right now. 

I seek clarification and assurance in relation to paragraph 8 of the minister’s statement. Let me read this statement for those who may not have the copies. “The general situation has normalised although we continue to receive information that there are people who are still planning other ways of causing further disturbances.” Hon. minister, can we know these people and can we know the other ways of disturbances that are coming? 

The last time the riot took place, it caught our security agencies by surprise. It appears that there was no capacity to predict and control these riots and probably if we had the capacity, we could have saved some lives. Now that the government is stating that they expect further disturbances, could you please tell us the nature of the disturbances we are expecting and how we can minimise loss of property and lives? Thank you very much. 

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement and I assume that we are debating the statement of the minister and the statement of the President will be debated later on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they are being debated concurrently.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I have decided to stand out to be counted on the statement because it is very important. Let me add my voice to those of other Members who have passed on their condolences to the people who lost their dear ones and secondly, I pass on my sympathies to those innocent Ugandans who were caught in the fracas. Thirdly, when you see your co-wife grieving and crying more than you the mother of the deceased, then you become suspicious. So, the debate on the floor has reminded me of a co-wife who grieved and mourned louder than the real mother who had lost the child. Having said that – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for a respectable colleague, Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, to come to the Floor when Parliament is having this very important debate and talk about co-wives crying more than the mother of the baby who is dead, without actually telling us who in this case the co-wife is? First of all, this is a national Parliament and secondly, the issues that are being addressed are of national concern. Uganda belongs to all of us; we are equal partners and we are stakeholders in this country. The people who were shot on the streets included people from Soroti whom hon. Nankabirwa does not represent and I do. So, is she in order to come and categorise our sentiments and arguments here as arguments of co-wives crying louder than the bereaved? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason the President came here is because he considered this matter very important. So, let us treat it as a national matter. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, for your wise ruling. I had three different scenarios, but because I know that the guilty are always afraid, I will not indulge in that. I would have loved.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, with all due respect to your guidance that this is a national matter, I rise to move a motion that Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa no longer be heard on this subject matter. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, because the matter is a national matter, let hon. Nankabirwa continue speaking.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, the statement misses a very important part. I would have loved to see in the conclusion a very strong condemnation of the barbaric acts that took place. We have to condemn the barbaric acts of the Ugandans who looted, who made road blocks, who undressed women who were putting on trousers in Nakulabye, in Munaku town near my home, in the name of the Kabaka. I cannot allow this to happen; who entered supermarkets and said that “Kabaka agabudde”, looting in the name of the Kabaka, I cannot stand this. It is a shame; I condemn it, and I condemn the organisers who assisted the rioters to act in the way they acted.

I can testify before the Minister of Internal Affairs in his office. The people who mobilised in the office and the room number in a certain building, who called boys and girls to come out and get stones and get pangas and riot. I can testify that because I sent there people. We have as Parliament to condemn this. People who ordered -(Interjections)

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear and as Parliamentarians we have maximum immunity in this Chamber. Could the hon. Minister for Microfinance substantiate allegations that she knows the names of people who mobilised and houses of people who mobilised these riots. Is she in order to just give a bare allegation without substantiating? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the Minister of Internal Affairs made his statement, he said investigations are still going on. Some of the issues are already in court. In my view, if she substantiates she might jeopardise the investigations. She has said she knows, she will speak to the Minister. She has not said they are in this House. (Interjections)

No, I think she has got access. The Minister has got access to her colleague; she will give the names to her colleague. Please, proceed.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker —

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, can I pray that in matters that are emotional like this, we try to control ourselves? I pray because this is a matter that is extremely sensitive. We are seated here, but people lost lives; we are debating, people lost billions of shillings; we are here sitting, but the name of our country got terribly injured; hon. Nankabirwa has already given us information. Investigations have not been closed and maybe let me take this opportunity to tell this House and this country that arrests are still going on and we shall arrest anybody who has got any connection whatsoever with these riots. I must state that very clearly; we cannot stand here as an elected Government of the people of Uganda to allow people to come and destabilise this country. We fought for it, we shed blood. Therefore, I want to inform this country that we shall arrest anybody who is associated with this. (Interjections)

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Hansard will capture my statement. I said I am ready to give the information to the Minister of Internal Affairs knowing very well that they are still investigating.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have protected you, proceed.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I am concerned by the way we are proceeding especially when the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs comes here and literally shouts on the microphone and says he does not care who. I know the law does not care who. But to proceed in a way that can intimidate us to stop us from debating this important matter is wrong and I would like to implore you to protect us so that we are able to —

This matter has already found so many people who tried to comment being paraded before courts of law; some are still locked up in safe houses and in prisons. They have not been charged and if we continue with this level of intimidation right on the floor of this House, it will be difficult for us to make our input to this debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will not allow anybody to be intimidated. Please, proceed.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. Honourable colleagues -(Interjections)- Can we have order in the House through you, Madam Speaker. 

Let me touch on the President’s statement by only supporting the four major aspects. The first one is the establishment of a regional government. This one was passed by this Parliament. Let us move forward. I know the importance of negotiations, being broad based and involvement but this time, let us move on and operationalise the regional government, Article 246 of the Constitution, on cultural leaders and the dialogue that the President suggested; he called it ttabamiluka. Let us support it. We want to go on dialoguing so that we can sort out a few things. 

On the issue of declaring the gifts, I beg to differ from my President and request that if the gifts that are given to cultural leaders are to be declared, let them be declared in the regional government for accountability purposes. This is because in my culture the gifts given to my king are not supposed to be declared to any other person except the authority within the establishment. 

Otherwise, we are behind schedule on the establishment of regional governments and the operationalisation of Article 246. I beg that this House supports the Bills when they come so that we pass them and we see political councils at regional levels operationalising their programmes. Thank you very much.

3.37
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to condemn what happened in this country. We may say it is not a mistake to make a mistake but we make a mistake when we repeat it. These things happened in the 60s and we have repeated them. So, it is a shame on all of us as a country and I totally condemn what happened. 

I think it is not good to start pointing fingers and shouting at one another; we need to sit and look at issues and address them. For instance, the root cause of the recent problems was the issue of the Kabaka going to Kayunga. So, the question should be: was the Kabaka entitled to go to Kayunga? 

The other question is: were there procedures for him to follow in order to be allowed to go to Kayunga? (Interjections) Ok, you will answer those. Then in the event that His Highness the Kabaka was cautioned not to go to Kayunga, was he right to insist and send the Katikkiro? I think those are the issues we need to look at.

The other issue that has caused confusion is how the Police handled the chaos. This one comes from the point of differentiating between a demonstration and a riot. In this case, if we understand a demonstration as a public meeting or a match at which people show that they are protesting or supporting, and we look at a riot as a situation in which a group of people behave in a violent way in a public place often as a protest, then I believe that there was need for Police to calm the situation. This is because this was a riot, and not a peaceful demonstration; as people want to put it.

Other people are blaming government but it would be wrong to blame government entirely. Why am I saying this? It is because even Parliament is part of government, if I understand government in the true sense of it. So, if you are to blame government -(Interjections)- yes, it is government. There are three arms of government. So, let us look at issues as they come. If you are to blame government, which arm of government? Is it Parliament, the Judiciary or the Executive? If you say, in this case -(Interruption) 

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we very well know that the Police you are talking about are the enforcement arm of the Executive. We very well know that Parliament is not involved in regulating when and how the kings should travel in this country. Is it in order for my honourable friend, for reasons best known to him, to drag Parliament, which was caught by surprise, into this circus? Are you in order to try to say that Parliament was involved in this illegality? What government did was illegal and it was not within our Constitution. Is he in order to drag Parliament into this fracas?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he will substantiate on why he was bringing in Parliament.

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I said that people are blaming government and I think my friend did not understand what I was saying. I am saying that if we are to answer these questions correctly we should not blame Government generally because Parliament is part of Government and in this case we did not participate. Are you getting me? (Laughter) I am saying, should we blame the Judiciary because it is part of Government or should we blame the Executive? So, essentially we are talking about the same thing -(Interjections)- yes, we are talking about the same thing. 

Madam Speaker, let me continue to look at those issues. We should put the blame where it ought to be. On the issue of compensation and assisting those that lost their dear ones, I agree with the President because government generally has the duty to protect the citizens and their property and in this case government failed to do it. So we must compensate these people because government failed to do what it ought to have done.

On the issue of equipping the Police, it is a shame when we agree like the President showed us that our Police are not equipped. We have got so many loans but why can’t we equip the Police such that we avoid the use of the Army in such circumstances? I am not condemning the Army. Yes, we should -(Member timed out­.)

3.43
MR MEDDIE MULUMBA (NRM, Luuka County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want, first of all, to extend my condolences to those who lost their loved ones. I think the statement of the President was good but there are some issues that we should address. In future the Police should try to follow the law instead of being so unilateral.

The Kabaka said he is going to Kayunga and the Ssabanyala was saying that he should not go to Kayunga. The Police should have advised the Ssabanyala to go to court and seek an injunction in the same breath maybe even the Kabaka also could have gone to court when he had been refused but the Police took it upon themselves and then all this fracas happened.

It is high time this country tried to address the divisions that are here. At the moment we have a deeply divided country. We have two Muftis in the Muslim sector; we have 72 Kyabazingas in Busoga; we have Buganda which is seeking very many things, which we do not know. Government should come up expeditiously, firmly and justly to solve these rifts or else we are going to get fire every other time.

We have got a problem of unemployment and poverty, some people out there do not have jobs; it is a good job to go and riot, for them rioting is a job for the day. People went to Bwaise and looted a shop and then said, “Kabaka agabudde”. They ate everything, maybe they were hungry so they rioted because they had nothing to do; their only possession in life was life itself so they had nothing to lose. They just rioted as though it was fun. They had a job for three or two days. 

I want to talk about the appeasement strategies that have always been done. For some time Buganda has always been getting better things for nothing; they have been appeasing Buganda most of the time. Let me substantiate. Busoga signed and accepted the regional tier long ago, Buganda refused, when Buganda refused, this government sat on the regional tier because they are appeasing Baganda. Madam Speaker, Bunyoro wanted but they are appeasing Baganda and now Baganda are paying them in the same currency because of the appeasement. Appeasement has never worked anywhere. 

Finally, I have a bone to pick with the Police, the way they deploy, they are very unprofessional. The Police force deployed a man who was injured, who had wounds on his head. He had been beaten by rioters and when they arrested some rioters, he removed his cap and he was showing them on TV. He was showing wounds all over his head and legs. That is very unprofessional and uncouth of the Police of Uganda to deploy somebody who has been injured by rioters to curb those rioters. What do you expect him to do? He could not be expected to be fair.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before hon. Bahati, I just want to supplement the point made by hon. Mulumba. Busoga brought the charter here to Parliament as per the Constitution. In the Sixth Parliament we requested government to enact a law to activate the charter and they said they are waiting for Buganda. I am confirming.

3.48
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County west, Kabale): Madam Speaker, the President made a very strong statement and I just want to quote the first paragraph: “These riots have been caused by the same Opposition, opportunistic elements using the Kingdom of Mengo.” I think this is a very strong statement and we hope that throughout the investigations we shall see this statement being validated. 

If Members of the Opposition - I can imagine, I am not saying it is true or not - can sit and organise riots that saw lives of Ugandans being taken through those riots then I think we have a serious problem with that kind of arrangement. But we wait to see how the investigations move forward. 

My second point is on the statement of the President again. I agree with the President that we need to operationalise Article 246 of the Constitution to define clearly the boundaries of the kings and the kingdoms; where they should reach and where they should not. 

The participation of political leaders within the management of kingdoms has in a way brought some problems. They bring a lot of misinterpretation. Take the example of the Buganda kingdom. Ssebana Kizito who is a member of the DP is a member of the Lukiiko of Buganda; Nambooze who is a spokesperson of the Democratic Party is a leader of civic mobilisation in the Kingdom of Buganda. If you look at Nsubuga who is the President of CP, he is the Deputy Katikkiro of Buganda. If Nambooze stands up to speak on behalf of the kingdom, the whole country gets confused whether this person is speaking for the kingdom or actually is speaking for the party. So in this law, when we start operationalising Article 246, we need to –(Member timed out­.)

MS ANYWAR: I rise on a point of order. The honourable colleague is giving to this House the list of the officials in the kingdom. We who are seated here are aware that the officials, apart from the few he has mentioned, belong to the ruling party. He has only given the names of the Opposition without mentioning other officials who are on the NRM -(Interjection)- right now. Can I be protected? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mention those that you know whom he has not mentioned.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, people have complained about the Katikkiro being on the Government side -(Interjection)- and he has not even mentioned his name. Besides -(Interjection)– I am on a point of order. 

In light of that, our Rules of Procedure in this august House do not allow us to involve people who are not in this House and who cannot go on record to defend themselves. Is the honourable member in order to proceed by mentioning a list of names of people belonging to the Opposition while not even substantiating on the other side of the Government? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, you should have named those who are on the Government side but you have not. (Applause) Also, he is in order because the issue is: how political is the cultural leader? That is what we are discussing. Continue. 

MS KAMYA: Thank you colleague, for giving way. I want to give this information to this House that Hajji Naduli is from the NRM, the vice-chairperson is Mukubyabyasi and before that, the first Katikkiro, Mulwanyamuli was an RDC -(Applause)- from where he was appointed to become the Katikkiro.

MR BAHATI: Thank you. I think the point I am making is that in this coming law we should bar these political leaders from participating in the affairs of the kingdom –(Interjection)– and that is a point. 

We have had negotiations with the Buganda Kingdom since 1953 and sometimes it is amazing when you see the delegations that are sent to Mengo to negotiate are in most cases members of Government who are  probably Baganda negotiating with the Kingdom of Buganda who comprise the majority of Baganda. So, with these negotiations, we must come to a conclusion and know that there is the President of the country and a king of the kingdom and that Uganda needs Buganda as much as Buganda needs Uganda. But I think that we cannot keep negotiating for years and years; we must reach a conclusion of these negotiations. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.56
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for the statement, and I also want to thank His Excellency the President for his concise and precise presentation made to Parliament about what happened recently.

I would also like to say, like my colleague, hon. Kagwera said, that it is useless to point fingers at one another but we should really be here to forge a way forward. What happened was a very big shame to the nation. On that day, there were some Members of Parliament who were outside this country and were seeing pictures on CNN; they called in wondering what was happening in this country. 

It takes a lot of trouble and time to do something good; but it can take just hours to undo all that you did in the last maybe 20 or so years. I think we should be here to see how we can co-exist and how we can maintain peace and prosperity in this country. 

I was very disturbed, Madam Speaker, when I read the headlines in The Monitor and Red Pepper newspapers that government is going to abolish kingdoms. I was very disturbed and as a very strong activist and supporter of monarchism from the great Toro Kingdom, I know that was very unfortunate. And I don’t think the NRM Government would really take that option of abolishing kingdoms in this country. You cannot produce your child and then kill it. 

But while we were here, His Excellency the President –(Mr Lukwago rose_) thank you for your wise ruling, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members have only five minutes; allow one another to speak. 

MR KALIBA: Madam Speaker, I think in the interest of time - I respect my brother from the Opposition but allow me to make my point –(Interjection)- but what is the problem? People have been talking about Article 246, even His Excellency the President talked about regulating or re-examining Article 246. Article 246(3)(c) - I wish I could be allowed to read it - is in contradiction with Article 246(3)(d) as regards financial support to the kingdoms in this country. And I think that is one of the problems. 

If we are going to co-exist with these kingdoms, we must support them financially and equally. This is because if government cannot support these kingdoms financially -(Interjections)- Hon. Members, please allow me to make my point. If we don’t support these kingdoms financially, there might be an enemy of the state who may want to support them on your behalf. So I would like to request government, as a way forward of co-existence in this country, that we have to look at funding these cultural institutions.

4.02
MR THEODORE SEKIKUUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to make my contribution on the President’s statement as well as the minister’s statement before this House. Due to time constraints, I would say the carcass berry that sparked off the riots, according to what the President told Parliament, was break down of communication between the Kabaka and the President for the last two years. 

For matters of governance, this is very unfortunate. Dialogue and communication should be ensured and as stakeholders, I believe we need to communicate to one another. This would have been the best way forward. However, to say that the Kabaka refused to pick the call is not very satisfactory. We have the Vice-President, the Prime Minister, the Deputy Speaker and the Speaker of Parliament. The President could even have used the PPS to communicate if at all there was communication breakdown. 

It is, therefore, a lame excuse to say that for two years they have not communicated on phone. State matters cannot be run on an individual basis. It is important that we institutionalise all these matters so that when there is a breakdown in one respect, institutions can always have modalities of resuscitating each other. That is why I am saying that to say that there was no communication and because of that there was this - why should the anger between His Excellency the President and the Kabaka engulf the whole country in this tension? This shouldn’t have been the case and I believe we should devise other methods of communication so that this does not happen again. If he had said that he had sent the Prime Minister, this would have been credible, but to say it was a phone call -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I want to give is that what hon. Sekikuubo is saying is very important. At least the Prime Minister, the Speaker of Parliament or the Vice-President should have been sent to meet the Kabaka in person because where I live down there in Wakiso; they seem to have a feeling and saying in Luganda that, “Kabaka tayogera na mukopi”. At least we could have eliminated that kind of excuse so that we get the exact information. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MR SEKIKUUBO: Madam Speaker, on my part I suggest that national matters should get the seriousness that they deserve. 

Members have been advocating for the operationalisation of Article 246. I would welcome this law but I think what is most important is the spirit. You can have as many statutes as you want but once there is no good spirit - for instance, I can tell you that we have the Anti-Sectarianism Act. I don’t know how much dust it has gathered. So what is important here really is to have a good spirit. 

You cannot rush and say you are instituting a law to regulate. May I be advised as to whether we shall have a list or schedule of activities that are basically cultural and that do not overlap into the social, economic and sometimes political arena? It is sometimes difficult to have such a dichotomy. So whereas we want to have that law, it may not be a solution to the problems that we are facing now. I think the best way out of this is to have good and symbiotic co-existence.

I have heard the minister here saying that the law will take its course on whoever incites violence –(Member timed out.)

4.08
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In contributing to this speech and what happened in Kampala, I ask myself: what caused this? I think the cause was stopping the Kabaka from visiting Kayunga. Why was he stopped from visiting Kayunga? I consider that controlling the movements of the His Majesty the Kabaka should be revisited. I think this was the second time that the Kabaka was being stopped from visiting his subjects in his kingdom. 

Personally I believe this is wrong. Had the Kabaka gone to Kayunga, those riots wouldn’t have happened. When you look at the reasons, which were being given, when the Minister of Information was talking, she was saying, “There was insecurity”. When the President came to address us, he told us that the Kabaka refused to pick his calls. In other instances, they were giving some other information. I think the government needs - especially the Executive and the security council - to be very objective and consider when you are sitting, the security of your country. 

I am saying this because on the 7th of September, the Kayunga District Council had said the Kabaka was welcome. Only a one Kimeze said the Kabaka shouldn’t go there. I think the President even agrees with me because in his quotation - I will come to it in his speech - but let me also comment about the conduct of the Police. 

In the second paragraph of page 4, the President says that the Police was slow in reaching the suburbs of Kampala because of insufficient vehicles. We have been talking about this issue day-in, day-out, that the Police is not facilitated, but they do not hear us. We even went to the extent, recently when we were passing the Immigration Act, of doing Appropriation-in-Aid so that maybe Police could access funds. I hope they will comply with it. Why is the Police being suffocated from fulfilling its mandate? Why is it not being given vehicles? These vehicles, we even have a proposal that we need to reverse the fleet – the management of government vehicles. 

Recently, you know the Prime Minister knows the guidelines for purchasing these government vehicles. To build a Health Centre IV, you need about Shs 250 million. That is the money we are using to buy one vehicle for an individual even at the level of commissioner. We are wasting resources and I am about to come up with a motion urging government to curb its wasteful expenditure, especially in these areas.  

On the same page 4, the President says the security forces are informed to use minimum non-lethal forces when dealing with civilian demonstrations. However, he says any rioter found attacking any civilian will be shot. This statement worries me. If such an order comes from the head of state who is the Commander of the Armed Forces, I am worried how many more innocent Ugandans are going to be shot pretending that these individuals –(Member timed out.)  

4.14
LT GRACE KYOMUGISHA (UPDF Representative): The information, which he has rejected, actually is my starting point now. I want to thank the President for coming up with this statement and for having solved this situation amicably -(Interjections) 

In the same spirit, I want to thank and congratulate the security agencies for having restored sanity and peace in the city Kampala, which we all live in -(Interjections)

I want to start with the point over which hon. Banyenzaki refused my information. I do not know why you call a civilian, who is possessing means of violence; who is destroying life and property, an innocent, peaceful Ugandan. I do not understand if that person is still an innocent Ugandan, or is he a terrorist who is trying to terrorise life and property of people? 

I want to thank the President for having been clear on this issue. The lives of security agents were at stake. In most cases, you have taken our discipline for granted. We thank and congratulate the President because we really feel we are entitled to self defence. In defending your lives and property, we are also entitled to self defence and we thank the Commander-in-Chief for having come out clearly on that issue.

Another point I want to talk about is the excessive force, which is being talked about that was used by Police and other security agencies. To us in the security sector, this was reasonable force. What do you call somebody who is armed with means of violence, someone who has iron bars, is armed with clubs, is armed with stones, and is armed with petrol to burn, pangas, holding all those kinds of things? I think he deviates from the concept of having a peaceful demonstration and is a clearly armed person. 

According to the Constitution, which gives us all rights to demonstrate when we are aggrieved, there are three important things, which we need to tell people out there. The demonstration should be peaceful; they should be unarmed; they should petition and by petitioning it means they must have an agenda. The agenda of all these rioters was not clear. They did not petition the relevant body to handle their grievances and from that aspect, they were illegal and they ought to be handled accordingly using the reasonable force, which our security people employed.

Lastly is the current stand-off between the Government and Buganda. I propose a mutual settlement. In case a mutual settlement is not helping us, for purposes of peaceful co-existence, I also propose going to court. I believe the rulings of the court will be upheld by the central government. 

I call upon Ugandans and I want to say clearly that as the UPDF, we are protectors of your rights and cannot double as abusers of your rights. We want to assure you we have our record of human rights and our performance is very clear. We are still clear and still focussed on defending your rights. For God and my country.

4.18
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was one of those sitting in the august House of the Constituent Assembly that put together the current Constitution on which we are running this country. I want to congratulate those of you who are still here with me to witness what is happening today. I also remember very correctly when this kind of issue - that was one of the last few issues that was deliberated upon and it came towards the end of the mandated period. I vividly remember that I was also one of those given an opportunity to make a simple contribution. 

Fellow Ugandans, I want to ask each one of us to re-examine his or her heart and ask this question, “Were these riots called for? Was the magnitude necessary to express anger to that extent?” To me, I think we went a little bit over board. As I told you earlier on, and as you must have read in the papers, I did participate in one of the original riots in this country; the “No Lule, no worker” riots. I was one of them and let nobody ever lie to you. These riots do not just come on their own, but originate from somewhere. Those of you who were there - I remember very well that we were starting from Kajubi’s house in Makerere trekking down to the various suburbs. I was one of the leaders – they never come spontaneously. Get this from me and from experience. 

That said and done, let us remember that there were no losers, not even winners; we all lost because Ugandans died, Ugandans lost their lives! I wish, Madam Speaker, you would give me just a small opportunity to share this calmly. We must also inculcate into ourselves a culture of constitutionalism, and it must be first and foremost exhibited from this very august House. If we cannot listen to one another, what about the wanainchi in Katwe? For goodness’ sake, the issue of constitutionalism must start with us the leaders, because it is very important and every eye is on us. The way we behave towards each other; the way we talk to one another, matters a lot to the local folks. It is very important if we want calmness, tranquillity and harmony in this country. 

Second but last, on the closure of radios. You see, before you start a radio station, regardless of whether it is Radio West, Radio Teso, Radio CBS or Radio Buddu, you must get an application form for a licence; and before you fill it, there are conditions you must fulfil in order for your business to be granted a licence. The moment you defy any one of the conditionalities, this radio must certainly be stopped. It is unfortunate that one of those radios stopped was CBS, and by the way, many other radios are still running – like Sapientia, my very favourite radio, gave an immediate disclaimer and they re-opened it. I wish the same could happen to this CBS. This is a business radio - do not misunderstand the two. They were only misusing it; otherwise it is a good radio. It is very important that we always remember that this country must run and should run on nothing but the law. Whether it is Byarugaba or His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, you must remember this country is a republic. 

Actually, those of you who subscribe to FDC put it very clearly that you want ‘One Uganda, One People’ - (Member timed out_)  

4.23
LT GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, before I proceed, I would like to remind you of what our National Anthem says –(Interruption) 

MR OCENG: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the General and the Deputy Prime Minister to dress in the way they are dressing at the moment. I seek for your wise counsel.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Our rules permit traditional wear. That is traditional wear.

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a reserved a shirt for him. 

I wanted to remind the country and listeners about what our National Anthem states: “Oh Uganda, may God uphold thee, we lay our future in thy hands...” And as an artist, I would like you to look at the design of God. God designed the human being with eyes, a nose, ears, mouth, breasts for the ladies and the other gadgets for the men -(Laughter)- the hands and feet facing in one direction –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: The honourable colleague holding the Floor is giving a narration and alluding to the women’s parts that are actually God’s secret without him also knowing that as men, they do have parts that God has given them. Is he in order to allude only to the women’s parts that are sacred and given by God? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope my time will be saved. I was just telling you that the purpose of God’s design was that we move forward and he only allowed us a short period to look behind and not even at 360 degrees. We are all as we soldiers say, “songa mbele.” I think we are here to discuss this subject and debate it for the purposes of moving forward together, and as a country, we cannot focus or move forward together or have a common vision for stability and security for the freedom of everybody, if we do not bring our minds together.

The first Article of the Constitution says all power, and not just power, belongs to the people. There has been a lot of misquotation of that Article – it is not just power belonging to the people, it is all power belonging to the people of Uganda. How will the people of Uganda be able to come together when there are riots, when there is chaos, when there is destruction of life and property, when - as the President said in his speech - Uganda has gone through hard times and my subject of discussion is how can we get forward instead of keeping in the hard times. 

We recently had a Smart Partnership Dialogue and the emphasis there is a win-win situation; where everybody wins and there is no loser. Personally, I am a member of the royal family of the Ankole Kingdom. My great great grandfathers, for 600 years defended the kingdom of Ankole and the process of nation formation has gone through those stages, and we reached where we are as a result of continuous organisation, continuous defence, continuous sharing and living together; what is called ‘Uganda’ or what will be ‘East Africa’ soon. 

There is need for us to participate in all affairs of our society including security. What happened during these riots was a demonstration that there is a major thing lacking in our society, where we all then take responsibility as the Constitution says – to take care of security of life and property, and as a responsibility of every citizen. 

I would request that out of this discussion, we pass a resolution that all of us - including the young people that are being manipulated into taking interest to demonstrate and risk their lives even when they do not understand properly - should start participating in regular fora to discuss our national concerns together and, therefore, not just the ebimeza but forum which is repeated. In our languages even before the colonialists came, we had names like Orukiiko which we call on Monday; Gwoh kiko in Langi; Balaza in Luganda and Swahili, and in many other languages. Those were weekly meetings for the people to come together and share issues of common interest. What happened was a result of where we would like to go forward from. 

On the side of security, where we do not have your problems of having to fight one another on both sides, is where I would call upon you so that we take security as a matter of priority –(Member timed out_)

4.31 
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would first of all like to thank His Excellency the President for promptly coming up with a statement to Parliament to explain the state of the nation then. I think that we as leaders need to equivocally condemn the acts that took place on that day, the acts that preceded the activities on that day, and the acts that followed the activities on that day. 

I was fairly young when the NRM came to power, and we were given pamphlets when we were still at school; and point number three on the Ten Point Programme was unity. Under unity, there was fighting tribalism, nepotism, sectarianism. It is extremely unfortunate that what was exhibited on that day was a total eclipse of what was professed on point number three of that Ten Point Programme. 

It is on record that the institution of the Buganda Kingdom has two ministers of Asian origin; one minister of Somali origin; and they profess unity and nationalism in character whereas the agents of that same kingdom, on that same day, were preaching something extremely different. 

I happened to receive an SOS call from those Asian families that were in one of the new newspapers – it was there on the front, Metro News, and they choose to put crying Asian women on the front page. I happened to be there and using support from the security agencies, we went to the building in Kawempe and found that a factory that manufactures water, worth a few thousand dollars, had been set ablaze and there were Asian families that lived on top and the women were crying. There were hooligans below who wanted to go in. I had to call a small rally where I spoke to them in Luganda. They were not willing to listen and they insisted that I sing the Buganda anthem. I sang it with them and then requested that they allow the families to come down and the security then escorted those families to the nearest Police station. 

Madam Speaker, It was so horrifying to see those women and children in the state they were in. Not only was it a total failure on the part of the security agencies - because they were outside there, they were overwhelmed and like one of the colleagues said, some of them were beaten; and for somebody to say that this thing was spontaneous, I think it is an illusion, because there were command centres; there were waragi sachets being given out; and there was bhang being distributed. We as leaders need to stand up and condemn these acts of violence and riots! (Applause) 

In response to what happened in Kampala, I would like to urge the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs and the Prime Minister, and through them, the President, who is the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed forces that we are spiralling - this nation has actually started the spiral and if we as leaders do not take charge today, then we shall be, to blame for what shall happen within the very near future. 

Madam Speaker, you are a witness of what is happening in Busoga; I am a witness to what is happening in Tororo. I was ridiculed by the speaker of the Tieng Adhola who happened to be in a committee and said, “He does not speak adhola and he does not speak Ateso. He is a muyindi who came as a merchant” in the precincts of Parliament –(Member timed out_)

4.37
MR JULIUS PETER EMIGU (FDC, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Here we are responding to two issues: One, from the Minister of Internal Affairs, and the other from the President. But, from the report of the Minister of Internal Affairs, I do not actually see anything to react to, except for the sake of the paper which was used, and which is taxpayer’s money, and probably for the sake of the secretary that typed it. I want to ask him one or two questions to help him go and create some substance out of those two questions. 

I heard that there is going to be compensation for those who lost their property and those who lost their dear ones, but I haven’t seen anywhere that the innocent persons that have been rounded up and locked in prison will also be compensated. I want to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs whether these people, especially those who will be found innocent, will be compensated, since they are now beginning to discover that there are people who were rounded up mistakenly because they were within the streets.

Two, since this House is actually condemning the rioters, I also would like to know whether the Minister of Internal Affairs and his team would consider organising a peaceful demonstration to protest against these killers of innocent Ugandans. Maybe if you put that together, it would give me some substance from this paper that you sent to us. 

But I also want to condemn those people in authority who provoke Ugandans into rioting, because I want to believe that the riots were the way they were because some people came and stood in the way of the people who peacefully wanted to go and visit their subjects wherever they were. 

Madam Speaker, on page 3 of the President’s speech, the President talks of elements that are causing riots, and he cites Dr Besigye in 2006. But I remember very well that when Dr Besigye came back from South Africa, there was no problem. The problem only came when Dr Besigye began visiting the country, and when Mr Museveni who was also a candidate for the 2006 elections saw the heat that Dr Besigye had generated, he organised for his arrest and that is how actually the rioting started. Otherwise, if he had been allowed to move peacefully, I don’t think there would have been any riot at all; just like there wouldn’t have been any problem at all if the Kabaka had been allowed to go to Kayunga. Similarly, even with Hon. Anywar Beatrice, if nobody was stopped on the way to Mabira, I don’t think there would have been any violence at all. 

Still on page 3, the President talks about not granting bail to the suspects. I think this is really very unfair. Maybe the President wants to change the laws of Uganda into his wishes so that people who do not reason like him are put behind bars and are not allowed bail, as the law allows. So, he has become the law himself. But I think it is really unfair for a head of State to say that people should not be granted bail since we have now discovered that there are a number of innocent people that are actually behind bars. It would be unfair to deny them bail and they stay there for too long, yet you are not going to compensate them for the pain that they have really undergone.

On page 4, the President talks of shooting people on site. I think these are double standards. In one paragraph, he said that if the Kabaka felt that he was denied the right to go to Kayunga, he should have gone to court. Why doesn’t the President also suggest that the rioters should always be taken to court? He expects the Kabaka to go to court if he has been denied his right and yet he orders that the rioters should be shot at site. What double standards! 

On page 6, he goes ahead to condemn the kings that they failed to defend the sovereignty of Africa. I really do not know what the President is talking about. Some of us were born at the time when there were no more kingdoms in Uganda –(Member timed out_)

4.42 
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me start by sending my condolences to those who lost their dear ones in the riots. I think in the interest of humanity, we really need to do things from the bottom of our hearts and sometimes, we need to be very truthful before pointing accusing fingers, like His Excellency the President pointed at the Opposition. Very many fingers actually also pointed at him. If he does things, he should do them in the interest of Uganda and not for his personal interests. 

We really need to find out how this chief or the Ssabanyala came about. Did it originate from the State House? For example, in my Acholi sub region, we have the Paramount Chief. When the Paramount Chief wants to go anywhere in Acholi or to those other chiefdoms, he does not have to have permission. He only gives a directive: “I am coming to visit that chiefdom” and nobody will say no. I wonder whether Kayunga is not part of Buganda. If it is not part of Buganda, then definitely the Kabaka needed to seek permission; but if it is part of Buganda, then the Kabaka did not have to seek for permission. So, let us be truthful and let us follow the law. This is what sometimes annoys people. 

I want to go straight to us in the Acholi sub region, where we are also going to have problems with the cultural leaders and the government, and whereby government, we mean the President. H.E the President, has a lot of interest in Amuru land and at one time we had a discussion in Gulu barracks, where he sat very close to the Paramount Chief. All our chiefs in Acholi sub region must take note of this; we have to be very careful. When we do things, we should do them for the interests of the people and not personal interests. If the Acholi people say no to Amuru sugar project, who is who to try and push it on the people? Whose interests are we serving? Are we serving the interests of the people or are we serving personal interests?  

These top-down projects may not succeed. So, please, as we handle the Amuru sugar project - we one time went to the Office of the Prime Minister and told him, please, give us some time; give us three years for our people to go back before you can really disturb us on this land issue. After all, I even travelled sometime in other parts of Uganda and I saw a lot of fallow land. Why do we take a lot of interest in Amuru land? This is going to cause confusion between the elected leaders and the cultural leaders. We are going to have a lot of confusion, which can also culminate into riots. 

I want to also comment on what has—-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, you can tone down. The microphone is okay. (Laughter)

MS AOL: Sometimes when we are charged —

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order, hon. Santos.

MR SANTOS: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The honourable member on the Floor is discussing the matter of land disputes and quarrels in Amuru District and yet we are here discussing His Excellency, the President’s speech to Parliament about the riots in Kampala. Is it, therefore, in order to discuss here matters of Acholi sub region, land wrangles and their internal problems? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us focus on the statement and the President’s address. Leave her, she is about to finish.

MS AOL: But Amuru is here on page 12.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Okumu.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank hon. Aol for giving me this opportunity to give her and the House this information. In the statement the President made before Parliament, he talked about the interference by Buganda Kingdom on land, and that Buganda Kingdom has a committee that is moving around Buganda to sensitise the people in Buganda, and yet the work of kingdoms should actually be narrowed around burials, grave yards and all that.

Recently, in the Acholi sub region, the President himself went and camped with the cultural leaders in Acholi, and directed the leaders to go and handle land matters and discuss this investment in Amuru by Madhvani with the Madhvani Group, himself and State House. He actually directed and gave a deadline to the cultural leaders of Acholi to go and discuss and report back to State House. 

Therefore, what hon. Aol is raising is actually in line with what the President said on land in Buganda, and the information is that the President should not be double faced and have double standards. He wants to use cultural leaders in other places for his political ends and elsewhere he does not want cultural leaders to engage in these areas.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I advise hon. Santos from Adjumani to go and read the President’s speech on page 12.

Let me now go to page 13, something about the LCs. I have been wondering whether the Presidency is the right ministry to give bicycles to the LCs or it should be the local governments to take that responsibility. I say this confidently; that this is the time when we are going to also consult our people for 2011. Already, on the ground, you find that public funds are actually being used to sell NRM. How about those other parties which are not NRM? We are not going to allow this if it is going to be —(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kabuusu; then hon. Kawanga; then hon. Kamya; and hon. Nabilah. 

You are here? You are a big man you will speak last.

4.51
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Madam Speaker, I want to be protected. I am personally a Muganda, but today, I will not talk as a Muganda. I want to contribute to this speech of the President as a Ugandan. The problems of Uganda have on several occasions been looked at and in most cases zeroed on addressing symptoms than causes. I wanted to question Uganda’s readiness to combat violence. The Minister of Internal Affairs is here. I will not blame him, but the incompetence of the ministry to have had Ugandan property set ablaze and destroyed when security officers were consuming samosas and sausages in hotels.

I remember texting an SMS somewhere to inform one person that there is a problem here, can you respond? And it took time for security agencies to reach where problems were. Is Uganda ready to combat problems of violence to our property? If any problem arose in Masaka, Lyantonde, Mukono, is the ministry able to protect Ugandan people and their property?

Ugandan security agencies are personalised. They always wait for single and individual orders. This is wrong. We had wished in this Parliament, a day before, to provide a solution here and we were prevailed over until this problem escalated. We did not have a solution as Parliament. I want to condemn this as a legislator. I do not know where this will end, but Uganda should be given to the three arms of Government to help and advise one another.

Another problem is, we must stop whatsoever what looks to be sectarianism. Sectarianism here is a cause of many problems. I will not cite where, but you personally know and the honourable members here know. We have criminalised speaking about sectarianism, but we have not done anything to condemn people who practise sectarianism. And this is a cause of Uganda’s problem. We are treating symptoms - the riots, somebody talking about singing a stanza and so on. Sectarianism is at its height. 

Parliament must come out and look at Government parastatals, ministries and institutions, to see that the distribution of jobs here meets the standards of all Ugandans. Many Ugandans are unemployed and are looking at benefiting from whatever violence comes here. We must fight sectarianism and prevail over it. This is when we shall get a solution.

Finally, I wanted, as a Muganda this time, to be educated; if there is a role some Baganda people played in bringing peace to this country. There is a role! Much as after 23 years there is no role we can see, there is a role. We are legislators representing people in Buganda and on several occasions, we have been here on the Floor of Parliament trying to bring out what our voters tell us and it has been disregarded in totality. 

I read in the President’s publication, Sowing the Mustard Seed, and I saw some names of Baganda people who made tremendous contributions to the cause. Many of us here who will come to contribute did not lose even a pregnancy, but Baganda lost their sons and daughters, grandfathers and what not, and if they have a problem and they are at the centre where governance is, we should come seriously to listen -(Member timed out_)

4.56
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Sanjay Tanna said we must watch the situation, otherwise this country might degenerate into greater chaos. Because of that, I found it necessary to read this quote to this Parliament. It is from Greek Mythology: 

“A politician approached Nemesis (Rhamnusis), the goddess of retribution who measures out to mortals, happiness and misery and asked, ‘What are the historical cycles of political revolution?’” 

She replied: 
“From bondage to spiritual faith;
From spiritual faith to courage;
From courage to liberty;
From liberty to abundance;
From abundance to selfishness;
From selfishness to complacency;
From complacency to apathy;
From apathy to dependence; 
From dependence to bondage again.” 

It is necessary for us to reflect on what stage of the cycle of our revolution we are now, because if we do not watch it, we may quickly go back to bondage. 

I listened to the speech of the President and there was one issue which did not come out properly. In his speech, he referred to freedom of movement as one of the freedoms, but the speech did not sufficiently explain to the nation why it was not possible for the Kabaka to go to Buruuli the other time. It was said that it was because of security reasons, and that it was also felt it was unsafe for him to go to Kayunga this time because of security reasons. The security reasons were that in the other case, the Sabaruuli said, “We do not want him to come here”, and in this case the Ssabanyala said, “We do not want him to come here.” 

The question was, are these the people who should be determining who should go where? And if they say they do not want somebody to come, must he, therefore, not come? That is something which has not been sufficiently explained for the population to understand. And because of that, the anarchy which followed raises a question: Was it really worth it to prevent somebody going to Kayunga in the first place? Perhaps if that had not happened, the kind of riots that we had would not have happened. 

Another reference I want to make to the President’s speech is about intimidation. He said people should not be intimidated, but I think one point which should be taken is that, it is not only one side which intimidates; it is always several sides which do the intimidation, and unless you control intimidation at all levels, you will not have peace in this country.

My prayer is that people in authority should develop feelings about how people feel. The question of preventing the Kabaka from going to Buruuli and Kayunga was an aspect of very great humiliation to the people of Buganda. They felt humiliated and it is necessary to start handling people’s feelings, marked with greater feelings of what has been done in the past, and unless we do that, we are going to spiral back into the kind of problems that we were in, in 1966 and before, and as consequence of that –(Interjections)- we have run into problems which we could have avoided –(Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Hon. Kawanga, I wish to thank you very much for having allowed me this opportunity. I would like hon. Kawanga to clarify whether the Banyala were not going to be humiliated if we had allowed His Majesty to go without them also saying, “Come”. Don’t we have the Baruuli also as Ugandans? Would they not have been humiliated?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Members have little time. Please, allow hon. Kawanga to finish. Clarification from hon. Tubwita.

MS TUBWITA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable colleague on the other side has made a statement which I feel was unfair. May I seek clarification - you mentioned that when the Ssabaluli stops you from going to Nakasongola, it is a humiliation! Don’t you think that the Ssabaluli is constitutionally in that place? And don’t you think the Ssabaluli is representing a culture of a people who are in this Constitution? Article 37 of this Constitution states it rightly that every person has a right to culture and similar rights. Do you think that when the Ssabaluli is representing the culture of the Baluli, the Baluli are regarded as non-existent? We have 65 tribes in this country; look at the third schedule of this Constitution, Article 10(a) - it stipulates clearly the different tribes with different cultures and if the Ssabaluli was constituted, it was a demand by the cultures of the Baluli. Legally, he has a right to be recognised and if the Kabaka is to visit Nakasongola, he has to harmonise with the people in charge of the culture like the Ssabaluli so that there is no conflict between the two tribes. 

MR KAWANGA: I have very simple answers to these questions. How can the Ssabanyala be humiliated by the Kabaka of Buganda going to Kayunga? He has lived in this country all along and he too moves from Kayunga to Kampala. How can the movement of Kabaka to Kayunga humiliate him? (Member timed out_) 

5.05
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): In 1993, the President of Uganda invited people from Ankole region to Rwakitura to discuss the matter of reinstating Omugabe. After the discussions, while the Bahima wanted Omugabe, the President advised the Bahima that being minorities, they should submit to the Bairu majority and give up Obugabe. 

He championed the wish of the majority, but these days the President is championing the wish of the minority. That is double standards and - I wish Gen. Tumwine were here – such double standards cannot allow the forward movement that he was talking about. You can only move forward if all of you are looking forward but the movement gets disrupted when some of you are moving forward while others are moving sideways or backwards and such double standards have built the recent crisis in Kampala and other crises around the country.

I heard yesterday on the news that some NRM MPs and Generals were advocating for the abolition of kingdoms. I speak for the Baganda and I am sure communities, which love their kingdoms believe in them –(Interruption) 

MS NANKABIRWA: I did not want to interrupt your speech but this statement has been coming up quoting NRM MPs as having resolved to abolish the cultural institutions. I was in the caucus yesterday and there was no such resolution but the statements that appeared in the Daily Monitor is what people are using, which is a misrepresentation of what happened in the NRM Caucus. Is the MP in order to say that NRM MPs and Generals supported a resolution to abolish the Kingdom of Buganda? Is she in order when what she is saying is not true?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we should leave the issues of the caucus out of this debate. Let us focus on the statement of the minister and the President. Anything else – forget it.

MS KAMYA: I just want to advise for the good of this country and for the sake of cohesion that the community of Buganda, and I am sure other communities which are monarchical, believe in their monarchies. Buganda in particular has been ungovernable without the Kabaka. There are historical facts to support this. In the late 1890s, the British colonialists tried it and they exiled Kabaka Mwanga. Buganda was ungovernable until the Kabaka was brought back. On his way back, he died anyway but his young son was crowned.

In 1953, it was tried again and Kabaka Mutesa II was exiled; Buganda became ungovernable and he was brought back. In 1966, it was tried again and the Baganda continued to demand for the return of the Kabaka. I know that the NRM would like to take credit for what happened in Luwero but it was only possible because the Baganda wanted their Kabaka back. It was impossible for Obote to rule. So in advice, it would be good for everybody to know that while we have elections and acquire culture - you know Ugandans have an acquired culture - Baganda after the elections will turn back to the Kabaka and look to him.

5.11
MRS NABILAH SSEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to make a contribution to the President’s speech which came after Kampala and other parts of Buganda had been engulfed in riots for almost a week. 

As a nation, I would like us to examine the salient objectives that the President had when he was making the statement to Parliament after the riots. We also need to look at the salient objectives that the President had when the monarchies were being reinstated. Actually, we became privy to something that was intimate between the Kabaka and the President in that he refused to pick his calls for two years. I think this showed that our President, His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, has been handling the institution of the Kabaka at a personal level and not as the Government of Uganda.

Why wasn’t this brought up earlier than the Kayunga incident and riots? Why did we learn suddenly that the Kabaka had not been receiving calls for two years? Did we have to wait for the riots to know that there has been a deep misunderstanding between the two? Now that we got that statement and tomorrow we hear there are talks going to take place or in the next week, are we privy to what is going to be discussed and what the President is going to say? Or we will wait for other riots to know what they may have discussed or disagreed about?   

As a country, we demand that whatever issues are going to be discussed, since the President thought it fit to make a statement to Parliament, he should also bring the issues he thinks we should discuss to us. But now there are talks going on and if they disagree then the President will come back to tell us what he thought after a year. I think as Parliament, we should stand up and tell the President not to handle cultural institutions at a personal level for him to give or take. We should debate and talk about the issues that we want enshrined constitutionally.

We also have a constitutional problem which left Uganda a republic but put clauses that recognise monarchies. When the President wants to use them he does so because there are grey areas. As Parliament, we should now demand that those grey areas that the President will use when it fits him are ironed out because the President is using monarchies as a token to every tribe in this country. When he wants to please a certain area, if it is not a district, it is with a cultural head. 

Buganda has a problem because it was not tokenism in its case - the kingdom existed before he gave it as a token -(Interjection)– no, they were not abolished and that is why he thought it fit to reinstate them. As Parliament, we should demand that the President disengages from personally giving or removing cultural institutions. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.16
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have passionately been listening to the debates and following the trend of the debate. The issues we have been discussing here are issues of national concern and those in authority should listen to the voices of the people who have been speaking. 

The issue of the Kabaka’s visit to Kayunga which led to the blood shed would have been avoided. I have sometimes been asking myself what government would have lost if the Kabaka went to Kayunga and talked to his subjects. Even if we operationalise Article 246(3)(e) which restricts the Kabaka or traditional leaders from partisan politics, we shall not be solving any problem. As a political scientist, you will find that between economical, social and political issues, the dividing line is so thin that you cannot go without any of them. If the Kabaka called the Baganda today and urged them to be organised to do farming, that message is already political. For the Kabaka to say that, “Let us look at our leaders and elect capable people to represent our interests”, he would be talking to the Baganda but it would still be political.

Why do we say that for the Kabaka to go to Kayunga, he will be undermining the Ssabanyala or the Banyala community? But the same Constitution, which was promulgated in 1995, talks in Article 29(2)(a) that every citizen of this country has a right to travel and to reside in any part of this country. The Kabaka is a citizen of this country.

We are aware that the 1966 crisis was a result of the hide-and-seek game the central government played with the Mengo establishment that led to that bloodshed and riots, which lasted longer than this one of 2009. History tells us there was a curfew for more than two years as a result of those riots.

I urge that we handle those institutions carefully. The government came and created them, which is a very good gesture in support of Article 37, which talks about the right of culture in this country. But there should be harmony in order to live peacefully in this country. We want to live peacefully in Buganda; we want a Muganda doing business in Arua to be very peaceful. We do not want a situation whereby a Munyankole who has a business in Arua fears that should a riot erupt, we shall have patrols with people being searched from vehicles, looking at somebody’s colour or nose and asking why they are wherever they are. 

During the riots, the Police would tell you to raise your hands up so that you are not taken as part of the rioters, and soon after you would find another group asking you why you are raising your hands while in that place. These are the things that we need to control. 

We are all aware that the riots caught the Police and other security organs unawares because they have never wanted to learn. By the time Olara Otunnu was coming to this country, there were plans to arrest him, something that would magnify his status and make him instantly prominent but after a security brief –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member holding the Floor has stated that there were plans to arrest Olara Otunnu when he came here. We all know very well that Olara Otunnu brought himself to Uganda unescorted. He was given a passport and went back without anybody forcing him to do so. And he was not arrested. Can you substantiate that information? Where did you get that information from? Is it in order to insinuate bad motives on the government that there were plans to arrest Olara Otunnu when actually there were no such plans and Olara Otunnu came and went by himself? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you substantiate?

MR GODI: Madam Speaker, I am happy Minister Kivejinja is in the House. He threatened that if Olara Otunnu continues to make statements, which are sensitive to security matters, he will be arrested.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Godi. I want to know. Did the minister threaten before he arrived here or after he arrived because that was the allegation that you made. How did he know that he was coming?

MR GODI: Madam Speaker, before. Even by the time he arrived, I was in Entebbe to receive him and the matter continued. I am bringing this in good faith and I am trying to say that there are some things that government magnifies. Like they toned down on Otunnu, if they had done the same with the Kabaka and allowed him to go to Kayunga, would there have been riots in Kampala leading to the deaths? Thank you.

5.22
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not want to quote section 2 of Article 29 of the Constitution because it has been handled by previous speakers. This article talks about the freedom of people to move to any part of the country and it does not state that any cultural leader is excluded from that right. I want to assert that in this country, there have been groups of people who create situations in which people die and they end up blaming it on other people.

Between 1980 and 1986, there was war and in this war, many people died. Later the leader of this country blamed it only on the government of the day. He went to the extent of blaming DP for causing those deaths. Recently and admittedly so in this document of the President, he states clearly that he and others created bibanja associations and he admits that people within these associations have gone ahead to do unlawful things including killing people. 

In this very statement, the President again blames it on Kabaka’s government yet he knows that it is him and his officials - Kakooza Mutale and Tamale Mirundi are some of those who commanded and empowered those bibanja associations to kill people and indeed they went ahead to kill them.

The disintegration of the integrated Buganda Kingdom is one of the activities that have been carried out. Somebody has been claiming that there have been other traditional leaders who have emerged in the Buganda Kingdom including the Ssabaluli and Ssabanyala. I think as a person who comes from Bukunja, I qualify to be a Ssabakunja but I am not going to demand those rights and to prevent the Kabaka from coming to Bukunja. We know exactly what is happening in Busoga and elsewhere.

When you look at all these situations, you will find that there has been an effort to continue to create situations, which are creating upheavals and these upheavals are political in nature and are being blamed on other people. This Parliament should not sit and watch but should blame such organised groups within this government.

The President’s said, “As I mentioned in the press conference of the religious leaders recently, those legitimate interests …” and he quotes the legitimate interests of Uganda as including peace, security, health, education and so on. Let the President be told that when we are talking about peace, we are not only talking about the absence of war but we are also talking about certain other software, which affect us and which the President or his government should not interfere with including the right to religion, culture, movement and other things, which are enshrined in this Constitution.

Let me just help hon. Kawanga answer a question people had asked him but he did not answer because of time constraints. I have this to say: the Constitution does not oblige anybody whether in Buganda or elsewhere to pay allegiance to any cultural leader. In fact, even here in Buganda, nobody is being forced to pay allegiance to the Kabaka of Buganda. It is out of your own will so if at all the Kabaka went to Nakasongola and the Ssabaluli did not attend or he did not come to prostrate for the king, it is his constitutional right not to do so. If the Kabaka went to Kayunga and the Ssabanyala did not turn up or did not come to greet him, it is his constitutional right –(Member timed out_)

5.27
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am the Shadow Minister of Defence and Security and my biggest concern still is: what has been the cause of this standoff which made people to riot in Buganda? We are doing a post mortem of the war between a cultural leader and a political leader. On page 10 of the President’s Address, and I quote, “We mean what we say and what we say, we mean.” So when he said, “Kabaka you are not going to Kayunga” he meant it. I am glad to tell this House that the Kabaka is a very respectful citizen of this country. He respected the President’s statement and did not go. 

But the question now is: who is to blame? Here is a law, which is very clear. Should you tell me that you will see and I take you to court? But here is a leader of the Banyala called Cpt. Baker Kimeze telling the government and the Kabaka that, “Do not come here”. Who is he and what has government done to this kind of statement? You really wonder. If therefore this is not an ally of his Excellency the President to disturb the kingdom of Buganda, who is this king in a big kingdom saying we do not want you here? Has he been investigated? Hon. Minister of Internal Affairs, have you arrested him for making this kind of statement if he made it at all as you have seen in the papers? We have seen the results. Many lives were lost, so much property was destroyed and many people injured. Now many people are going to be arrested. 

We have to realise that in future, the cultural leaders are very important. And in this case, can you imagine the great sons of Uganda fighting? One of them is making a lot of noise and the other one is quiet - very quiet. To date he has not made his response to this statement about this incident.

When President Museveni was crying to us that the Kabaka refused to answer his call, was that not a shame or failure in leadership? When I do not answer your calls, does it mean you stop me from executing my duty to visit my people or go to any part of this country because you have political power? 

I remember when we were discussing the removal of term limits I made a statement in this House that the third term will be a sad term, a mad term, a gun term and a death term. And we have seen it.

We know that now the 11th September is a bad date. So President Museveni was not very careful in stopping His Highness the Kabaka from going to Kayunga on that day -(Interjections)- I was not born here but I have the knowledge -(Member timed out_)

5.32
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a trained advocate, I know if you are to address a problem, you start by assessing the facts and raising issues before you come to solutions.

I have been looking at the facts before us and the issues. What really caused this crisis? I have tried to gather from the facts before us, the statement by the minister, the speech by the President and they are offering us no answer to what actually caused this crisis.

Loosely from the President’s speech, he talks about the Kabaka’s failure to pick his calls. That is number one. Two, is the mixing of politics with cultural matters. I will address one by one.

Hon. Gutomoi has assisted me with the first aspect. Failure by the Kabaka to pick the President’s call cannot justify the excessive force that was used. However, as a rejoinder to that, I challenge the President - government business is conducted in a normal and formal way, not through telephone calls. Has the President ever raised any formal communication with the Kabaka? Even if that were the case, how was that related to the Kayunga visit? He said for the previous two years –(An Hon. Member rose_)- I have very limited time.

The question of mixing politics with cultural matters does not also arise in this particular case. Why? Because the visit to Kayunga was very clear. It was to officiate at the celebrations of the youth day. So what was politics? And the Constitution in this particular case is misinterpreted. Article 246 talks about partisan politics. It is qualified and there is no ban on talking about land, federal or anything.

The real cause in my opinion is the violation of the Constitution. If you are to address the question - there were arrests. You can arrest and charge me with terrorism because I made a statement here. You can arrest all these people you are talking about, but you are not addressing the real problem. Who violated the Constitution? The person who blocked the Kabaka from accessing part of his kingdom is responsible for that chaos.

It is on record that we as Parliament demanded for a statement and we reached an extent of walking out of the House so that we could address this problem in advance but no statement was made. Now there is a crisis, again we are waiting to address symptoms. Ssabamooli - a so-called self-styled Ssabamooli in Buwekula is also putting conditions and is sounding war drums that, “If the Kabaka wants to come to Buwekula, he must talk to me”. This is in the press and we are keeping quiet. 

The Kabaka is scheduled to visit Buwekula on the 8th day of October and there are people there sounding war drums. I hope after October, because we are going to have a recess, we shall not be again in the same process of symptoms.

Article 3 of the Constitution is very instructive in this particular case and we need to revisit it. It gives all of us as citizens a duty to protect the Constitution. You are here condemning violence - you are talking passionately – but there is what we call constitutional violence. The state can use force –(Interjections)- yes, to deal with you. But likewise, the civilian force under Article 3 can deal with any person who violates the Constitution. 

5.37
MS REBECCA OTENGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from Northern Uganda, a part of the country, which has not seen peace for a long time and the people we represent no longer believe in violence. When the President mentioned that the Opposition was using the kingdom and most of the Members in this House who come from Northern Uganda are Members of the Opposition –(Interjections)- I sit on the Opposition side. I wanted the President to help us and mention the names of such people because we also do not believe in them. 

At one point, there was something coming out that external forces were also beginning to use the traditional leaders. That is a national security problem. But we did not talk about it because as Ugandans, we want to know those external enemies. 

I listened to the President speak about his first meeting with the Kabaka when he was still a prince in London and I thought they were very close. It looks like only the two of them may know where it started from. The President told us that they first met in the house of the late President, Prof. Lule, but they concluded in the hotel room with Prince Mutebi. He was not yet coronated then. I thought that at that point, maybe some agreement was reached. And after that, when the President became the President of this Republic, he needed to hand over what they discussed to the legitimate hand of maybe Parliament to discuss how the Kabaka issue could be handled. 

I would like to show my displeasure that the Kabaka’s issue is no longer a private issue. It is beyond that. It is now a national issue and some kingdoms and chiefdoms are also coming up like the one of our namesake, His Highness Baker Kimeze. 

We have a problem now in Busoga. If people are not in agreement, you will find other chiefdoms coming up. We need to debate this now to help all Ugandans. I do not know what exactly is taking place in other parts of this country because I may be shocked to find that in Lango, somebody has come and said he is also a Won-Nyachi and he is being recognised and we have never had two of them at once.

The regional tier was debated in this House but I was a bit worried about the timing. It was reinstated at a time when things were not so good. I am proposing that we briefly take it back to the people and we look at it. Even the Lango region had agreed. If we just say that next financial year we are going to implement it when there is this kind of confusion, it may not be very easy for us.

I support the compensation of people who lost their property and for the families of those who lost their lives. Maybe the government should look at something which can be done to help the families.

The Bible tells me that two people cannot walk together unless they agree. From 1980, the President, the Kabaka and Buganda have been walking together; why are they disagreeing now? Do the rest of us really understand what we are debating now? I believe that there are people who can help us. Our leaders from Buganda should help us because they are our linkage even between the President and the palace –(Member timed out_)

5.42
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This Parliament is not the first to debate the issues of the relations between cultural leaders and the central government. There are those who were there in the 1960s but failed to solve this problem. 

I want to condemn the barbaric acts and to send my belated condolences to the families of the people who lost their lives. No amount of words can soothe the pain in the hearts of those people. No amount of actions can fill the emptiness in these people’s families but what we can only do is to help Ugandans as the Eighth Parliament solves this problem once and for all. I am just calling upon Members for unreserved sobriety. I am calling upon Members to have great understanding, absolute honesty and towering commitment. We cannot afford to continue debating this - even those who will come after us will do the same. 

Forty-seven years ago Uganda became independent. My prayer is that 47 years from now, those who will be celebrating the 94th Independence anniversary, will say that we too played a part by resolving this problem once and for all. Let those who will come after us not be bogged down by the same problem.

There has been a perception created here that Buganda has been pampered. Even outside there, many people are saying that Buganda was a beneficiary during the colonial days and they were pampered. Buganda was a victim during the colonial era. There is nowhere in this country where we have dual ownership of land except in Buganda and Kibale, which has already benefited from the Land Fund. So the argument that Buganda is being pampered is wanting. Even in this government you cannot say Buganda is pampered. Buganda paid a price -(Interjections)- we cannot afford to engage in that luxury.

On cultural leaders, there is a very clear difference between a traditional leader and a cultural leader. A cultural leader does not have territorial jurisdiction. If you are a Ssabanyala, I mean you are a leader of the Banyala whether they are in Gulu, Mbale or in America. But a traditional leader has territorial jurisdiction. In our case, the Kabaka is both a cultural and traditional ruler. 
Section 8 of the fifth schedule is very clear; if we implement the regional government, which I personally support, the traditional leader is supposed to be the titular head. Now, where Buganda, Nakasongola and Bugerere are part of Buganda under this Constitution, are we going to have two, five or seven titular heads in Buganda? –(Interjections)- So, to me, it is true a Munyala is a Munyala; a Muruli is a Muruli. We do not have the same cultures. We have 56 clans in Buganda, while the Baruuli have more than 120 and they can be there. 

The position of Kamuswaga in Buganda is very clear. Now, there is Ssabamuli, in Bulemezi; we have the Banubi, and very soon we shall have the Ssabanubi –(Laughter)- We need to implement this law and enact a law on cultural institutions to stop these other egwes coming up every now and then. As we implement it, we must follow Article 246(6) to the letter -(Member timed out.)

5.48
MR PETER OCHIENG (NRM, Bukooli County South, Bugiri): Thank you very much. Many people have talked. I also want to thank both the President and the minister for giving us a report and for condemning, in the strongest possible means, what happened in Kampala and the surrounding areas, in particular Buganda, on that day. 

I was supported by this Parliament to travel out of the country for two weeks. I was talking to different people from all those areas we went to and people at that time were regarding Uganda highly. We talked to them and they received us with good hearts and two hands. We went everywhere and made a lot of pledges. We talked to them and assured them that everything was happening positively in this country. 

On the day I arrived at Entebbe, however, even before I reached home, so many messages were coming onto my phone asking me about what was happening and whether what I had told them was correct. It became very difficult for me to immediately inform them. I basically just said, “I have just arrived. Let me assure you that if there is anything, those things will be solved.” 

I came straight here to Parliament and when I left this place, I went down to the bank and everybody was standing, including the managers, those who were working, those who had come to pick their money and those who had brought in their money. One manager asked and said, “Honourable, what is happening? What can we do?” I ran short of what to say, but they knew I was a Member of Parliament. All that I said on that very day was, “I am sure, just like you are, that this country has leadership that is committed; leadership that requested that they be given an opportunity to run this country for a period of time. I can assure you that today and tomorrow, this country will be okay.” 

I want to thank those who made it possible for that word of assurance to be realised thereafter. Those who brought so many traditions that we now see in this country, together decided and said that as we are doing this, we are commanding and requesting every Ugandan to do everything that they do for God and their country, Uganda. I believe that is what all of us here are supposed to do, and that is also what I try to do. In doing so, I want this country to look at these areas:

Kisekka Market. Who is in Kisekka Market as we speak today? Do you know them? Let me give you my experience. Every time your side mirror is snatched in any part of the streets in this town, immediately you go to Kisekka Market, you will find it there; if you are clever enough to mark it. Take your vehicle there and even before you enter -(Interjections)- I have all the evidence and I can show you, and those people know me. Immediately you enter Kisekka Market, everybody is calling you - those who know what they are supposed to do as mechanics – (Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: We are legislators here who are supposed to promote the rule of law in this country. It is a cardinal principle of law that a person is liable for his own acts as an individual. We should condemn, in the strongest terms possible, the concept of omnibus accusations. 

The honourable member here on the Floor is blanket accusing all the vendors in Kisekka Market. Is he in order to accuse everybody who works in Kisekka Market as a thief as if whoever comes from Bukooli is a thief? -(Interjections)- Is he in order?
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you suggesting that there are no thieves in Kisekka Market?  

MR LUKWAGO: There are thieves all over the country –(Interjections)- including Bukooli. Even in Kamuli, there are thieves. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Member must have established that the ones who steal mirrors are in Kisekka Market and that is why he said it. 
 
MR OCHIENG: Thank you. I am part of this society and if Government wants, I can offer myself to get evidence straight away from that market. I have been there; I am part and parcel of that place and I know what is happening there. Now, what are we saying? I am not saying that everybody in Kisekka Market is bad, as you have got the experience. There are many good people in Kisekka Market but there are also very many difficult people in that market. The earlier this government and those who want peace in Kampala take keen interest in Kisekka Market, the better. We shall not have this situation. 

It is not only Kisekka Market, but there are also hardcore spots in this city that need urgent attention and the earlier we do that the better. I have many things that I can talk about for that very matter –(Member timed out.)

5.54
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker and honourable members of parliament, first of all, on behalf of Government, I wish to convey our condolences to the relatives of those who lost their lives during the strike. We also condemn acts of hooliganism and thuggery, and we thank the Police for having contained the situation. 

In 1966 when there was a confrontation between the Buganda Government and the Central Government, the Army invaded the palace and the Kabaka of Buganda had to run out of the palace. He came to our house at Bulange and my father prayed for him. When the people who pretended to be friendly came to our house even though we knew they were spies, we made sure that we took him to our neighbours. At that time he was armed with a gun and I disarmed him. I advised him not to keep a gun but I asked him what went wrong and his answer was that the people he trusted had let him down. [HON. MEMBERS: “Who were they?”] 

When the traditional leaders were restored -(Mr Nsubuga Birekeraawo rose_)- The honourable Speaker says I should not entertain it. Well, the Speaker has given guidance. So, when traditional leaders were restored, Government had to sort out the causes of the 1966 crisis. That is why under Article 246 of the Constitution, traditional leaders are not allowed to participate in partisan politics because that was one of the causes of the 1966 Crisis. That is why I thank his Excellency the President for saying that we should operationalise Article 246 and it has taken a long time. I am part of Government and we made a mistake not to operationalise it because when we do so, the privileges of the Kabaka and the dos and the don’ts, will be made very clear. Hon. Opio, the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development, is bringing the Bill. 

Another cause of the 1966 Crisis was that Buganda was seen as having a special status. Under the 1962 Constitution, Buganda had a federal status with the Central Government, while some had a semi-federal status and others had a unitary status. So, Buganda was targeted and when the Constitution was abrogated, people from other areas rejoiced because in their view, it abolished the special status of Buganda. That is why we had to find ways of having a system of Government - some people call it federalism, others call it a regional government - which would be marketable to all parts of Uganda and that is extremely important. That is why we came out with a regional government because a regional government is marketable to other parts of Uganda and indeed Lango, Acholi and others have accepted a regional government. 

I am glad that H.E. the President has said that we should implement it. We should have implemented it yesterday and traditional leaders will be titular heads of these governments and also, it will have elected people essentially so that they are accountable. That is why some of us who are not elected are not allowed to vote here. I am a Prime Minister; but I am not allowed to vote because I was not elected; but I am accountable to the President who was elected. So, that is why we propose a Katikkiro who is elected because the current Katikkiro is largely accountable to the Kabaka, who is not elected. Those arrangements of a regional government – (Interruptions) 

MR NSUBUGA BIREKERAAWO: Madam Speaker, I am compelled to move a point of order. The Prime Minister, who is also the Leader of Government Business, is not elected but he is saying that the Katikkiro of Buganda cannot lead the Kingdom of Buganda or be given the resources for the Kingdom of Buganda because he is not elected. What is the difference between him who is not elected leading Government business and handling resources of Uganda and the Katikkiro? Is he in order to allude to the fact that the Katikkiro of Buganda cannot handle issues yet he is also not elected?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He was talking about the plans for the future. But Prime Minister, do not go into the regional tier now. We shall debate this separately.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I was saying that I am grateful to His Excellency the President because he raised the importance of the regional government. Some of you are calling it tier, but under Article 178 it is regional government.

I have two more points. Some people were saying that the Baganda leaders have not been giving —(Mr Nsubuga Birekeraawo rose_)- Hon. Member, you should try to understand. Are you the Speaker? Have you taken over the role of a Speaker? What a shame!

The point was made that, have the Vice President, the Speaker and the Prime Minister tried to ensure that channels of communication are opened between the President and the Kabaka? I want to assure you that we have tried our best. In my case, I have even tried religious leaders and Abataka. We have been trying. Let me finally say that —(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: I am also constrained to rise on a matter of order with due respect to the Prime Minister. I have attended several functions, at least three, where the Vice President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, was a guest at these functions hosted in honour of the Kabaka. One was actually at the Vice President’s hotel in Entebbe and another one was at Lubiri recently. During the two occasions, the two leaders expressed verbally to us all their good relationships. Is the Prime Minister in order to tell this House that the Vice President has also failed several times to communicate with the Kabaka?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you were not listening. There was a Member who said the people of Buganda have big representatives in this country - the Vice President, the Speaker and the Prime Minister. They asked, has it not been possible to use those channels? That is what they asked and that is what he is answering. So, he is answering for himself. Proceed.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people shall judge. We have tried and I want to finally say that His Excellency the President is due to meet the Kabaka. We should avoid making statements which may prejudice that meeting, and that is why I have avoided making statements. I am only praying that vertical and horizontal channels of communication may be opened between the Central Government and Mengo. I thank you.

6.07
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (NRM, Ibanda County South, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to those who have extended condolences to the families and friends of those who perished in the riots. I also want to thank the security organisations for coming out in full force to control those riots. Well, I happen to be a victim. Though I was away, my property was torched in Nalukolongo. They burnt my generator, but of course these were hooligans who took advantage and they wanted to loot.

Sometimes I am hurt when I hear some people standing up and saying that the President prevailed on the Bahima to accept the abolition of the kingdom in Ankole. I feel as if the Banyankole cannot decide for themselves by saying that it is the President who decided. This is not true. We had already formed the Ankole Cultural Foundation. We had already submitted our memoranda that we do not want the kingdom. We said that and the President listened to us; we were the majority and we took the show. Therefore, for anybody to stand up and say that it is the President who prevailed on the minority is an insult –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, the record of this House is very clear. There are people from Ankole Kingdom who signed a petition and submitted it to the Office of the Speaker. I am sure that the minister is aware that there are very many people who petitioned this House regarding the restoration of the traditional leader in Ankole, and that petition is pending consideration by this House. Is the minister in order to make a statement as if it is a settled matter; that in Ankole the people do not want; when the matter is still pending before Parliament? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He represents people who do not want, so it is ok. (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. I represent the majority. Those who presented the petition were the minority. I continue with my submission.

If anybody wants to be respected, he must respect others. If the Constitution is giving you power to be everywhere you want, we first question whether that power is absolute. Those are the questions we should first put forward. In other words, supposing you force your way, what happens if you go and get a problem there. Government is there to protect everybody including the Kabaka, the Ssabanyala and whoever. They tell you that, “look here, we are sensing danger; please take heed and do not move”, but then you say, “I will continue”. Please, under the Constitution, we are all equal. There is nobody who is above the other. Therefore, I think it is not proper to take yourself to be above all or to be the best among the best. 

Somebody talked about funding the cultural institutions. Some of us are republicans. I do not see the reason a republican like me, John Byabagambi, should pay taxes to feed a cultural leader somewhere. Why should I pay my taxes to feed somebody else? If somebody wants a cultural leader, get your cultural leader, feed -(Member timed out.)

6.12
MR FREDRICK MBAGADHI (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to that of the previous speakers in first and foremost registering a word of condolence to the bereaved families that lost their loved ones. 

In the same vein, I take this opportunity to thank the President for coming up very fast to make the kind of statement that he made to the Parliament of Uganda. Why do I say so? It is because in such a situation where we seem to be having a political-cultural conundrum, the onus was on the President to come and show this nation that he was fully in charge. That was good because it was done at the right time. 

A lot has been said and a lot has been heard, but surely, we need to accept that the nature of the riots is a clear indication that they were highly organised. Given that kind of situation, I would like to thank the security personnel for having done all it takes to sort out this mess. Many colleagues have been saying that they used excess force, but surely, in situations where you have hooligans razing a Police post, I think that is really going beyond what someone can expect. So, I think they used the force that was within their mandate, and I really commend them for that.

We have been talking about the issue of the monarchies, but I want to make it clear to this House that if we are to allow the monarchies to co-exist with a republic, we must take into account the fact that a lot of sacrifices have to be made on either side. The principle of give and take must be adhered to; otherwise we might end up failing in this kind of situation.     

Why do I say so? I have been hearing Members talk about the issue of Federo. Actually, one of the causes of these riots was the insistence on the issue of Federo, and so many other issues like the 9,000 sq. miles. At one time, I think that was in the Seventh Parliament, we had been informed that out of that principle of give and take, it was clearly agreed that a regional government should come in place. So, when Members continue insisting on issues of Federo and the 9,000 sq. miles, surely, I think these are mythical desires. 

Coming to the issue of CBS, the radio station that was closed together with other radios stations, this government has been tolerant for long. For years, these radio stations have been used by political demagogues and political vultures to propagate their egocentric and myopic interests. Sincerely speaking, we cannot continue having this kind of behaviour. You remember sometime back in Rwanda, that one million lives were lost just because of a radio station -(Interjections)- yes! So, in this case, if a radio station is going to be used to propagate sectarian and tribal sentiments that are bent on disuniting this nation, I think we should all stand to condemn such acts. 

If Radio CBS is to be opened, then I think there must be dialogue. I heard some members say that those people who use that radio station should have been held accountable. I hold the view that if someone is robbing using a gun, the first thing you have to do is to arrest him together with the gun so that he cannot continue using that gun. So, in this case I know Government may come up with a decision of opening these radio stations, but I think it serves them right that at this point, the government took the right step -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, honourable members, I just want to add to what hon. Mbagadhi is saying. It is quite possible for the Central Government to co-exist with the traditional institutions. Recently, I was in Botswana and they have a very well integrated structure. So, it is possible. I came with the Act and I am going to pass it on to the Central Government. (Applause)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Also in Ghana.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Also Ghana? Okay.

6.19
MR BRUNO PAJOBO (NRM, Workers' Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my friends who have contributed to this motion. I wanted also to clear the air that I did not move a motion yesterday that kings should be abolished. I did not move such a motion and if I had that intention, I am aware that I can move it here and not in a caucus -(Interjections)- No, I am not moving a motion. That is out.

The other issue is that I would like to thank the government for saying that they are going to assist those people who lost their property and those people who got injured. I would like to ask the minister concerned to create a station where these people can report because their property may be destroyed. Also, those who are injured should be compensated, particularly those workers who were injured while going to report for duty or returning home. They should be compensated according to the Workman’s Compensation Act, because they were still on duty. 

Having said that, I want to say something about nationalism and tribalism, and what type of nation we are coming up with. We have tried our best to divide this country into districts, about 80 of them, and I think they are coming to 100; and now we have kingdoms which are also mushrooming. That is why yesterday, I said that we in West Nile, particularly the Lugbara, did not have a kingdom previously. We had our king and, therefore, we need a state. We had a state stretching from southern Sudan to northern Uganda. So, there is no need to deny others to have a king if we want –(Interruption)

MR OYET: I want to seek clarification. Are you trying to suggest that we secede from Uganda and form a Ladu state? I belong to that Ladu state and I am trying to suggest that we secede from Uganda.

MR PAJOBO: I am talking about being in Uganda and then we have part of the Ladu state in Uganda.

I want to tell you that right now, we have our king. Our king is staying in Denmark, if you do not know that. He has was exiled -(Interjection)- Yes, by Amin –(Laughter) He is called Dr Agami and he is a lieutenant colonel. The Minister of Health knows him very well. So, you cannot say you do not want to recognise other kingdoms.

MR JAMES BABA: The fellow hon. Pajobo is talking about, Dr Agami, is actually a refugee in Denmark. He fled this country in 1979 and since then he has been there. I am not aware that he is a king or traditional chief or anything like that. Substantively, he is a refugee in Denmark.

MR PAJOBO: You are very right because you are not a Lugbara; you are Kakwa. (Laughter) 

MR EJUA: I have been prompted to rise on a point of order because of lack of a clear basis on which hon. Pajobo is bringing up the issue of the so-called king. Hon. Pajobo says there is a kingdom which is supposed to be covering Arua, Koboko, Congo and Sudan; is it in order for hon. Pajobo to again say that hon. Baba is not a Lugbara, knowing that the Kakwa are within the territory he has described?

MR PAJOBO: What I was saying is the royal family. Therefore, you can see that once we enact a law that traditional leaders must be supported by the taxpayer’s money, you can have more to come because everybody has got a tradition and, therefore, we shall start ours as well. One cannot, therefore, say that we are wrong to come up with our kingdoms or chiefdoms. They are there. We should now see if we are really building nationalism in our people or building tribalism. Are we dividing this country into smaller areas and villages? Are we really serious about it? (Member timed out.)

6.26
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): I speak as a person who fortunately hails from an area that has never had kings. On page 5 of the President’s statement, he made one good point; he said that kingdoms were meant to remain only cultural. But when the state itself starts paying these kings and traditional leaders monthly salaries; building palaces and all sorts of things, even before we harmonise the provisions of Article 246(4) and 214 of the Constitution, then the claim that they are strictly cultural is negated by the actions of the State itself. I will stop at that. 

I fail to understand why we had to go through this hooliganism that affected most of us. I hope it was not part of the ring fencing talk that has now come. When you say modern Africa must transcend and discourage tribal organisations and we are creating chiefdoms even where they were never, we are doing all sorts of things bringing kings and you have ministers in tribal organisations like Mubende Cultural Committee, then we are building symptoms of distraction for our country. We must actually transcend it by our actions and not only by speaking.

MR OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. I went through the President’s statement, the one that was initially posted on the Internet, and it was 101 paragraphs. In the discussion of Uganda’s history and the history of communities, the President made reference to all the major tribes. The only reference to the Bakiga was that when he went to campaign against Salaamu Musumba, he found some Bakiga who were referring to the people across as Bakiri. But the information that I want to give you is that it looks like in the evolution of things right now, if you do not have some traditional leadership base, you do not have a major count in this country. (Laughter)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Member, for that information and I hope that it has been taken by everybody in good faith. On page 12, about the solutions the President gave, we in this country seem to be glorifying areas where there is especially dual ownership of land. We seem to be glorifying bibanja owners instead of helping them upgrade from that position. 

I welcome the move to extend the operation of the Land Fund to areas of Buganda, but we must also be very careful on how we operationalise that Land Fund. Otherwise, people who have bought big chunks of land and have no squatters will now start to claim to have squatters and get Government money. I hope that when it is operationalised in this place, all of us will be involved because this is taxpayers’ money.

There is also the question of unemployment of the youth. I was recently talking to a prominent poultry farmer; we may have very good Government programmes like NAADS etcetera, but I was told that in order to break off, and actually take off, when rearing poultry, you must have a minimum of 2,000 chicks. But how many do we give per individual under the NAADS programme that can make our youth get out of the quagmire they are in? What programmes do we have on the ground to help our educated landless youth, in view of the corruption scandals we have in that all the money is embezzled left, right and centre? Yet we come and talk about these youth of Kisekka Market when the big thieves who are blocking our people from getting money in employment are here?

Finally, although we may be praising people for closing radio stations and whatever, this country needs to have a means of people airing their views in a democratic way. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to call members of parliament thieves by insinuating that the thieves are here? Is he in order to call us thieves?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, unless he can substantiate. Where are the thieves hon. Member?  He has finished. 

6.36
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to condemn the riots, the mayhem and destruction of property that happened in the city of Kampala and other surrounding areas. 

In Toro, where the kingdoms do not elect ministers who are political, we have no problem. Even in Bunyoro, the problems we have are internal. But we have a problem here in Buganda, because most of the people who speak for the kingdom – in fact the statement given by the Prime Minister, hon. Nsibambi is also correct. The kingdom is surrounded by people who have their own interests. I know, in the organisation of riots, people would have carried placards - we have lived in Buganda and we know how the Baganda conduct themselves - we would not have seen what we saw on the streets of Kampala and other towns. There was a problem which needs to be addressed. 

I would like the Prime Minister and the Minister of Internal Affairs to justify this situation. On the Tuesday of the week of the riots, someone rang me from my constituency and said, “Kigyagi, people are being ferried from here, what is happening in Kampala?” I asked, “What kind of people are they? He said, “They are taking them to Kampala that they have been paid and are going to be dropped in the towns of Lukaya and Mbirizi.” I rang the security people to inform them and it is on record.    

Now, on Thursday and Friday when the mayhem started, the people who started trouble from most of these towns were not people originating from there. I will give you an example; in Lukaya, they rounded up 14 people and three were from Mbarara Municipality, two from Kabwohe, one from Isingiro, and others. How the Police rounded them up was that whenever they started a fire – you know they burnt a vehicle in Lukaya – the ordinary people would run away. And whenever Police came, they would chase the people running away from the fire and not deal with the people who had actually lit it. But in Lukaya, they got them and they said that they had been paid Shs 30,000 to cause mayhem in Lukaya and would be paid another Shs 100,000 after the work. The Minister of Internal Affairs and security should follow that up because the mayhem that started in most of these towns and centres was started by people who had their own intentions.

In the areas like Bwaise where I was staying, boda bodas were ferrying tyres to come and start the fire. They were organised in such away that 10 people would meet at the same point, bring tyres and then leave a team to begin the fire. They would then go to the rural areas and tell people that: “Kabaka bamusse, Kabaka mufu, Nambooze mufu, musibe muduke…” They were mobilising people to run away so that they could start looting. There was an organised kind of vandalism and I would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to come out and explain this to this country because I did my job on Tuesday. I rang them and told them what was being organised. The problem was more than meets the eye.

The Kabaka is surrounded and if he does not relieve himself of political people who talk for the kingdom, we are going to continue having a conflict between the kingdom and the Central Government. Let the people who want to handle their politics leave the kingdom to handle its affairs. Unfortunately, the system of Buganda does not allow the Kabaka to come out and talk. So, when the populace hears from the people who talk on his behalf, they think that that is the thinking of the Kabaka. But I know that Kabaka does not think like that, he is a very honourable person who should be protected, and the earliest he deals with the people who are using the kingdom for their own ends, the better for this country. I thank you. 

6.36
MR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County North, Bushenyi):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I condemn the violent acts. As a doctor, I value life and my heart goes to all those people who lost their lives and their dear ones. I also want to thank all those who tried their level best to save lives because someone said that the highest ethical act one can ever do is to save a life. 

You can take a person to the moon or give him everything, but I think the highest ethical act is to save a life. So, when you would watch people on TV trying to save other people’s lives, I think we need to praise those people who did whatever they could. The violence went beyond to people who were not necessarily of any political affiliation. When violence starts, it affects everybody and we must condemn it irrespective of party affiliation.

I also want to say that I have two challenges in my own mind; one is whether you can really have a kingdom functioning very well in a republic. This is food for thought. Two, whether it is not theoretical to think that you can have a Kabaka who is not political. This is because since time immemorial, people in their minds feel that Kabaka is a very powerful person. So, isn’t it theoretical to assume that you can have a Kabaka who is out of power? Those are the two challenges I have in my mind; how to have a kingdom within a republic and how you can assume that you can have a Kabaka without political power.

The third point that I have is that after those two challenges, is it also possible to have a strong cultural leader that transcends boundaries or territories? I know we have leaders although they are spiritual like the Aga Khan, who is a very powerful person recognised all over the world, but he does not have a territory. The other time, I was in London and I went to East London. When you go there and the Katikiro comes, you can think that the whole of London is Buganda.

Last week, I was in the United States and I heard about what was in Boston. The Kabaka can still be powerful without necessarily having a territory. Even in my own area where they mentioned Kabwohe, I have so many Baganda. So, it is still possible to have a cultural leader, but not a traditional leader, and still have the recognition. I think God will say there is heaven and it has no boundaries.

What I also saw is not so much that those who were fighting or breaking houses really loved the Kabaka. I think some of them are really not even bothered. The issue is unemployment. As you know, 56 per cent of the population of Uganda is below the age of 18 years. We have very many people who are finishing school and have nothing to do. Their parents sold everything to take them to the university and they have no jobs. There are also very many people in town here, the urban poor in the slums, who do not even have a single meal, and that is the problem. 

As I said, it happened in South America where there was a revolution and many young people rose up. In the past, the colonialists used not to send many people for training because they said if you educate many people and do not give them jobs, it is a problem. So, it is a big issue and my appeal is to the people who really love our cultural institutions. Let us work together and look for money as we have a lot of land. If all the people who have cultural leaders put up money, invested and put up factories - 

Go to India and China; there are many factories, which cost little money. You find a big prime area like the Lubiri. If you put there so many factories, all these people would get jobs, be happy and still praise you. There are even other areas not necessarily in the Lubiri. So, the problem is not simply the tribe or loving the Kabaka, but lack of money and employment. There are many youths who are doing nothing and so have nothing to lose, and so if there is some confusion, they may imagine that they can come out better than what they are now.

Finally, I hope that we will have national reconciliation – (Member timed out.)

6.42
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I have listened to the debate very attentively, but some Members appear to have been advancing a reason that Mengo is surrounded by Opposition politicians. That is not the problem in Mengo and that is not the problem we are facing because you know that we have got ministers in Cabinet who are also cultural leaders; but there appears to be no problem. 

Hon. Omara Atubo is a whole clan leader in Lango and he doubles as a Minister of Lands contrary to Article 246(e). Hon. Vice President Bukenya is a Mutuba leader in Buganda but he is comfortably serving as the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda contrary to Article 246(e) of the Constitution. So, let us not apply this Article selectively. If we are to apply this Article, let it be across the board.

Would the Ssabanyala have been offended if the Kabaka had gone to Kayunga? The answer is no. And even if he were to be offended, the Constitution bars the Ssabanyala from being offended. Article 246(d) of the Constitution states, “Subject to paragraph (c) of this clause, no person shall be compelled to pay allegiance or contribute to the cost maintaining a traditional leader or cultural leader.” So, all these were basically pretexts.

I have got very little time and I want to say this. President Museveni has begun paying the price that Milton Obote paid. He appears not to have learnt from the past. The problem in Uganda was no.1, the politics of divide and rule; no.2, the politics of manipulation and scheming in order to gain electoral advantage and no.3, violation of the Constitution.

We are all aware that the President, until he stopped receiving calls or getting through to the Kabaka -[Hon. Ruhindi: “Information”]- I do not need information. I have got very little time. No, I do not have time.

Madam Speaker, we are aware that the President – (Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I have a lot of respect for my colleague, hon. Mabikke. I am very well aware because recently, I participated in conferring upon him the Honours of Counsel and he is a very able lawyer. 

I would like him to reflect on the provisions of Article 246(3), which succinctly spells out the salient features or ingredients of a cultural leader or traditional leader. It says, “The following provisions shall apply in relation to traditional leaders or cultural leaders; (a) the institution of a traditional leader or a cultural leader shall be a corporation sole with perpetual succession and with capacity to sue and be sued and to hold assets or properties in trust for itself and the people concerned.” 

Go on and read the rest and tell me whether Hon. Omara Atubo who is not here to speak for himself, or the Vice President, falls in these categories. Are they corporation soles? I also have a cultural responsibility in my clan, the Abashambo, and to say that I am a cultural leader, who is bound by this Article, is really overstretching the meaning of these terms. Although they are not specifically defined, they are contextually defined. 

So, Madam Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to mislead the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you really substantiate because all of us have clans. I do not know whether I should tell you what I do for my clan, otherwise you might disown me here.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, I will not use five minutes to debate the merits and demerits of the opinion of the Deputy Attorney General because the law has got two sides; it is like a coin. You can debate either way and the rest is for the judge to decide. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I want to give to the learned Attorney-General is that Article 246(3) talks of the Institution of a cultural leader being a body corporate not the individual so there is nothing that eliminates hon. Omara Atubo, hon. Omach and the Vice President from being a cultural leader but they are not institutions. The Constitution just protects the institutions and not the individual.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you should read it in totality, you are isolating small pieces.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, these provisions are not specific and that is why they can be interpreted in any way. We just do not have the time to go into all these details. What is important is that the President must stop his political schemes. The schemes in Buganda were to gain electoral advantage over the Opposition. He made many promises to the Baganda and made many private promises to the Kabaka until the promises ran out. 

I can tell you that the Buganda question will not be sorted by the President meeting the Kabaka because they have met for the last 16 years. The Buganda question will not be sorted by the President appointing as many Baganda as possible into his Cabinet and having professors as Prime Ministers, Vice Presidents and the like. We must get to the crux of the matter.

I think I need more time to tell you why we must get to the crux of the matter. We all know that the British used divide and rule politics to remain here. They used the Baganda against the Banyoro and that is why some of these differences are manifesting in the actions of the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs, who still holds this historical problem of the Banyoro and the Baganda. 

The British used all the tribes in Uganda against each other for the purpose of remaining here. Similarly, the British divided us along religious lines in Buganda. The problems of 1966 were a culmination of the politics of divide and rule that had been sowed by the British. The Protestants are trying to outdo the Catholics and that kind of thing. President Museveni did not learn –(Member timed out.]

6.52
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to convey my condolences to all those families who lost their loved ones because most of those families come from my constituency.

The people I represent were greatly alarmed over what happened and the biggest number of people were miserably tortured by Police, and the Black Mambas came from my constituency. As I speak, Police is still arresting and torturing people in areas of Nateete, Ndeeba, Busega and Kibuye.

I do not understand why Police used excessive force on people who were not armed. Government is supposed to provide security, which is the most important political good to its citizens. Nateete suspects have been charged with terrorism, Madam Speaker. According to the Anti-Terrorism law, I do not think these are the circumstances under which this law can be applied. 

I remember it was just 24 hours that changed Kenya, where a Church that had 30 civilians was burnt. So, I think it will be better if the Ugandan Government copies Kenya. How did Kenya address this? I understand it is the same thing that happened there.

We have to ask ourselves; Why the violence? What caused the riots? If in Kenya there were free and fair elections, would that happen?

We are not happy. I can hear statements from the Front bench that if you do condemn Police, we shall ask Police to arrest you. This is our Uganda and no one will intimidate us because Uganda is for all of us. So, I would like to condemn Police for arresting and killing innocent people in my constituency.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, Police handle every situation in accordance with the realities on the ground. The situations, which we faced during those days were not normal. Police officers were shot and killed by the rioters, who shot some Police officers and took away their arms. Police stations were burnt. The Police Force is the epitome of the State. The very moment you assault and take up arms against the Police, then you have taken up arms against the State.

Is hon. Nampijja in order to say that Police used excessive force when actually in accordance with the law they are allowed when the State is under threat? We could never have used kids’ gloves to face a serious situation like that. Is she really in order to say that the State should have taken things calmly and the mayhem continued? Would she have been happy to see more deaths? Would she have been happy to see more property destroyed? Is she in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know you have strong feelings and emotions, but I think you should be balanced. 

In Nateete, in Rubaga, you represent not only the voters, but also the Police whose stations were burnt. You represent the people whose buses were burnt. You represent the people whose roundabouts were dug by the rioters. I think you should balance because even the Police who were attacked there are your people. So, please condemn the rioters.

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last week, I gave this House information about the dead bodies, which were dumped in R. Ssezibwa. I have information, which I want the Minister to know. According to the reports in the Bukedde of 18 September, residents of Ntoke village in Kayunga District found a body of an unidentified man dumped in R. Ssezibwa. (Interjections)

MS NANKABIRWA: Hon. Nampijja, you know very well that our Rules do not allow us to debate basing on newspapers. (Interjections) These are the Rules you made. I can be helped by the Speaker to quote the Rule. Is the hon. Member in order - because we want to follow the matter? The Minister of State for Internal Affairs would like to follow up the matter. But following up the matter quoting Bukedde is to say that whatever is written in papers is the truth. Is she in order to base her submission on newspaper reporting?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My difficulty is I do not know how to read Luganda and this paper is in Luganda. So, please do not speak Luganda because I do not understand the language. I cannot read it. It cannot go in the Hansard.

MS NAMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, this is a Government paper. So, the residents of the area called Police immediately, Police came and retrieved the body of this dead man. We all know that Buganda is a conglomeration of many groups. We have the Banabuddu, like me; We have the Abalemezi, we have Bassesse, we have Abaruuli, we have Banyala, we have Bakooki. All those groups are in Buganda. But what this government has done is to devise all tactics to ensure that it creates fear and conflict among all these groups. Buganda is unique because our Kabaka is the bloodstream of Buganda.

7.01
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As my previous colleagues have stated, when you look at the President’s statement and the minister’s, none of them gives us the causes of the riots that we had. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you before this House, because when I sensed that there was going to be a problem after the Police had started beating people in Kayunga, I came to your office and I asked you to give me a chance to bring a matter of national importance to this House and you did. I raised the matter and it is even on the Hansard. I said Government should make a statement as to why they are beating people and stopping the Kabaka from moving to one of his counties - a district of Kayunga in Schedule I of our Constitution that says, “…is Kayunga of Buganda”. I thank you for having given me that opportunity. 

However, the Members, especially the government, did not take heed. I moved that on Tuesday here and on Thursday, there were riots. When the government came in, they started playing monkey tricks. You remember the Minister of Internal Affairs promised to give a statement here and when he brought his statement, you said it was shallow. The next thing was for the President to call all NRM MPs to Entebbe. 

The problem between Mengo and the Central Government is very historical. In my party, the Democratic Party, which suffered defeat in 1962 because of insincerity of leaders like we have today, I can talk with authority. In 1962, when the UPC Government made an alliance with Mengo just like President Museveni made an alliance with Buganda, we lost power. When I look at the Frontbench – maybe the only person I can refer to is hon. Kirunda Kivejinja who could have known this. In 1981, when the Popular Resistance Army of President Museveni and UFF of the late Prof. Lule, merged to form NRM, there was an agreement that was signed. Have you ever looked at that agreement? Do you know the contents of that agreement? Who were the members of the UFF? What did they demand? The President said in June - that agreement was signed in June in Nairobi, in Chris Mboijana’s house. The President moved to London and met Kabaka Mutebi in Lule’s house. Do you know what they talked about? Do you know the contents? It is only two kingdoms; the Kingdom of Tooro and the Kingdom of Buganda that President Museveni courted to give support to the war. There is nobody who collected money for the movement or for the war other than Princess Bagaya and the late Patrick Olimi. We were in Nairobi and he moved around mobilising all the Batooro and Baganda on purpose, that the kingdom would be re-instated. 

Insincerity – when UPC fell out with Mengo in 1964, what resulted was the 1966 crisis. In 1986, when the NRM came here, they asked for four years. And after four years, it took five years to make the Constitution. When President Museveni realised that the Constitution was going to be promulgated and he was going to stand in 1996, he re-instated the kingdoms because he wanted the support of Buganda. In 2001, when he was about to contest again, he came to Mengo and brought the title of the Lubiri in 1998/99. Mengo is demanding because he has been giving Mengo piece meals. Whenever he thinks there are elections, he gives piece meals; he re-instated Kabaka­-ship and brought the title of Lubiri. In 2001 to 2006, that is when most of the debts of Mengo were paid. Now, Mengo is saying we want “Ebyaffe” – all of it. This is the problem -(Interjections)- insincerity of leaders –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, 38 Members have contributed and I am aware that other Members want to contribute. So, the debate will continue tomorrow morning at 10.00 a.m. The House is adjourned to 10 O’clock in the morning. 

(The House rose at 7.07 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 30 September 2009 at 10.00 a.m.) 
