
Thursday, 24 September 2009

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FORM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I would like to inform you that in the gallery today, we have pupils and teachers of Sir Apollo Kaggwa Primary School, Nakasero. You are welcome. We also have students and teachers from Jordan Bright Education Centre, Masindi. You are also most welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, today I met the International Federation of the Deaf Board in Uganda, here in Parliament. I would like to report that they expressed their appreciation to you for recognising persons with disability as people with ideas. They also thanked you for associating with them. (Applause)

I would like to inform you that I have just received sad news of the demise of Joseph Okune, which occurred yesterday at his residence in Entebbe. Mr Okune at one time was the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Planning and Economic Development from 1980 to 1985. When NRM came to power, the President appointed him a full Minister of Planning and Economic Development and later the first Minister of Environment.

His body will lay at his house today and prayers will be held at Bugonga Catholic Church tomorrow, starting at 10.00 a.m. Burial will take place on Saturday at his home in Ebuje, Apac District starting at 11.00 a.m. I would like to request that we observe a minute of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

3.00
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, you gave a directive to the effect that Government comes up with a statement in regard to our fallen colleagues in Somalia. 

The hon. Minister of Defence has been working on this statement. He, however, happens to be attending a meeting with his counterparts from the region and one of the matters that they are attending to is in regard to our presence in Somalia and the enhancement of security in that part of the continent. I would, therefore, like to beg that you give us up to next Tuesday when Government will be in a position to present that statement. I thank you.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 102/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF HEALTH

3.01
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): “Would the minister explain to the House the practical strategies that Government has put in place to reduce maternal mortality to attain the MDG No.5 by the year 2015?”

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to provide an answer to Oral Question 102/1/08. This is a very good question and timely to us in the Ministry of Health. Millennium Development Goal No.5, as the question stands, refers to a reduction by 2015 of the maternal mortality ratios by 75 percent. For Uganda, this implies reducing maternal mortality to 131 deaths per 100,000 live births by 2015.

The Ministry of Health, together with its partners, has developed a roadmap for the reduction of maternal and neonatal death, which was launched in October 2008. The ministry has focused on major causes of maternal deaths such as infections, bleeding, hypertensive disorders, abortions, obstructed labour and post abortion care. However, other underlying factors like malnutrition, poverty, low status of women, low education levels of women and urban-rural inequalities will require the joint efforts of sector ministries. The practical strategies that Government has put in place to accelerate maternal mortality include:

    • Establishment and construction of health centre IVs. This was intended to bring comprehensive emergency obstetric care nearer to the people. However, only a few of these are functional due to various reasons, for example, staffing, unfinished theatres, staff accommodation and so on. 

I would like to say, and I am happy to report, that after our policy statement for 2009/2010 was adopted by Parliament, the infrastructure of health centre IVs is going to be fully equipped.

    • Equipping health units with EMOC equipment. The credit line for equipment was established to improve the equipment status in the health facilities so that they can be able to replace these critical pieces of equipment that are usually found missing or faulty such as blood machines, manual vacuum aspirators and so on.

    • Improving the referral system. I would like to report that almost all health centre IVs have got some form of transport and can refer patients, including women with complications relating to pregnancy. The UNFPA’s distribution of ambulances to the Karamoja Region is shown in the table on page 1, if members already have copies. When you turn to page 2, you see another table on the ADB’s distribution of ambulances to the various districts.

    • Medicines and supplies. Over the years, the budgets for medicines and supplies have been increasing. However, we must note that the population is also increasing. The Ministry of Health has introduced some new drugs to prevent major causes of maternal deaths. These include:

1. 	Misoprostol, to prevent bleeding after birth. This has already started and it is covering 10 districts including Iganga, Mbale, Nakasongola and so on.

2. 	Emergency contraceptive pills to prevent unwanted pregnancies.

3. 	Emergency obstetric care drugs even at health centre IIIs and IVs, like Ergometrine.

4. 	Cycle beads and other natural family planning methods for those who do not want to use modern contraceptives. 

The challenge is ensuring continuous supply of these drugs and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Sorry to intervene, hon. Minister, but obviously, the answer to this question is a long one. However, according to our rules, the answer should take not more than three minutes and the provision relevant to that says: “The reply to a question shall be limited to three minutes. However, if the Speaker considers that the matter is of sufficient importance, up to an additional two minutes may be added…” So, an answer should be framed in such away that it does not take more than five minutes. There is a way this answer could have been reduced to be read in only three minutes. Anyway, you can proceed.

MR KAKOOZA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I am going to summarise within 50 seconds. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.

MR KAKOOZA: Since you have copies of the reply, I am now going to summarise by just mentioning the salient issues. To start with, we have revitalised family planning; human resource capacity for maternal health; maternal death notification and auditing; and the village health team strategy. 

The others include: Adolescent health programmes; HIV/AIDS and malaria programmes; and donor collaborations to fund the roadmap. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much too. (Laughter)

3.09
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank the honourable minister for attempting to answer this question. I am saying he just attempted to answer because in my view, what has been written in this answer is what everybody knows about the programmes and strategies of Ministry of Health to eradicate maternal deaths in this country. So, in my view, I have not seen anything new. Although these programmes are in existence, women continue to die. 

What I expected the minister to do was to show us tangible programmes on the ground. When he talks about staffing, equipment and so on, we all know that there are not enough midwives in this country and we do not have enough equipment in country. 

Anyway, I do not want to take a lot of time, but I am not satisfied with this answer. So, I would like to request the ministry to create a budget line specifically for funding the roadmap for the reduction of maternal mortality. (Applause) Otherwise, I would like to repeat that the honourable minister has not answered the question as expected. I thank you.

3.11
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for having tried to give us this information.

As a supplementary question, I would like to know from the minister when they will bring a loan request to Parliament for funding the roadmap for reducing maternal –(Interjections)– Yes, we live on loans! We need a loan for maternal health. 

Yesterday we were talking about gorillas; where is the loan to request for money to handle issues of maternal health? We need money to handle issues of women because women in this country have been neglected. We need money to save the lives of women and children; we need money for drugs; we need money for equipment; we need money so that midwives and doctors are recruited. 

When we asked the Ministry of Finance about this, they said that the Ministry of Health had not brought its request. So, when are you giving the request to the Ministry of Finance so that women’s programmes are funded? We need the Ministry of Health –(Interjection)- Can I ask one more question, please? –(Interruption) 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you. I would like to thank hon. Alisemera for allowing me to provide this information. This matter, as you remember, Mr Speaker, came up in the Business Committee. It had been clearly indicated by colleagues on that committee that the government side would run into a lot of problems in getting any loans to be considered let alone to be passed in this House without providing for maternal health and reproductive health. 

At that sitting, it was agreed that the Chairperson of the Committee of Social Services, the Chairperson of the Committee of Budget, and the Chairperson UWOPA, would be interacting with the Minister of Finance on this matter. This was agreed so that issues of budgetary provision for maternal and reproductive health would be comprehensively attended to. 

My understanding is that meetings are going to be held with the Minister of Finance and the technical people in the ministry. I would like us not to restrict ourselves to loans because as you know, the Government of Uganda is currently funding 70 percent of our budget. So, the loans can come in to supplement our resources which are locally sourced. My view is that we should permit this meeting to take off so that the Members who will be attending this meeting can be in a position to come to the House and appraise the House on the progress so far made in this regard. I thank you.

MR DOMBO: Thank you. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I will soon inform this House through the report I am about to present. What surprises me in all this is that MPs are asking the ministry to ask for a loan when the ministry has not planned any activities. Getting money starts with planning for activities; and it is from planning for activities that the requisite funding will be needed. 

The information I want to give is that it seems there is a deficiency within the Ministry of Health at the planning level, for them to appreciate what they want to do and what is required. Through that committee, as informed by the Chief Whip, can we ask the Chairperson of the Social Services Committee to help the ministry comprehend what we want them to do for our women? Because if that is not done, they will be seated doing business as usual as if our women are not dying and nobody is planning at that level. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alisemera, I expected you to ask a supplementary question.

MRS ALISEMERA: Mr Speaker, I also want to ask the ministry that apart from the loan, what other method or mechanisms are they planning to put in place from our own generated resources to ensure that the percentage for health care is raised from 8.9 percent to 15 percent as was agreed in Abuja? Thank you.



3.18
MRS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you. I wish to thank the minister for trying to answer the question, but I am interested in the ambulances. My question to the minister is: what has he put in place that is practical for the ambulances to be mobile? 

It is true that these ambulances are in some hospitals but when women get to the centres in critical condition, the ambulances have no fuel and some have never been serviced. Some ambulances have even been used for transporting charcoal instead of transporting patients. 

My question to the minister is: What has he put in place to ensure that these ambulances are useful to the people who need them, especially when the women in labour come and they are sent to referral hospitals? Thank you.

3.19  
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity and I also thank the minister for the statement. 

I just want to ask a supplementary question in regard to a statement appearing on page 1, where the minister said that maternal mortality is high due to the low status of women. Does the minister want to tell us that when women reach hospitals, they are disregarded and not looked at as human beings and eventually they die? What did he mean by “low status of women”?

3.20
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you. I thank the minister for endeavouring to update us on what we actually know. My question is: What has the minister done about houses which are built in the centre and yet they are not being occupied by the officers because they are located in remote areas? Some time back, we took a tour and we went up to Mukono and we found that houses are not occupied and the officers who are meant to occupy them are not there because they are located in remote areas. Has the minister seen these remote houses? What is he doing about this, yet you lament that one of the setbacks you have is housing of staff. 

Secondly, in the minister’s report, he admits that the TBAs are going to be part of the village health team. We are aware that most of the help that ladies who are in labour get when upcountry is from the TBAs. We have already had issues as to whether to incorporate them or not because they are not officially trained, and now you are saying that they are going to partner. Have you looked at how you are going to motivate them to do their work better? They are on the ground, and they are actually the ones who are helping the village woman and not your midwives who are always not there. What have you done to ensure that you motivate them well so that they do their work very well?

Lastly, I have seen on page 4, the minister has elaborated on the donor collaboration to fund the roadmap. Recently, we had a workshop at Royale - my honourable colleagues will bear me witness on this - and some of the NGOs which I see here that you are going to partner with were found not to be on the ground. These NGOs are not on the ground and we are now putting our mothers’ health in their hands. Is this not a direct way of further causing death among our expectant mothers? Have you scrutinised these NGOs and found them fit to partner with you? We know that they are not there in our districts? I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should get an answer first and then we have a full debate on the subject matter rather than having just supplementary questions. I do not think we can exhaust the questions. I think it would be better to go that way.

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank honourable members for these questions. 

Hon. Rwakimari asked about the strategic plans. As you know, in managing society you must have programmes which you monitor, evaluate and develop a plan for implementing them. The situational analysis today in the Ministry of Health - remember that you are the Vice-Chairperson of the Social Services Committee - is that we had Strategic Plan II and we are yet to launch Strategic Plan III. Strategic Plan III will highlight to us all the challenges that we have, and these challenges will be dealt with, and this is where we are heading.  

In the policy statement you presented, you remember very well that we ably elaborated in the committee that this strategic plan, which was incorporated within the policy statement, is going to be dealing with infrastructure and the strategy to address the problems. However, all this involves resources, which we just passed yesterday. We feel that we are going to do our best to address your worries.

Hon. Babiiha talked about the ministry’s budget. I would like to put it on record that in the budget we recently passed, we came from 10.5 percent and now it is about 11.5 percent, and that means that there is something added. That addition means an improvement. You remember that out of all the signatories in Africa in the Abuja Declaration on Primary Health Care, Uganda is among the countries leading with the biggest budget south of the Sahara. Other countries in the region have less than 10 percent. 

Hon. Boona - the recurrent budget is going to address the gap of ambulances. You know that the ministry is in partnership with other donors who are going to help us address the problem. 

Hon. Anywar talked about houses that are built but are not occupied. It is a big challenge, but you know that under the policy that we have on recruitment of staff, recruitment is under the district service commissions. Most of the districts have not recruited to full capacity as set in the guidelines of the ministry; some districts are below 65 percent and that is why there is such a gap. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the question was that: Is locating residences of medical staff faraway from the centre helpful to the situation? I think that was the concern.     

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise guidance. Hon. Anywar’s second question, that is if I understood it correctly, was that there are health workers who are doing donkey work and she wanted to know what plans we are putting in place to help them. 

We are saying that in this budget, we proposed a hard-to-reach allowance which is going to cater for these health workers who are doing the best of work. The budget that we passed will cater for that, so there is no need to worry. Even the village teams will be incorporated. We feel that if the motivation is there, work will be done. 

On NGOs, yes, NGOs are given certificates to do work and there is a monitoring and supervision system put in place by the ministry. We have established a plan to form headquarters within the region so that every three months we evaluate the performance of NGOs. Those who do not perform to the standard will have their certificates withdrawn. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: It seems that there are many people interested in this subject. It is an important subject, so I think one of you should prepare a motion so that we debate this matter in detail. 

REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW ADDITIONAL FINANCING SDR 3,100,000 (US$ 5 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) TO FINANCE COST OVERRUNS IN THE SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF MINERAL RESOURCES PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Before we come to that, I had earlier introduced pupils and teachers from Nakasero, but I think they had not arrived then. I think these are pupils from Nakasero now. You are welcome to Parliament. 

3.29
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the select committee which was set up to harmonise certain challenging issues which were observed by Members on this Floor during the debate of the report of National Economy.

THE SPEAKER: So, what you are saying is that actually debate on this loan took place but as a result of the debate, there was a select committee constituted?

MR DOMBO: Yes, Mr Speaker. In the opening notes, I want to thank the Members of this House because what we have been talking about, that is, maternal health and some other questions which Members raised that are of concern to all Ugandans, have now progressively got elevated in the national agenda. So, I thank the Members for that pro-activeness. 

Mr Speaker, this select committee was set up to look at the challenges raised on this Floor because of a requisition for additional funding of US$ 5 million by the ministry for the implementation of the sustainable management of mineral resources. This is aimed at strengthening Government’s capacity to develop a sound mineral sector based on private investment and improvement in the artisan and small scale areas. 

This bi-partisan committee which was set up constituted of the following members: Hon. Sarah Nyombi, Hon. Amuriat Patrick, Hon. Achia Remigio, Hon. Tolit Simon, and I as Chair. 

During the deliberations and interactions of this committee, we were able to meet the ministers of energy and the department of geological survey. We were also able to meet the Minister for Finance. We also went to the field to carry out certain findings in order to establish the challenges. 

When the committee met, we came up with terms of reference. They were specifically to examine the utilisation of the loan that was approved earlier on in 2004; and secondly, to establish the justification for the additional funding of US$ 5 million that was being requested for. 

According to our findings, we discovered that the requisition of the additional US$ 5 million came up because of the mid-term review, which constituted of all financiers. They evaluated the performance of the previous project and the required work which was to be completed, and also what was required to supplement that and to enable the ministry do a good job. 

In our findings, we have discovered that the project implementation has been going on according to schedule, but there have been some challenges which were faced and affected the implementation of the previous project. Those challenges included: 

Delays in the implementation of the project; these were caused especially because the finances were not provided at the same time. 

Also, the project did not have a project preparatory facility, which affected the implementation of the project. This is because there was no funding enabling the preparation of the bids and the other related documents. 

It was also reported that our procurement process in the country is very lengthy. This process, coupled with the international competitive bidding requirements of the project which could take between nine to twelve months in order for the contract to be signed, did affect the project implementation. 

All these together affected the cost of the project. The delays caused the project costs to escalate and other challenges that affected the implementation of the project. 

Therefore, the challenges established by the committee were, as in 4.0: 

The implementation of the project began before the project implementation facility was developed. 

The sequencing of the implementation of the project and other activities also got misplaced. I need to explain this. 

We discovered that whereas there was supposed to be some civil works done, for instance at the department of geological survey, before the installation of certain equipment, a lot of equipment was bought yet the civil works had been delayed. This will now create a synchronisation problem because when the demolishing of the building housing this equipment is done, it will partially affect the implementation of the project.

The other thing, which was raised by the members, was about the project valuations in the costs which were escalated by hundreds of thousands of dollars. When we reviewed the project contracts and interacted with the implementing authorities, we discovered that whereas it would have been possible to negotiate the price downwards, this would have involved compromising the quality of the project and reducing the terms of reference as advertised. The international competitive bidding provisions do not allow this. 

Therefore, the project costs escalated partially because of inflation, and secondly because the project was planned in the 1990s and early 2000. Because of inflation, implementation of the project became expensive. 

The other issue, which became very prominent, was the nomenclature as given by the project implementing committee. For instance, calling some of the items ‘Intranet’ and ‘Internet’. This was misleading to the Members of Parliament. For instance, whereas Intranet and Internet is basically about assembling of computers together and co-ordinating them to share information, what was on the ground was not that. It was a Geological Information System with a lot of hardware and specialised software which had to be procured at varying levels. When this was presented to the Members without explanation, Members thought that the project cost had been escalated due to fraud. 

We also discovered that the cost overruns, which were created, were basically due to a mineral commodity boom since 2004 that resulted into a higher cost of services due to inflation and other issues as observed. 

We wish to recommend as follows:

Having considered the previous funding which enabled the project activities to be implemented and enabled the successful implementation of the first phase, we discovered that if these funds are not provided, it will affect first, the contracts which have already been signed. Government has to look for money and pay. For instance, some of the students who are being sponsored on this money are already abroad studying and Government must look for money to pay for these costs.

Most of the contracts have been signed; at the time of the previous reporting, the contracts had not been signed. Now the contracts have been signed and Government has committed itself to provide the funds. The early acquisition of funds will enable the effective implementation of the project. 

However, I wish to observe that there are challenges which we encountered and have made us to make recommendations. Honourable members, whereas we are talking about the approval of this US$ 5 million, Government has already signed the agreement for this money. This is because of the poor cycle of negotiation and involvement of Parliament. What we agreed with the Ministry of Finance was that for future loans to be procured, it is important for Parliament to be notified earlier on so that Parliament is aware and can anticipate the projects that are coming through the relevant committees. 

For instance, if this had been taken to the committee of Natural Resources at the time it was anticipated, there could have been fewer questions raised by the Committee on National Economy because Parliament would have been informed early enough. This is an omission which we must reverse. 

Before Government negotiates and makes any commitments, Parliament should be notified and brought on board early enough and given all the necessary information to reduce on the cycle and the haste that is usually exhibited on the floor. 

Government should in future inform Parliament on any intentions to negotiate for loan funding before negations for the loan commence. This will help Parliament to get information for the intended project before the approval process commences. It will also reduce on the haste usually exhibited by Government. 

The relevant committees of Parliament should play an important role in monitoring the implementation of project activities. 

Honourable members, we made these recommendations specifically because all the project mid-term review reports, and project implementation reports were never submitted to the sessional committee which is responsible for overseeing the ministry. And some of the questions raised by the Members on the floor would not have been raised if this information had been provided to the members of the relevant committees. 

Parliament should be informed on the progress of the project activities and on the progress of all projects for which funds have been approved by this Parliament. 

We approve a lot of money in form of loans. But we do not progressively monitor the implementation of the activities for which this money is provided. And because some of these projects are not funded directly under their line ministries, you may find that many policy statements are silent about other sources of funds like loan funding which finance the projects. We have, therefore, made this recommendation because of that.

In future, Government should prepare a project preparation facility before it embarks on implementation of the projects. This will prevent the delays that have been experienced. 

Honourable members, you remember that during the initial debates, Karamoja was cancelled because of insecurity, and the Acholi Region was included within the available resources that had been provided. 

When we interacted with the Ministry of Mineral Development, we discovered that Karamoja is a highly prospective area. We recommend here, therefore, that when the security situation in Karamoja Region improves, Government should acquire the necessary funding to conduct an airborne survey of this region.   

In conclusion, in order to enable the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development through the Department of Geological Survey and Mines to complete the implementation of the pending activities, the committee recommends that Parliament approves Government to borrow the additional US$ 5 million for additional funding. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, as I explained, you had this motion debated but you wanted certain matters investigated. Now the committee has recommended that we allow Government to procure the money. Should I now put the question? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker, the committee made some recommendations. Does that mean that we have now adopted those recommendations?

THE SPEAKER: We have.  We are now going to the next item.

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, without taking the House back, I would like to appreciate that the select committee that was appointed looked at the aspects of this loan in detail. Regarding the recommendations, Government notes the recommendations of the committee and we shall look into the possibility of adopting some of them in accordance with the law and also the procedure and the loan cycle. 

Is it in order for the person who presented the report, which we have just adopted, not to lay it on the table of Parliament so that we can follow it? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think what you can do is to go and scrutinise the recommendations. So, do you have some reservations, which you may want us to change? After that you will come back to us. (Laughter) Yes, now can we deal with other items.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $ 7.59 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR FINANCING THE MULTI-NATIONAL  PROJECT FOR THE INTERCONNECTION OF ELECTRIC GRIDS IN THE NILE EQUATORIAL LAKES COUNTRIES OF BURUNDI, RWANDA, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO AND UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: I think we need some assistance from the owners of these motions because when you look at five, six and seven, you wonder whether they are concerned with electricity. What is it now? What do we do? What is the difference? I do not know Hon. Member whether you are following my observation. If you look at five, six and seven, are they about electricity.

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Speaker, all these motions are about one sector and that is Energy. The problem is; we are borrowing from different sources. I would appreciate it if we could read all of them and debate all of them at once.

THE SPEAKER: Our problem is going to be that when you talk about electricity - I would like to talk about electricity in my constituency, then another one would like to go to West Nile. So, what do we really do?  Should we consider them together so that we avoid becoming personal in the sense that you fight for your area?

MR OKUPA: I think for consistency and procedurally, it is in order for us to deal with one item at a time such that maybe you only restrict the time for contributing. Otherwise, we are going to get messed up in the contribution because a Member will want to contribute to all because they may be affecting his area of interest.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know. Yes, you want to say -  

MR OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was essentially going to say the same thing because the three requests came to Parliament separately and, therefore, Parliament has to respond to them in their own rights; although the subject matter is similar, the requests are separate.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, then let us start with five. 

3.50
THE GOVERNMNET CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I would like to beg the indulgence of Members. It was not really clear to me because it is true we have got three loans; two of them are to do with transmission, one is to do with distribution, which is rural electrification. I was of the view that given the fact that Members have already been availed these reports, it may make sense because there is bound to be a lot of overlap when the debate comes up. It will be that we receive the reports from the committee and then when it comes to the debate, we can have a common debate and then, a decision or pronouncement of the House and each of these loans can subsequently follow.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I do not see the problem that the Government Chief Whip is worrying about. I can assure you if we start with the first loan and people express themselves, by the time we reach the third loan, nobody will be having anything in his heart. Probably we will just pronounce ourselves in terms of votes. The effect is the same, except that what we propose is how it should be. That is why they have put them as separate items on the Order Paper. 

THE SPEAKER: I think let us see how we proceed.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, now that the Hon. Leader of the Opposition has demonstrated appetite to debate in the House today, I think we can –(interjections)-

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INVESTMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. We have a proposal to borrow a Unit of Account of    7.59 from the African Development Fund of the ADB Group to finance the interconnection of Electric Grids of the five Equatorial Lake countries. The proposed project for which this money is required consists of construction and upgrading of interconnection lines of the five Nile Equatorial countries. This will increase cross-border energy and power trade and, therefore, improve the transient stability of the system, safety and affordability of supply as well as flexibility in the operation of the interconnected network of the five countries. The five countries I am talking about are: Uganda, Kenya, Rwanda, Burundi and the DR Congo. The project is in line with the government’s sector plan, which was developed first of all, to enhance the Public-Private Partnership in power generation and supply, and to enhance the financial sustainability of the energy sector in light of the rising energy costs. 

It is to also increase the inter-regional power trade and address the declining Lake Victoria Basin supply by diversifying the sources of power supply. 

By increasing the availability of this affordable and sustainable energy, the project will improve the living conditions of the people as well as their socio-economic development framework. 

The project is included in the NEPAD infrastructure short-term action plan, which lays emphasis on interconnection of power grids as a key option for increasing access to electricity on the continent. 

The project will also supplement the on-going energy transmission projects as well as those planned in the future in the region, namely, the Giba in Ethiopia and Djibouti, the interconnection between Ethiopia and Sudan as well as the interconnection between Kenya and Ethiopia. 

The operation of these projects will provide incentives to countries in the region for a common region approach in the planning and development of productive capacity. It will also ultimately help develop a regional energy market for productive domestic uses.

Objectives:

    1. To develop the Nile Basin water resources in a sustainable and equitable manner to ensure prosperity, security and peace in the region.

    2.  To promote joint action between member countries so as to eliminate the evils of poverty as well as strengthen regional economic integration. 

When you analyse the growth and distribution of the electric energy in each of the five countries I have mentioned, there is an apparent unmet demand. The current situation as you well know is characterised by load shedding and cut-back on the connection of new consumers. However, limited power trade exists between the two networks of Kenya and Uganda based on loose electric supply agreements. The trade corresponds to the current surplus from Kenya to Uganda of up to about 20 megawatts and from DRC to Burundi and Rwanda of 4 megawatts as of 2007. 

However, the commissioning of these new initiatives in the region like Bujagali, Luzizi in Burundi, Rwanda and DRC, Karuma in Uganda, and Lusomo Falls in Burundi, Rwanda and Tanzania in 2016, and Rwizi in 2018, will enable the region to have exportable national surplus. This project, therefore, consists of construction and upgrading of 769 kilometres of 110 kilowatts and a 220 kilovolts line, and construction and re-enforcement of 17 transformers –(Interruption) 

MR OLENY: I rise to seek guidance from you, because the practice in the past has been that what the minister is presenting is what the House received some time back, and what would be of interest to the House today would be a report of the committee. I really want to find out whether it could be necessary –

THE SPEAKER: The last time he just laid papers and did not explain why he was seeking the loan. This is what he is trying to do now.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, if I can summarise –

THE SPEAKER: Summarise then. 

MR KAJARA: This project will cost US$ 160 million comprising of a Unit of Account 106 million in foreign currency and 53 million in local currency, 7 percent physical contingency and 3 percent of the escalation of foreign and local costs.

The governments of the five countries will finance the project to the tune of 7.35 Units of Account and the Japanese Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) Unit of Account of 37.8 million; and the World Bank will put in an equivalent of 15 million Unit of Account; plus the FADB and the FDB, which will meet two thirds from the regional envelope and a third of the allocation from the member countries. 

Each of the five countries has allocated their contributions to the annual investment budget and our prayer is that the terms and conditions of this loan will be read out by the committee. But we do pray that this House notes and supports the strategy of Government for implementation of the multinational project of the interconnection of electric grids of the five Nile Equatorial lake countries. The House should approve the borrowing of Unit of Account of 7.59 million from the African Development Fund and also further approve the terms and conditions of the borrowing and authorise our ministry by passing a resolution so that this money can be borrowed. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

4.01
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Rutangye Wangwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Committee of National Economy on the request by Government to borrow Units of Account 7.59 million from the African Development Fund on the African Development Bank for financing the multinational project for the interconnection of electric grids in the Nile Equatorial lake countries of Burundi, Rwanda, DRC, Kenya and Uganda. 

Methodology 

    1. We met with the minister –

THE SPEAKER: Can’t we really leave out the methodology so that you can tell us what is in your report?

MS WANGWA: Yes. I will just say what we did briefly because the minister has given most of the information. So, I will summarise. Let me first lay the documents on Table that helped us come to our conclusion.

That is the loan agreement, the upraisal, the implementation plan –

THE SPEAKER: I think what we need really in your report in view of the minister’s statement are the terms and conditions of the loan and the recommendations.

MS WANGWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Following the minister’s details of the loan, I will go directly to our observations and our recommendations, that is page 8.

Observations

    1) The transmission power system networks under this project will complement each other and make it possible to have cheap, adequate and reliable power. The current power sharing between Rwanda, Uganda and Kenya are limited and based on loose power agreements. 

    2) It was noted that regional interconnection is being emphasised notwithstanding the fact that the available power at the moment is not adequate as most of the existing power projects within the region are still under construction. 


    3) Regional power will promote interdependence and regional security, and it will deepen regional integration. 

    4) There will be harmonisation of policies and proper unified coordination and supervision of the implementation of this project. 

    5) The project will be implemented by the Nile Basin Initiative and each country will have a project manager and implementation team as already highlighted by the minister. 

    6) The project is part of the comprehensive energy programme in the country and it includes energy for rural transformation, Bujagali interconnection project, Mbarara - Nkenda and Tororo-Lira transmission line projects among others. 

    7) The committee is pleased to observe that there is counter funding and it has been provided for within the MTEF. We, therefore, do not expect the project to be delayed due to lack of counter funding. 

Therefore, our conclusion Mr Speaker was that, given the above conditions, that the House approves Government’s request to borrow Units of Account 7.59 million from the ADB to fund the interconnection of the electric grids of the five equatorial lake countries. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and the committee. Debate is now open.

4.06
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga-Latigo): I would like to thank the committee for their report and I would like to say very briefly something on this loan request. If you went to Europe - all those countries in Europe - you will find that the train system is connected in all the countries.

The power system is connected in all the countries because that is how you optimise investment in the energy sector. For us in Eastern Africa, if the argument that we have consistently faced with the World Bank previously, that you do not have to build this power plant because there is not enough demand, if East Africa had been connected the way this loan is supposed to do, the argument that there is no point building Karuma because the demand in Uganda is not enough would not have arisen.

And, therefore, we would not be suffering the kind of power shortage and the high tariffs arising from using alternative means, when we have a huge hydro power potential to generate enough for ourselves and enough for the region as of the current demand.

I would, therefore, like to say that this is a very relevant loan that will help us to argue for the building of these power plants and stations early enough; because the building of these power stations are investments that add to our economy. 

They provide employment, but more importantly, it means that if we have excess capacity now, we can sell, and as our capacity grows, we shall be able to cut down on the exports and still meet our demands without grossly undermining our power needs.

Lastly, the question of using the Nile waters is a problem. The negotiations which at one time the minister for water said she would brief us about, and there was even a motion from this Parliament is a process that we must handle in a multi-national manner.

If we have alliances with countries that share in the resources that we have - they become alliances when we need to argue, particularly over our rights to use the Nile Water which right must be resolved. Therefore, at a personal level, I am in full support of this loan request. (Applause)

(Hon. Members: “Is that the opposition support?”]

Members, this is a matter which is open to individuals. (Laughter)

4.10
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the need for this loan, but I would like to be helped first of all by the committee to appreciate the relationship between this interconnectivity and the supply aspects of power in this country, because I am aware that more than half of Uganda is dark; there is no electricity, especially in the rural areas.

I also appreciate that with the interconnectivity we should be able to export. I also think that our greatest priority should be to ensure that we have enough before we export.

So, I would like the committee or the minister to help me understand how this will in one way or the other cause the supply side of power in Uganda to improve.

Secondly, there is an observation that there will be harmonisation of policies and proper unified coordination and supervision. Earlier on, the committee had observed that the current power sharing between Rwanda-Uganda and Uganda-Kenya is limited and based on loose power agreements. My thinking is that perhaps the committee should have gone further and asked the Ministry or the Government of Uganda should have asked the neighbouring countries so that by the time we implement this, they would have come up with a proper coordination mechanism. If we borrow money, on what framework shall this implementation take place? Thank you Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: In other words, you are saying, you are borrowing to get plates when there is no food. Where is the food that you are going to put on the plates?

4.12
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We do appreciate the good intentions of pulling resources together.

THE SPEAKER: But perhaps allow me to introduce our visitors here. In the gallery, we have students and teachers from Town View Secondary School, Bugiri District. You are welcome to Parliament of Uganda.

MR OKUPA: I was just looking at this report and there are a number of observations; and when I look at the recommendation -

THE SPEAKER: But to help you, our visitors, when you are introduced you stand up so that you are seen.

MR OKUPA: They are from Bugiri. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, I was saying, the format of the reports we have always had - because I take this as a very important report - when we make the observations, we also make the recommendations.

I see here very many observations, but I was surprised that there is only one recommendation of just saying approve the loan.

I had expected more to that given that if you just looked at the observations - very good observations, there should have also been recommendations that would have gone along with them; one of which is what you have just said. We would have also seen the recommendations where governments of this great Nile region are urged to construct more dams to supply the transmission because we are only getting the arteries here but where is the source? Where are we going to get all this power which we are going to transmit? I had expected that to come out.

Now that it has not come out, possibly it has given me the opportunity to bring it out that way. I think we need to urge the respective countries to explore the construction of more dams such that we are able to have a constant supply of electricity to this area as we are moving to advanced stages where we are going to be having modern trains that will be using power.

I had also wanted to know in particular on this Tororo-Lira line which is being mentioned -

THE SPEAKER: That is a different loan. It is the next one.

MR OKUPA: I am sorry. So, I really wanted to look at that issue of the supply line. Thank you.

4.15
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the intention of this loan is very good unless Government mismanages this process as it is fond of doing. I am interested in -

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Hon. Florence Ekwau, hon. Member and Commissioner of this Parliament, has made a sweeping statement to the effect that this pro-people Government of NRM is in the habit of mismanaging what would otherwise be good projects. She has not taken the trouble to substantiate the basis of her assertion. Is it, therefore, in order for the Member to continue debating without substantiating fully knowing that her statement has no basis at all? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well I thought she said the “loans... unless”. Isn’t that what she used? She said “unless”. (Laughter)

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for your wise ruling. In fact, I was ready to substantiate, but let me stop there. (Laughter) I am really very happy about Government’s move in this direction. It is not until our countries begin getting into business at regional levels that we shall manage to advance. I am very happy.

But concerning the Ministry of Energy, related to this loan, less than 5 percent of this country has been electrified, and at the same time, we are going into these ventures. It is my humble plea that the rural electrification department really moves ahead to do a little more such that by the time we begin engaging into these massive businesses with other countries, we are able to feed our own and we are able to manage because we are having problems at the moment with Umeme.

We have longstanding problems with the distribution and the transmission; so the Ministry of Energy should take trouble to iron out some of these issues before we go this massive, including the issue of feeding in the tariffs and the nitty-gritty - the small local issues that we have with the ministry.

I also want to urge Government and send this plea that if you are doing this to Energy; we are also looking forward to the time when you will do the same to security. We are having longstanding problems as members of the greater North with Karamoja and the North Western Kenyan districts, on the issues of security. We want to see you moving in this direction to bring peace to some of these regions that have really suffered.

And lastly, it would also be very important that Government looks at this project and goes beyond, to one time think in terms of technology. East Africa is very fertile ground for geothermal power generation, but possibly because of lack of technology and resources, we have never ventured deep into geothermal energy and yet these are some of the issues that would help to release the pressure on our dwindling water levels. 

So, I really want to thank government for this move in the right direction. Our plea is that you handle these loans very well. We will be very glad if you did that.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, let me also introduce to you students and teachers from St Jude Zzinga Primary School, Lugazi, Mukono (Applause). You are welcome.  

4.21	
MRS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have one concern which I want the minister to note. The idea conceived is good but we have to go an extra mile. We are aware that projects in the Energy sector, like the one we had on Bujagali and subsequent ones, had some reservations from some of us because as much as the idea is good, we are not catering for the sources of the water we want to use in generating this viable need. 

I want to hear this assurance from the minister. In this venture, have they looked at how they are going to protect the water sources, that is, the watershed so that we have sustainable water to generate what we are projecting and what we are putting taxpayers’ money into? 

What mitigation measures have we put in place with the changing climate so that the effect is mitigated so that we do not have the sources of water dry up and after committing money at the end of the day - my colleague hon. Migereko is shaking his head but these are facts which I want you to assure this country on as we commit this money. We shall not keep giving money and then later on find that the sources of the water have dried up. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.23
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank the chairperson for the report. I also thank the government for this project. I am particularly happy to see that we are going regional in projects of this sort and I encourage government to look for more projects of this nature. We should develop things like the railway system as a region other than going individually to countries looking for money. So, I really like this project.

However, we are progressively, in many of these loans and projects, talking of PPPs and here we have been told that PPP development strategies and production plans are going to be used. It is over a year since I asked the Minister of Finance to bring a legal framework for these PPPs. They are complicated but we are diving into them without any legal framework. So, I appeal to government to ensure that we bring the legal framework for these PPPs so that we do not make a mistake as we go in that direction.

The project administration and management is going to cost 1.83 units of account. Many projects have been coming and we as Parliament have got this oversight duty. The monies we get from the budget are increasingly becoming less and less for us to effectively carry out our oversight duty. Is it possible, in these loans, whenever they come, to have a small budget included for Parliament to undertake the oversight duty? We see people are going to be trained and there are workshops, and I think as part of our oversight duty, maybe we could get some little money for Parliament to see that we really do our work properly. 

And lastly, I know this unit of account is not a common currency unit. I would urge government or the committee to come and tell us the equivalent in the usual currencies. What is a unit of account? Maybe all of us here do not know what it is. Why can’t they tell us in terms of a dollar that we are always talking about or a Pound Sterling or Uganda Shillings? Most people do not know unit of account. If I take this thing to my constituency in Luweero, they have never heard of units of account. So -(Interruption) 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, this is Parliament. We handle complicated work and go to the people that we represent and break it down for them. Is the hon. Member in order to stand in this House and demand further breakdown of a language when is supposed to go and revise and tell his people about it? 

He should also have remembered that this country does not have a plain language commission like it is in Britain where they break down these documents and then bring them to the House. Is the Member in order really? 

THE SPEAKER: The Member is simply making a proposal for consideration. (Applause) 
  
MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. My colleague, hon. Kyanjo, should know that this is now becoming a public document. People will pick this document and they do not know what a unit of account is. The purpose of this is for people to know what is happening. 

4.28
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank government for having come up with such a project which is fundamentally good for bringing the region together. 

However, I would like to seek clarification from the committee. In the observations, observation No.1 states that this project will make it possible to have cheap, adequate and reliable power. I know that we are supplying power and the lines are connected between Kenya and Uganda. I also know that we supply power to Tanzania and to Rwanda as well. But our power rates here are among the highest. So if we are using this interconnectivity as a basis of having cheap power, how come the power we have now, despite the interconnectivity, is still at a high rate? Simple economics denotes that once the supply is little and the demand is high, the price will automatically be high. 

And really from the observations of the report this project is calling upon the parties and they are undertaking construction work. I believe that once these states undertake construction; once they build their dams and so forth, they will have to first meet domestic consumption before they can roll it out to the neighbours. I just want to know how this is going to help to reduce the power tariffs especially for Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: I think there were some questions which were put to the minister such as the preservation of water.

4.30
The MINISTER OF STATE, ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Simon D’ujanga): I would like to thank my colleagues for having raised the various issues. I would like to appreciate hon. Prof. Latigo because he made a summary of the concept and I can confirm that hon. Latigo is actually a professor and is not a professor for nothing. 

Hon. Alaso: “How is this interconnection related to rural electrification?” As was described by the minister and the chairperson of the committee and indeed by the professor; this idea of interconnection helps us to pool resources. In other words, we can now plan generation at will by having some time. If there is a big construction in Uganda, Kenya does not have to invest in generation, for example. This programme helps rural electrification in that it will make power available to supply the rural electrification programmes.

This programme addresses reliability of electricity in the region and, therefore, when you roll out rural electrification, with this interconnection the power to the rural area will be more reliable than it would otherwise be.

Hon. Alaso also raised a point on individual borrowing. In this report of the committee, it is reported that the East African countries under the Nile Equatorial Lake Countries (NELC) should borrow in order to implement its part of the project. 

There is a similar approval being sought in Kenya; there is a similar approval being sought in Congo; there is a similar approval being sought in Rwanda and in all the countries because here our portion is on page 3 of the committee’s report. 

Constructing 127kms from the border with Kenya to Bujagali; the other part is construction of 66kms from Mbarara to Mirama Hill on Rwanda Border. Kenya will then take on from the border up to Juja road and Rwanda will take on from Mirama Hill up to Kigali. So each country of the East African states is presenting to their parliaments similar requests as we speak here. Borrowing is by individual countries but they are all harmonised under NELSUP. 

Hon. Okupa Elijah, yes these are arteries, but I can inform the House that the two generation projects with this - Sudan is building a power station on River Nile just after our border with them under this same programme. Congo and Rwanda are developing another power station. So for us on our side since we are already doing Bujagali with some funding from other sources under this programme, it was only necessary for us to do the arteries as observed by hon. Okupa Elijah. 

Hon. Florence Ibi, yes, I have already answered it in part that we are five percent electrified; rural electrification programme is another project but I have said that we need this reliability to support the rural electrification programme.

AS far as geo-thermal is concerned, last time when I was here I reported that we were also advancing on that front. As I speak now we have identified three possible sites in the rift valley, which we want to investigate further. We think these have an excess 1,000 megawatts capacity from geo-thermal power.

Hon. Anywar, the water; well the water is being monitored very closely. There is monthly reporting on what is happening in the Nile Basin. In fact the Nile Basin Initiative is only about availability of water resources in the region but this project will not be supported only by the electricity from water alone. This project will be supported by electricity from geo-thermal - as I have already said - our own gas from the rift valley, and of course the hydro. 

Hon. Byandala, this project is going to be undertaken by the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Ltd, which is 100 percent owned by government. If we recall when UEB was being unbundled, it was debated and agreed that for the time being the transmission, which is like on a highway be owned by the government so that we can plan and direct expansion. So this project is not a PPP; this project is going to be run by transmission, which is 100 percent government. 

Parliament’s budget; I think my colleague will answer that. And then, one unit of account is equivalent to US $1.5. Mr Speaker, we come here with this unit because it is the unit we borrow in and it is the unit we are going to account for because if we translate it into dollars or the Yen, then we are subjecting ourselves to foreign exchange fluctuations. So it is better we come here with a unit of borrowing so that when Parliament approves, in the Hansard, the figure of that unit is recorded and that is what we shall account for. We would also have wanted to come here with simple currencies but we are forced by this professional requirement to come here with Units of Account (UA). Sometimes we shall come with Special Drawing Rights (SDR) et cetera but information will always be available.

Finally, hon. Kasozi asked: “How is this programme going to help us have cheap power here?” Allow me, Mr Speaker, to give a background. When we were in a dilemma, I think around the Seventh Parliament, and we were deciding to bring emergency power plants in this country, we wanted to control the price of the unit to the consumer. Among the things we considered was that this emergency power plant was to be put at Mombasa; generate from there and then import electricity. It would have been cheaper because the diesel would arrive there on the ships, no inland transport; get a unit there cheaply and send only the electricity, but we were limited by this problem. If we did that at that time, there was not enough capacity to carry the power here. And, therefore, that is why today we say that the electricity costs 24c from diesel generated here and we are buying down the tariff and, therefore, we pay a high tariff. This is because the inland cost would have been avoided if we had a good interconnection. 

MS AKELLO: Mr Minister, about two years ago you were telling quite a good number of Members of Parliament about subsidised solar systems that would help especially communities that are not able to quickly get electricity, how far are we with this programme? Because this I know would really help villages that are very far away from reaching out to electricity.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Minister, this morning as a committee on Natural Resource we were meeting Umeme and the issue, which was raised by the committee to Umeme and which has been pending, is the high tariff. You are giving us an explanation as to how it should have been easier or cheaper if you took the trend you are taking. 

Are you saying that when this programme comes on board, it is going to be reflected in the tariffs of Umeme, which are currently very high and disputable and which even today they are still asking us to confirm? That is why I insist on that clarification. Are there contradictions between what you as the ministry are planning for this country to have lower rate tariffs with that of Umeme as they are projecting? Thank you.

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What hon. Anywar is asking is already in the report and it is the one which generated this question that electricity would be cheaper if we were interconnected; no doubt about that. 

And then in respect to solar, I think the next item, ERT II, if you can stay in and consider ERT II then you will see how you are covered in that one. 

If I can continue, really when we interconnect and pool our resources and also pool our profit, then it becomes cheaper. This is simple economics. 

Then hon. Kasozi also said that there are issues of demand and supply. That is true but this statement really supports this programme; that if we interconnect ourselves, then the availability will be better. We shall have access to the generation capacity in Kenya; we shall have access to the generation capacity in Rwanda; for example, Mr Speaker, the Lake Kivu Methane Gas Programme is going to generate much more electricity than the Rwandese people need. So in that instance, we can negotiate and get the power here. So really the demand and supply statement actually supports this programme. Mr Speaker, I think those are the issues that were raised.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. I put the question the motionn for a resolution of Parliament to authorise government to borrow UA 7.59 million from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank for financing the Multi-national Project for the Inter-connection of Electric Grids in the Nile Equatorial Lakes countries of Burundi, Rwanda, Democratic Republic of Congo, Kenya and Uganda.
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Before we go to the next item, there was an announcement, which I should have made at the beginning about the 11th National Prayer Breakfast. This is to inform you that this year’s National Prayer Breakfast will take place on 8 October 2009. Venue: Hotel Africana. Time 7.30 a.m. to 9.00 a.m. 

The Guest of Honour is His Excellency, the President of Uganda, Kaguta Yoweri Museveni; Guest Speaker is renowned statesman, Dr Mensa Otabil, Founder of Central University College, Ghana, who is the author of, “Beyond The Rivers of Ethiopia and By the Future”. The cards are available in Room E4-15 and E4-10, Parliamentary Building and E2-09 second floor, Bauman House. So you are encouraged to buy the tickets and attend the breakfast.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UNITS OF ACCOUNTS 52.51 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) FOR FINANCING THE CONSTRUCTION OF MBARARA-NKENDA AND TORORO-LIRA TRANSMISSION LINES PROJECT

4.46
MR FREDERICK MBAGADHI (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Here with me is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by government to borrow 52.51 million Units of Accounts from the African Development Bank for financing the construction of Mbarara-Nkenda and Tororo-Lira transmission lines project.

As you have ably guided, I will not dwell much on the first pages but as the committee did its work we had documents, which we used to come up with the report. Among those documents we had the minister’s brief, the financing agreement, the project appraisal document and the project implementation plan. Before I move on to the gist of the matter, allow me to lay these documents on the Table.

The first pages contain the introduction, methodology, background, project objective and project component. 

The minister elaborately did his part and made all the justifications as to why government is requesting for this loan. I will move straight to page 7. On this page, I will only handle item six, which is project implementation. Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited will be the executing agency of this project. It is estimated that the project will be implemented over a period of 48 months and will be commissioned by 31 December 2010.

On page 8, item 7n, which is the project cost and financing, the project is estimated to cost 72.49 million Units of Accounts, which is an equivalent of US $115.90 million comprising a foreign exchange cost of 52.51 million Units of Accounts, which is an equivalent of US $83.9 million. The local cost of 19.98 million Units of Accounts is an equivalent of US $31.95 million.

I will move on to page 9 where we have the observations. The first observation that the committee made was that the West Nile region is not connected to the national grid but it is not catered for under this project. This region currently has no power supply.

Concern was raised about the slow process of the Rural Electrification Programme. It was noted that in some of the rural areas, electricity lines had been put up but with no electricity connected to them.

The committee noted that one of the conditions prior to the first disbursement was confirmation that financial closure from Mputa Thermal power plant and the associated Mputa-Fort Portal-Nkenda transmission line was reached.

The committee further noted that the ministry was facing challenges in compensating people to build new lines. These challenges arise from the huge amounts of money required for compensation, people refusing to relocate and others demanding sums beyond those approved by the valuer. This is likely to slow down the progress of the project.

Note was taken that government is incurring high costs of compensation for the land every time there is infrastructure development, especially in the roads and power sector. With the increasing value of land across the country, this is unsustainable in the long run.

The committee observed that the available power is very expensive. Most people cannot afford it and supplement their energy needs by using charcoal and firewood due to the fact that it is not economically feasible to use electric power to serve all their power needs.

The committee further observed that the high power rates are partly responsible for deforestation due to the fact that the trees are cut down and utilised as an alternative source of energy.

It was noted that there was a mismatch between the presidential pledges for power connection in various parts of the country and the actual connections.

On page 11, we move on to the recommendations on item ten. The committee thus recommends that:

    1. Government is urged to develop a comprehensive infrastructure development plan in the area of road development and provision of utilities. Such a plan could be used to ensure that people do not settle in areas earmarked for infrastructure development. It would also solve the problem of the uncoordinated laying of telecommunications cables and water pipes, which has resulted into disruption in the provision of some of these services.

    2. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is urged to incorporate the presidential power pledges within the ministry’s work plan.
    3. The energy sector should take measures to address the power losses, which currently stand at 35 percent in order to save the consumers from paying for power that is actually not consumed.

    4. The government should speed up the process of implementing the planned comprehensive programme for rural electrification, which is planned to increase grid access to 15 percent within the next 15 years.

    5. Government should come up with measures to further subsidise electricity or invest in alternative renewable energy as one of measures of protecting the environment and reducing the unit cost of electricity hence making it more affordable. The current power subsidy stands at Shs 90 billion per year and a unit of power stands at Shs 426.

    6. Government is urged to expedite the process through which power supply will be provided to West Nile region. 

    7. Government should design a programme for establishing sub-stations to step down the power from the electricity highways so that such power is averted to other or neighbouring areas as need may arise.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we come to the conclusion, which is item No. 11. Note has been taken of the government’s commitment to the project in line with its sector strategic plan as it will contribute to Uganda’s economic growth, poverty-reduction and attainment of the MDGs. 

The availability of additional power supply as a result of the project will enable the rural electrification agency to provide electricity to new rural communities through distribution networks connected by the Uganda Electricity Distribution Company’s network system.

Given the strategic importance of this project and the objectives therein, the committee thus recommends to this House to approve the request by government to borrow 52.15 million Units of Account from the African Development Bank for financing the construction of Mbarara-Nkenda, Tororo-Lira transmission lines. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairman and the committee for the report. The debate is open.

4.56
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the loan. I want to keep my promise that I will no longer oppose any borrowing -(Interjections)- because I know in the end, the loans will be cancelled. We shall not be in position to repay, but my concern is the results of the loans. If we could go back and follow every other loan on the ground, definitely we would stop debating any loan. 

But specifically regarding power, to connect a new consumer, I was told recently that one electric pole costs Shs 380,000. If you need two, you multiply that by two. How many people in rural areas can afford that? Why should the ministry transfer the cost of electric poles to consumers? Why don’t we give poles as loans that will be repaid over a period of time? But to demand that consumers must pay first before they are connected is very discouraging. Will the ministry consider giving poles as loans so that we get our people connected to the grid? 

Two, it is not enough to get connected. Kitgum town was connected about 18 years ago but we have had more darkness than light. Every weekend there is an announcement that there will be no power because the line will be cleared. What is clearing the line? For years, every weekend, power is turned off, saying they are clearing the line. That has taken place for more than ten years. I even wrote to Umeme about this. When there are rains with wind, power automatically goes off and it takes about a week or more to restore power. What kind of organisation is this? I think if we want our people we should get power for them; we should get serious. 

But really, I do not know what Umeme is all about. I do not know who owns Umeme. My understanding is that someone who owns Umeme came here as an employee, but he bought his way up to ownership of what he came to work for. I think the government should look at this situation again. Power is so essential that we cannot allow a businessman to supply our people. It should be supplied by the state. There are certain things that the state must provide for our people and power is one of them. I beg to support the loan. I thank you.

5.00
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota North County, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion for the government to borrow this money, but I have two concerns.

One is observation No. 5 on page 10 of this report where they say government incurs high costs to compensate land owners where transmission lines pass. In my constituency now, there are people - I understand there is a proposed transmission line to the West. They surveyed the land and actually some parts of the line are going to pass through people’s land and even over peoples’ houses. It is about three years since they surveyed. However, the people are confused because when they surveyed, they promised to compensate the people who are waiting; they cannot develop their land nor do anything on it. They are still waiting.

I want to know when the government will compensate these people and how long it will take because the people are confused. They have waited for long and their plans are frustrated by this long waiting -(Interruption) 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much Hon. Mutuluuza for giving way. What Hon. Mutuluuza is talking about is very important. In those days UEB was only getting “way leaves” as per the Act. They just needed to come, cut your plants or do anything and compensate you but never acquired land. This is the major reason why Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited was never privatised. This was because no credible company could come and take something where they do not have land titles for the part where they are passing. 

So, what he is saying is very important. In these new loans we are acquiring, a provision for the acquisition of land is paramount. In fact UEB had started demolishing peoples’ houses in Kampala illegally. I had to come in, told them the law and they stopped because they wanted to play on the ignorance of people that having “way leaves” is the same as having acquired the land where the “way leave” is. I thank you.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, hon. Member, for that information. Our appeal is that either Government or the organisation supposed to compensate these people speeds up this exercise. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, there is this observation number 8 where they say losses of 35 percent are the causes of the high tariffs. I think Umeme should be capable of really checking these losses because losses should not be a punishment to people who use electricity. It should not be an excuse – they should make sure that they check those who are stealing power; otherwise they are just punishing innocent people who are getting this service. I thank you.

5.04
MRS JOYCE KWEBIHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the committee for this report and I stand here to support the motion on these grounds: I was listening to the President at the United Nations last night and one of the problems he gave for our country and other parts of Africa was that we do not have enough electric power and we have to work hard to improve the situation. So, in the same spirit, like the President’s, I would like this Parliament to support this loan.

Secondly, I see on page 8 that the terms of the loan appear to be favourable, especially where we have that grace period of 10 years before we start paying. I thank you.

5.06
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): I rise to support the loan request. I have a few concerns I would like to raise. The first is to do with the observations of the committee. They report that the West Nile region is not connected to the national grid. I want to appeal to the minister concerned that once in a while, there is need for us or for them to observe and watch the statements they make on the Floor of Parliament. When we were discussing this year’s budget, the Member of Parliament for Arua did raise this same concern in this House, and the minister in his response told the House that this was a short-term problem and that Arua District had run short of power for only four days. He did assure us that they were going to put the problem right in the next few days. 

I am surprised when I again see the committee report stating the same thing; that the West Nile region does not have power. Mr Speaker, this is part of Uganda and I want to appeal and request the minister to take this as a serious issue. I suggest that they come up with another loan pushing for the connection of the West Nile region on the national grid. 

On the second observation, they are talking about the slow progress on the rural electrification programme. For the last three and a half years that I have been in this House, I have been raising the concerns of my constituents –(Interruption)

MR MUTABAALI: Thank you very much, Hon. Milton Muwuma, for giving me way. It is not only Kigulu South but it is now six years since the late Hon. Basoga Nsadhu and the President pledged power in Namutumba District. From that time to now, I have moved to the rural electrification office, and the Minister of Energy, and nothing has been done – not even an electric pole has been put in the particular place. So, unless the ministry wakes up, we may fail to approve this loan – sincerely, tell us what you are going to do with this particular money! Thank you.    

MR MUWUMA: Thank you hon. Member for that information. We have stalled power projects in Iganga that were started way back in 2003. To date, we have written correspondences and I have moved, but you find every day, we are approving loans, we are starting new projects; and I wonder whether we have decided to write off the other projects. 

Some of us are finding it hard to convince our voters for the forthcoming elections that we are the right material to consider. They think we have failed to achieve as far as this subject is concerned. It is my humble appeal, therefore, that the ministry considers completion of all stalled power projects within the country to simplify and to level our political terrain. Mr Speaker, I am interested in staying in this House for many more years. 

As we look at transmission, I was in Kabale District three months ago and there is a dam that is very viable – it is called Maziba. This place requires only installation of turbines that were stolen some good years ago. Can we look at procuring turbines and we put that as a power source for this country, instead of looking at Bujagali and Karuma because all our eyes are fixed on those two dams. Can you also explore such avenues? I thank you.   

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kitatta, Hon. Francis Kiyonga and hon. Mabikke, and we conclude. Do not worry; you will contribute because there is another opportunity.

5.10
MR ABOUD KITATTA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for this report and I support the request. On page 10, the committee observed that the ministry was facing a challenge of compensating some people, and some people were refusing to vacate their land. I would like to know what the ministry is actually preparing to do to see that these people are compensated so that the work is not slowed down.

Secondly, there is a timeframe of 48 months in which to complete the work. If these people are not compensated, how will the project be implemented within that given timeframe? That is what I would like to know from the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.12
MR FRANCIS KIYONGA (Independent, Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Mr Speaker, just one clarification to the chairman of the committee and the minister. Mention and emphasis in this report has been put on West Nile as the only region not having power. It has been mentioned in the observations as number one, and in the recommendations it has been repeated as number six. Is it true that it is only West Nile which is not having power? What is very special about mentioning and emphasising West Nile region when there are other regions like Karamoja which do not even smell having any power? Is it really correct to mention and list and emphasise some particular places and indicate that some other places are not even being bothered about? Are they not part of this country? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are there plans for Karamoja region? Yes, be bold. I think save us on that. Are there plans for Karamoja?

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY(Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Mr Speaker, with respect to Karamoja, we have just installed new equipment in Moroto, but within a month or so, as a region, we are coming from Corner Kilak and we are about to be in Abim. We have plans. They are not only smelling, but they are actually touching power now. (Laughter)

I know that the honourable member may be referring to some specific area, but we have plans to reach in the next year the two, Kotido and Kaabong, as well and then the third side is called Katikekile. That programme is going through Katakwi, and I think that is in the next law.

THE SPEAKER: Then you have a question from near Kitale, Kenya.

5.15
MRS EVERLINE TETE CHELANGAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion, and I want to ask a similar question like that of my colleague. Honourable minister, several times we have been talking about the problem of Bukwo. What plan do you have for Bukwo District? When will it ever have electricity? We are next to Kenya; we smell electricity and we see electricity across the river. (Laughter) Can you tell us what plan you have for Bukwo District?

THE SPEAKER: No, the minister will answer subsequently.

5.16
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make closing remarks. (Laughter) I am at cross roads whether to support or not to support this motion. First, because I believe that the national strategy on electricity generation and distribution is a wrong one. Very many countries fell in the same trap that Uganda fell into, and today they are correcting it. The business of generating and supplying electricity the world over is very expensive, and it can never be in private hands; it is always the responsibility of the state. But in Uganda, very unique as we are, we decided to privatise this very essential sector, and we left it in the hands of profit-making companies.

Now when I hear my colleagues from Kigulu South, Bukwo and Karamoja, I really sympathise with you because you are actually smelling power, but you may never get it. For the people of Kigulu South, they had a whole Vice-President for 10 years - I think you know this - but what more opportunity do they have? (Laughter) 

They had an opportunity then of a whole Vice-President, and they failed to get power and you think you are going to get power now? (Laughter) I am really sympathetic.

It is high time we put pressure on the government of the National Resistance Movement to rescind the decision to privatise this energy sector. (Applause)

There is no way we can leave electricity generation, transmission and distribution in the hands, of Umeme and UETCL and all these other companies. We can talk about revenue collection in private hands but not the other three. 

So, however much money we borrow - we can even borrow trillions, but it will never make any impact in that sector, unless we correct the mistakes that we made in the first place. I want to thank you.

5.20
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Until recently when I was lured by banks to go into borrowing, did I ever believe in borrowing, especially borrowing to consume. I know, since I joined this Parliament, we have borrowed quite a huge amount of money and if I may say this, my first born is six years old, and we were borrowing money, and we shall continue to borrow money.

I know my son, and his children and grand children, will be the ones to pay these loans we are borrowing today. I feel so passionate on monies that we borrow in this Parliament because you never know you may be bankrupt. Today, I get very little money in my account because I have borrowed a lot. So, I am almost broke every day because of borrowing.

I want to suggest that instead of borrowing too much for consumption, we should be borrowing for investments that will be giving some money. I know you will say electricity is investment. It is true; but all we are doing is mainly to make sure we have electricity for consumption because only five percent of Ugandans, as alluded by you honourable minister, are using electricity in Uganda.

I wish I would see one minister from the Ministry of Health because that is the major reason I got up. I am happy I can see ministers from the Ministry of Finance. The main reason for borrowing I believe is when there is a pressing need that we cannot avoid to borrow. But in this House, we women Members of Parliament have been crying for Ministry of Health to initiate a loan to provide some money for reproductive health in this country. It is two years down the road and we have not seen any loan coming before this House.

Mothers of this country are dying every day but we are borrowing money every day. I wonder what is happening. Why are we not -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, during the day I mentioned this. Please why don’t you leave that for that debate? Consider the merits of this one.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought I said am actually rising not to oppose this loan, but am saying much as we borrow - because borrowing -

THE SPEAKER: Actually, your concern has been seriously registered in very bold letters. (Laughter)

5.23
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The last time the people of Kasilo saw power was during Obote II Government. Up to today, the people of Kasilo County - I hear the Minister of Finance interjecting. Can you protect me, Mr Speaker, from the hon. Minister of Finance who is saying that we are rebels? You will need to substantiate.

The last time hon. Migereko was a Minister of Energy in 2003, he came and promised the people of Kasilo that there will be power. It was on Voice of Teso, the whole eastern region heard. He has left that ministry, and the people of Kasilo still do not have power. It is my prayer that during the time of hon. D’Ujanga and Hon. Hillary Onek, the people of Kasilo are taken care of.

We have four health centre IIIs and one health centre IV; Ministry of Health has done well. But we need power in these health centres to help the women when they are delivering.

I want to thank hon. Byabagambi. Ministry of Works has done well. The people of Kasilo have good roads. I want the Minister of Energy to follow the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Works. We shall be very appreciative if that is done.

I also want a clarification from the Minister of Energy. We read in the papers that your senior minister is talking of re-nationalising Umeme. How far true is this? I think these issues of utilities should remain in the hands of Government; even if they make losses, Government can subsidise. We need that from your ministry. We thought that was the right thing to do. Just imagine if water had gone. Had it not been for hon. Otafiire to put his foot down when he was a Minister of Lands, what would be happening today? I think these key things need to be re-nationalised. You have seen what has happened.

When I read observation eight - I have a fact sheet here from Umeme which was distributed. It has been there on the table since last week. Point eight talks of losses. The power losses stand at 35 percent; that is why the tariffs are high. I do not agree because at the time when the power losses were at 40 percent as shown on this Umeme fact sheet, it was low. But the committee’s report is talking of the losses standing at 35 percent; but this fact sheet of Umeme talks of 33.5 percent not 35 as it is in this report. So, we do not know which one is correct.

We are also told in this fact sheet that the collection has improved from 75 percent to now 97 percent. So why should the tariffs be going up if the collections have improved from 75 to 97 percent, which means we are about to reach 100 percent? So, who is telling us the truth and why are tariffs still going up? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Finally, hon. Chairperson, Committee of HIV/AIDS.

5.27
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance once again. I want to thank Government for prioritising the energy sector in this country, because without energy, we cannot get out of poverty.

However, I have an observation to make on page 8 about project cost and financing. The second paragraph is talking about the cost of monitoring the HIV/AIDS campaign and am wondering -

THE SPEAKER: Which report is this?

MRS RWAKIMARI: The same report, Mr Speaker

THE SPEAKER: Page?

MRS RWAKIMARI: Page 8, paragraph seven on project cost and financing. Yes, somebody is talking about social responsibility, but what has it got to do with electricity connectivity and all that, when we know that there are well established organisations to carry out these activities. And how much are they going to spend on this? It is not clearly specified.

I am worried because there are many HIV programmes in this country and most likely there is going to be duplication of work and wastage of resources. I am concerned and so, I need clarification from the honourable minister.

THE SPEAKER: Is it from the minister or the authors of the report?

MRS RWAKIMARI: From the committee chairperson. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SEBUNYA: There is information that I want to give my colleague about the cost mentioned here for environmental mitigation, monitoring of the HIV/AIDS campaign, and compensation and resettlement for this Mbarara-Nkenda line. I am a member of the committee. We also went to Jinja and we travelled along the Bujagali-Kawanda line where they have resettled individuals. People were given a choice between being given money and being resettled as families. So, where they have resettled these families, they need this HIV/AIDS campaign. When they are moving people to a different area which is new, they need to sensitise them about AIDS. So, it is an all-round package about compensation, environmental mitigation and HIV campaigns.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now, can the minister answer the questions that have been raised - the last one? Ok.

5.30
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I listened to my colleague talking about monitoring the HIV/AIDS campaign and I was just wondering whether the input of Ministry of Health has been sought in this matter; whether the committee listened to Ministry of Health. 

The question of duplication has already been alluded to by Hon. Beatrice Rwakimari, but there is also the question of whether you have the capacity. Are you going to transfer this money to Ministry of Health or is it Uganda AIDS Commission? You cannot monitor what is not yours. You would not understand. The relevant committee - the Social Services Committee - has not been privileged to look at the framework under which Ministry of Energy wants to monitor the HIV/AIDS campaign, and I really want to be brought on board. 

5.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Mr Speaker, I would like to start with this one. This is a very small component of the project and a breakdown can be given. The policy is that if you are going to carry out the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) it is mandatory that you have a small component of an HIV/AIDS awareness campaign. In every ministry, there is a focal person on HIV/AIDS. You do not go into the details of injecting people or giving them ARVs, but to say what can happen to you if you do not do certain things right. It is really a social issue and has nothing to do with medical -(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some years ago, when the insecurity in the north was declining, the USAID proposed a project to inject resources into the community. One of the projects that were implemented in Pader-Kitgum was community road works. The idea was very good. I did write a proposal for World Vision and I was cautioning about money flowing into the community without checks. What turned out was that at every site where the work ended and payments were done, people who were selling waragi and doing all this then camped in the environment. When you start doing these line constructions and you are injecting money where previously there was no money, you change a lot of the social interaction, and unless you have a tight monitoring system, you actually end up constructing a line and leaving a trail of –(Interjection)

MR D’UJANGA: So, Mr Speaker, I think this subject has been well covered. It is a part of all our projects which cut across communities. We have that component for all our projects which cut across communities. 

Now, hon. Okello-Okello, you really justified this project. The fact that the Tororo-Lira line is on wooden poles and was built in 1962, is the reason why there is always a shutdown every weekend to maintain the line. The poles are rotting. So, this programme is to change those wooden poles to steel towers so that you will have less of those interruptions. In other words, you really justified this project - (Interruption) 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I appreciate what the honourable minister is saying, but I am saying this, shut down has taken over 10 years. Can we be given a timeframe that you will have a rest at this time? Thank you.

MR D’UJANGA: Yes, Mr Speaker. This project is the solution. This project is going to change those wooden poles which are old to steel towers which will not rot and they will be concrete from Tororo to Opuyo and then Lira. Now, the Kitgum line is taken from Lira so the reliability will improve if we approve this project. 

Mr Speaker, as I said last time, one may wonder why this project is tied with Mbarara-Nkenda, and I will say that it is better for electricity when you have a complete loop. So, the loop we are looking at is Bujagali-Tororo, Opuyo-Lira, now tie that loop to Karuma and bring the other leg to Kawanda on the Gulu Road and back to Jinja. There you have one ring. The other ring is from Kawanda. The line which hon. Mutuluuza is talking about for which compensation will be done early next year is through Mbarara-Nkenda, Kaiso-Tonya and back to Karuma. So, that is why these two portions of the loops are coming as one project. 

The losses of 35 percent; well, like I explained last time, there are names for them. You find commercial losses, technical losses and distribution losses. We have to be careful what we are talking about. The 33.5% is the total losses on distribution that includes commercial theft and technical which is inherent in the power system. The theft can be controlled, not only by Umeme - because there is a campaign that when you see your neighbour enjoying electricity without a meter, you are paying for his theft. So, the population and all of us should be vigilant to see illegal connections. That is how we shall reduce theft.

MS AOL: I would like to get a clarification that by the fact that we monitor and make sure that neighbours do not cheat on Umeme, how sure are we that we will pay less when we monitor and bring out those cases on thefts.

MR D’UJANGA: It is like a water pipe. If you bring water from Gaba to here and you have leakages along the way, somebody must pay for the water to be produced there and this is the same with electricity. If some electricity is being supplied in your area and it is not being metered, then the people who are being metered pay for the losses. One solution which we have given to Umeme is to immediately introduce repayment metering. They are sourcing now and soon areas will be on prepaid metering. It is better for the customer; he monitors his consumption and theft cases are usually reduced.

I made a statement here on Arua and I will make the same statement that Arua-Nebbi are on supply, Government is now buying fuel because the company which concessioned that area, ran into a financial difficulty. Government supplies fuel to that power station in Arua on a weekly basis, and the two districts are on supply. I am sure this report was written during the time when the equipment, as I reported, was under overhaul. Now, this overhaul is over and the place is on supply.

National grid to West Nile 

The national grid to West Nile has been considered and technically it is not feasible at this stage. One, because the main power station is in Lira; if we extended the 33000 vaults to west Nile, you will have dim lights. On the other hand, if you transmitted the 32000 vaults to West Nile, your bulbs would blow. So, what we decided is to first build a local network of Nyagak to stimulate growth of demand, then take the grid, and we have a German consultant working on it called Amar International. He is looking at this together with Maziba hydro power station, which is a mini hydro - one megawatt. This is also being studied by this consultant. In time, there will be extension to West Nile by the grid from this side of the Nile.

The other one is hon. Kitatta - land is a constitutional matter; when hon. Byandala was in KCC and myself in electricity, we used to acquire bailiffs, give notice, allow, and pay for crop compensation, but you do not own the land. This was before 1995. When the Constitution came, land ownership was emphasised there and right now when we are doing any programme, we must compensate and this takes some time because of evaluation, the chief valuer’s report and everything. They normally take time, but we always compensate upfront. 

Timeframe is difficult to say because for this project it is better to do the entire agreement action plan so that you know that your way is clear like for Kawanda. 

Bujagali - we are finishing all the compensations then we can say we will finish this line at this time.

Now hon. Tete of Bukwo; we have looked at the small rivers in that area with a community development programme, but the solution would be to finally extend this line from Kapchorwa. We are also looking at - if possible - to get extension from your neighbours on the Kenyan side. It is nearer and we have done this for Kisoro; we got power from Rwanda and a dam in Bunagana, and we supplied Rwanda, and this is a possible arrangement we can look at; but it is being held.

Hon. Mabikke, transmission is 100%; I said it already. But open space for private people to enter into generation, like Karuma, is going to be a public project by Government using energy funds which this House approved. 

Distribution – yes; we do not only have Umeme in Kanungu, we have another company using prepayment metering. In Kyenjojo, there is another company coming soon. Next week we are commissioning another company in Kibale using prepayment metering. So Umeme is now in this area.

Perhaps, at this time, let me talk about nationalisation. What hon. Onek said was that he needed efficiency and he said that if Umeme could not live to its expectations there was room for nationalisation and all of us know this. First of all, Government retains the ownership of their network. Umeme has come to use the network on concession basis to run the system; but the system remains Government. So, it is not far-fetched to say that you must perform; if you do not perform there is a possibility of nationalisation. But as far as we are concerned, we have a committee headed by Gen. Saleh which is looking at this and it will be better to give them time to finish their report and then we can comment further. 

Now hon. Franca, borrowing is okay, but you do not borrow to buy cloth; you borrow to invest. It is better to borrow to invest and it is okay.

Hon. Okupa Elijah, the people of Kasilo vandalised their own power network. Power existed in that area but during that time when we had insurgency in the region, the lines were vandalised in so many places in the east. We are now going back there; for example, Kalachi power station where hon. Ibi represents; we are restoring power there. We are doing Orungo, Kataine restoring power lines which were vandalised. So, Kasilo is in this. We will soon give back the people of Kasilo their power. We have agreed to repair this thing. I think those were the issues.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow UA 52.51 million from African Development Bank (ADB) for financing the construction of Mbarara-Nkenda and Tororo-Lira transmission lines project.

Those in favour say aye, to the contrary no.

 (Question put and agreed to.) 

Now for business lined up for today, we have only No. 7 which is Rural Transformation Project II. Can we dispose of it so that we leave others for tomorrow?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 49.5 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) FOR FINANCING THE ENERGY FOR RURAL TRANSFORMATION PROJECT II

5.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INVESTMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, this loan was presented before this Parliament and also considered by the Committee on National Economy and which generated a report to be presented to this House. I would therefore like to hand over to the chairperson of that committee so that the details can be given by her. I thank you.

5.48
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Erinah Wangwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will start off by laying on Table the documents of the loan that was given to us in the committee to consider and report to Parliament to borrow SDR 49.5 million from the International Development Association for financing the Energy for Rural Transmission Project II. These documents include the project implementation plan, the appraisal, the loan agreement and the document from the ministry which shows the rural electrification projects that have been implemented and are on-going. 

Since the members of parliament had already got the minister’s brief, which detailed the background and the rationale of the project and the project overview, I will start from page 5 to talk briefly about the project components which include: 

Rural Energy Infrastructure, which is going to cost $53.5 million. Under that component we have the Grid Related Power Generation and Distribution which will include investments which were commenced under the ERT I but were not completed.

Two, the Household and Infrastructure Solar PV Systems that one Member asked about and it is estimated that 20,000 households are going to benefit from this scheme. 

Part III, the Technical Assistance and Training, which includes support to ERA for engineering support in preparation for the main grid and independent grid packages.

Then we have the Credit Support Facility which will be taken care of under the Uganda Energy Credit Capitalisation Company and it will be implemented as it was done it Part I ERT.

We have V, the Private Sector Foundation on page 6 and it will also benefit from this project.

On page 7, we have the ICT Sector. It will have $9.1 million and its components are first of all investments which are detailed in that paragraph as well as the technical assistance and training. 

Then we have Component No.3, the Energy Development Cross Sectoral Links and Impact Monitoring on page 7. Under that component, we have the energy packages, technical assistants, training and operating costs and retroactive financing and Northern Uganda. 

On page 9, the loan terms and conditions are that a total of SDR 49.5 million is going to be loaned and the payment currency will be in United States dollars. The maximum charge rate payable by the recipient on the un-drawn financing balance will be 0.5 per cent; these are standard conditions as in all other loans. 

Project implementation
We have already had other partners helping us in the loan and they have their conditions as part of the loan. 

The institutional and implementation arrangements have no major differences from those that are in Part I in ERT I. 

Monitoring and evaluation is also following the same ERT I system.

Sustainability and reliability is also following the same ERT I.

Risks in the project
    1. The risks that were in ERT I have given the opportunity for the ministry to conceptualise how they are going to act in ERT II. The first risk was that there will be no power available to supply the rural areas and this will be a major barrier to grid based rural electrification as was the case in ERT I. However, presently there is good progress on the bank that supported Bujagaali Hydro Project which is expected to be commissioned in 2011 and will provide adequate power for rural electrification.
    2. There is on-going worldwide micro-economic and financial crisis that will reduce incomes to Ugandans and therefore the financial viability of the Rural Scheme. This crisis may also affect the financial sector in such a way that the flow of credit is reduced.
    3. The private sector will not participate adequately in the project. The project offers partial grants and other concessional arrangements to encourage private sector participation. The credit conditions and covenants are in that table which can be looked at later by the members of parliament. 

Observations and Findings

The committee raised the following concerns:
1. 	The criteria of the selection for the districts to be considered under the ERT II Project was due to the fears that areas with less economic activities such as Northern Uganda would be at a disadvantage. 

2. 	The committee further raised concern over the consideration of prioritising power connections in areas where there are existing social services and economic activities, for example, schools, hospitals, health centres, places of worship and factories.

3. 	Commitment of the private sector before partnership in the projects was questioned due to the fact that it has been noted that at times, the private sector is slow in responding to the investments they have committed to after government has played its part. This has caused delay and at times failure for completion of these projects.

4. 	Note was taken by the committee of the limited private sector participation. This was attributed to government’s laxity in promoting and giving incentives to enhance participation of the private sector.

5. 	It was further noted that the sector lacked a national strategic plan to cover the whole country as well as funds required and the funding of the strategies.

6. 	The committee further noted that though investments are being geared towards rural electrification, urban dwellers are shifting from thermal to hydro electricity that has proved to be very costly and are going in for renewable energies hence the concern over the viability and sustainability of the project given that the projected number of consumers is likely to go down.

    7. It was also noted that sensitisation on the productive use of energy had not yet been done in the rural areas to be serviced under the ERT II project.

8. 	The committee noted the need for the sector to carry out mapping of projects and activities under the sector in order to avoid duplication of similar activities and projects in the same areas.

9. 	Concern was also raised that the sector did not have a comprehensive plan on how it was going to harmonise the various ministries involved as beneficiaries in the ERT II project.

10. 	The committee noted that the loan request was conceived prior to the establishment of the National Information Technology Authority (NITA Uganda) and hence the project’s cognisance of the UCC to execute the ICT component albeit the fact that the UCC is limited to telecommunications.

Recommendations
    1. The criteria for the selection of districts to be serviced under the ERT II project should be made transparent and equitable in all regions.
    2. Consideration should be given to areas with already existing social services and high economic activities.
    3. Government should introduce incentives into the sector in order to make it attractive and viable to private investors.
    4. Government is urged to draw up a national strategic plan for electrification of the whole country for better planning purposes and funding strategies.
    5. Government needs to gear more effort into the exploration of cheaper renewable energy sources in order to move away from hydro and thermal electricity, which have proved to be very expensive and climate dependant where hydro is concerned.
    6. Sensitisation should be carried out to the end users and beneficiaries of the project on the productive usage of energy in order to achieve maximum benefits from the project.
    7. The sector is urged to carry out mapping of projects and activities in order to avoid duplicity.
    8. Government should put in place a strong coordination team to harmonise the activities of the various stakeholders and ministries involved.
    9. The ICT component in this project should be entrusted with NITA (U) which is mandated with matters related to Internet, computers and the last mile bandwidth and country information systems under section five of the National Information Technology Authority Act, 2009.

In conclusion, the committee recommends the approval of the financing arrangements envisaged for phase two namely the Credit of Special Drawing Rights 49.5 million equivalent to $75 million from the IDA Bank and the grant of $9 million for the Global Environmental Facility Trust (GEFT). I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the committee, for the report. Any contributions on this?

6.01
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chair and the members of the committee for putting together a comprehensive report.

The issue of rural electrification is very important to all of us especially as far as economic development is concerned. We cannot talk about meaningful development to our people if rural electrification is not looked at as a priority. We are all aware that the majority of Ugandans live in rural areas and these are Ugandans that are able to work but many times are not as productive as they ought to be because they do not have the energy that they need to turn their labour into productive outputs. Therefore it is important that the issue of power is focused on. It is the basis of improved health, improved education and economic empowerment for the majority of people in this country.

If we are to avert environmental degradation, which is widely spread in this country, we need to have an alternative source of energy and I think this money will go a long way to avail the population with the energy that they need so that they reduce the environmental degradation, which is a threat to us and to the globe.

However, the issue of affordability is pertinent. We might have power spread out but people are not able to access it due to affordability. I hope that through this loan, we shall be able to make power affordable. It is one thing to provide power and it is another for people to access it. Sometimes the high tariffs bar people from accessing the power and using it for productive activities. Therefore, I hope the components that have been stipulated in this loan request will be those that will reduce the tariffs so that they are afforded by the population. 

As a committee, we discussed this loan and supported it. But we went ahead to remind the Ministry of Finance that there is money under UEDCL, which has been raised through rentals and licences. According to our estimation, although we did not have the actual figures, it is above $50 million. We have been waiting to know the exact figure but we know it is above that. We think this is the money they could use to complement this loan so that they give it even to private investors and they co-invest in the production of electricity. 

Since we have the Ministry of Finance here with us, may I use this opportunity as the chair of the Natural Resources Committee to get an explanation about how that money is going to be used or the extent to which they are going to adhere to our recommendation. 

We are aware that the money is received and maybe they planned. What we got from the press is that this money is going to be used to construct an office block - twin towers, I understand. But we do not think we need that at this time. We need issues of rural electrification answered and addressed appropriately. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence that the Minister of Finance at the appropriate time gives us an explanation. This is a request we put in the report. I got a letter from the Committee of Finance to the Minister so that we complement this loan. This loan is nothing. It will not go a long way in covering the whole country. But I am sure if they added that money, it would help us to avail power to the rural population. That money could be used to invest in mini-hydro power stations so that they are spread out in the country.

I hope through this loan, the ministry will be able to put in place a monitoring mechanism. It has come to our notice that sometimes even the wires that are put in place to distribute electricity are stolen. So how is the ministry prepared to deal with that habit of even destroying the wires in which we invest colossal amounts of money and they are just taken as scrap and sold cheaply? I hope the monitoring that has been put here seriously addresses that issue. 

I support the loan and I know if it is properly utilised - and I must underline the word “proper utilisation” - it should help Ugandans. I thank you very much.

6.07
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you Mr Speaker. I rise to support the Motion. However, we are now dealing with the Rural Transformation Project II. But we did not fully get how the first one performed. We should have been given a background properly before proceeding.

The other issue I see in my area is that phase one has not worked very well. Many areas still lack electricity. This is why I am concerned about how phase one moved because there are even areas where poles were put and since 2006, no other work has been done. Now we are going to phase two. I think the ministers will have to do some clarification.

Also, the sector lacked a national strategic plan to cover the whole country. Such cases leave a lot of doubt because if you do not have a strategic plan, you may not use the money effectively.

Harmonisation of the ministries is another issue. I think at the centre of government, there is the Prime Minister’s Office and other avenues for the ministries to work together. So when the committee brings out such a thing, we doubt it because these are ministries in the same government, which must work together in a harmonised way.

There are many areas in this country - like colleagues were saying - that were promised electricity some years back and up to now, they have not received it. As the debate was going on, someone told a colleague that you had a Vice-President of this country and you did not get electricity then; do you think you will get it now? I heard this and got disturbed because this goes back to the issue of having institutions rather than individuals. This is because when a Member of Parliament mentions such a thing, you really feel that you do not have institutions. One day, one will say that President Museveni promised you electricity and now that he is not there, where will you get electricity? 

We must build institutions and not individuals. It does not augur well for this country. A number of times I have mentioned it on the Floor of this Parliament. It is okay for a leader to promise but then it must not be seen as if it is that leader giving. It must be government so that with or without that leader, the programmes continue.

Another issue concerns progressive reports. Whenever we pass loans, it is unfortunate that in most cases, we end at passing the loans and then next thing is that we pass another loan. But we need to get progressive reports. We must monitor and we must be facilitated to monitor. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, this is a problem of our committees. The committees’ responsibility is to monitor these projects. When we pass a loan, they know who is handling it. The committee should be able to monitor and requisition for reports but apparently, we tend to end with the budget and policy statements. If we are interested, we can monitor.

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we are in agreement that there is a problem and we ought to address it. 

Finally, we urge government to put this money to good use because it is true some loans have been used fully by government but there are those that have been wasted. Yet people in this country and the future generations will have to pay. We ask government on this particular loan that from its inception, it should be put to good use. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I will allow just two contributions; one from each side. 

6.12
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you. Considering that this is phase II, it means there should have been Phase I. Now, in project one, I wish to know from the minister what fraction of the country did that project cover so that when we come to project two, we get the correct equitability. 
 
THE SPEAKER: Will you need those details today or some time so that the minister brings up – we can ask the minister –
 
MR ACHIA: From the committee, the criterion for the selection of districts to be serviced under the ERT project should be transparent and equitable in all regions. That is quite a good idea but it should have also been very clear because we first of all do not know which districts these are and who is going to make this – where is the list? All this is not yet very clear. May we get that clarified?

6.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Nelson Wambuzi): I thank you. I would like to thank the committee and indeed my colleague, the owner of the Motion. We should approve this loan because it is consistent with “Bonna Bagagawale”. If you look at the history of the electrification of Uganda, you will see that all lines that were installed were going to a production unit whether it was a ginnery, coffee milling unit or a maize mill. All these lines were going to a specific economic activity. Therefore rural electrification is actually to do with people being productive. 

As I talk, people who want rice mills should be given – you cannot run a rice mill on solar power. You cannot run blast freezing equipment at the lake on solar power. That is why serious power in the levels of 415 volts must be developed and put at strategic locations across the country in order for us to start adding value to our agriculture, fisheries and animal production. If you want to do comprehensive milk cooling across the country, you need power in rural areas. This loan is indeed very important.

The committee has suggested that there may be no consumers. But there are going to be serious consumers of this power. You roll out this power across the country and the country is actually going to start changing and transforming. This electricity for rural transformation is not about people having small bulbs in their houses but about power for production. This is the way to go. The Motion is valid and we should support it.

6.17
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you for giving me the opportunity. I thank the committee for the report and the ministry for the efforts to improve the development of our country through provision of energy. I would still want to echo what one of the colleagues has said - we need to know the districts that are going to benefit from this second project and which ones benefitted from the first one. This is important because we want to know that every other area is benefiting from this. 

The other point is about the cost of electricity in this country because this is still going to be a very major problem. Go to any of our roads; either in Masaka, the North or the East – the lorries are full of charcoal. Charcoal is being ferried to this city in hundreds of tones. Why is it? Charcoal is being consumed by all categories of people. So what is the problem? The problem is the cost of electricity. So even as we move towards improving rural electrification, unless we address the issue of the cost, this will just be a white elephant –

THE SPEAKER: But honourable, we have handled about three Motions and this issue has come up. I think we have talked about it and exhausted it. It has featured.

MR BARTILLE: Thank you. What I am only trying to say is that as the ministry plans, we should also get efforts to see that electricity is affordable. 

The other concern is completing connections - even in areas where the grids have passed, there are still a lot of hanging areas. There are institutions and trading areas which do not benefit from the electricity. There should be provision of transformers so that people do not just see the wires passing through their areas and they are not benefiting from it. 

I came in when the minister was trying to answer my colleague’s concerns about our area, Bukwo, which has not “tasted” electricity. He did not seem to be committal as and he said they were thinking of bringing it from Kenya. We are thinking -  

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, that was also brought up and has been answered. 

MR BARTILLE: I thought that getting some schedules of time would be helpful to us. We have tried to do this – (Interruption) 

MR KYANJO: There is a situation of Members who come into this House and sit quietly and others contribute vehemently. Then there are others who come at their convenience and drive the whole House back to where the debate has shifted from. Is it procedurally right that Members who have honestly committed their time here still sit to wait for those who just come late to contribute to things that have already been resolved?

THE SPEAKER: Well, procedurally everybody should be on time.

MR BARTILLE: I will ask for the indulgence of colleagues if I am taking you back but sincerely I had a big problem and I would not have come earlier. I lost somebody and I have just come from the hospital. But the issue I am raising is still relevant and I do not see its irrelevance.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Toskin, there was a very effective Member of Parliament from Bukwo who had talked about this and his case was taken and answered – but you may have had a reason as to why you came late.

MR BARTILLE: Thank you. Finally, I support this Motion and urge Members to support it too. I thank you.

6.22
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for their report and I support the Motion. I was in the Seventh Parliament on the Committee of National Economy that passed the phase I of the project. But I have two concerns about the committee report that probably need to either be corrected or they seem misleading. 

In their conclusion, the first paragraph, the committee is saying that Phase I triggered a 15-years phase II proposal. Is phase II 15 years or the three phases are actually 15 years. If phase II is 15 years, then we have a problem of stretching this little money over that period of time. 

Secondly, when you go to page 13, committee observation number six is not an observation that should come from our committee because it cannot be that investing in solar will make investment in the main grid ineffective or lose demand. I do not think that these two contradict each other. You will always find that there will be a gap that one fills than the other. Besides, like hon. Wambuzi said, you will not use solar to run your grinding mills. Inevitably you will need both. 

But lastly, my concern is that in 2001 when we passed this loan, the ministry for ICT was not in existence. Now if you look at the loan components, they are very diverse. It creates a problem of coherence in the loan request. Even applying these loan resources is focussed towards rural transformation. But there is incoherence in how the loans and the activities are handled by various ministries.

What I envisage is a situation where there will be a split in phase two with the Ministry of Energy taking the component of electricity and then the ICT ministry too. Otherwise the desk officer wherever he may be needs to be an expert in very many things. While we pass this for now, you should bring two loans in the next phase to complete the phase but directed to two separate sectors and ministries. Thank you.

6.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Mr Speaker, the whole ERT is 15 years; ERT II is four years. Secondly, it is true as observed by Prof. Latigo that when we started this project, the ICT Ministry was non existent. More so for this component, we are talking of Uganda Communication Commission. But now, there is this new authority which is not yet established. It is true that one person in the Ministry of Energy cannot handle this. This component of ICT will now be done by UCC. But if the new body gets established and takes root, then UCC can let that body take over.

But most of the issues have been repetitive. The origin of the high tariffs is known; we are burning diesel at 24 cents a unit and government by approval of this Parliament is subsidising this to 17 cents per unit. We shall be starting to commission hydro stations next week on the 7th of October when we are commissioning 13 mega watts. With the commissioning of hydro stations, we shall be decommissioning the thermo stations and tariffs will come down. Tariffs are a matter of science - there are components which are involved and contribute to tariffs. It is a policy matter which determines which component to leave out. 

There has been a question about what happened in the ERT I. The committee summarised this on page 4 but the list of the components of ERT I exists. It is a long list including Kakira co-generation, Kisizi mini hydro grid extension to Mutukula, grid extension to Mbarara, Kikagati, the West Nile project, solar energy packages for several schools - the chairperson of the committee laid the document on the Table. 

Those were the raised issues.

THE SPEAKER: The Motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise government to borrow SDR 49.5 million from IDA for financing the energy for rural transformation project II. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

I seriously want to thank you for the work well done. We have been able to deal with four of these loans.

MR FRANCIS KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to raise an issue in respect to tomorrow’s business. In our notice of business to follow, it is indicated that we shall have the President’s Address before the statement of the minister. I would like to propose that the statement of the minister comes earlier than –

THE SPEAKER: We shall not have it because we are still waiting for the relevant answer. As you were going on with the debate, I was marking what business we may do tomorrow. I thought in view of the el-Niño, we should deal with number 4 on the city council sanitation and then number five on Victoria and the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund. That is the order we shall follow tomorrow. I think these are very important in view of the circumstances under which we are. 

Tomorrow we shall be sitting from 10.00 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. The other one will come when we have all the documents which the Members requisitioned for.

MR KIYONGA: Okay Sir; but my point is when we shall start that of the President. It is likely to take longer than the minister’s statement and —

THE SPEAKER: The reason why we wanted the minister to make a statement is because both are related. The statement of the minister concerns those arrested, those missing as a result of the riots we had here, and the President’s address also, was concerned with the same subject. So, when you are debating the President’s address, actually debate the report of the minister.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is just a prayer for the time of tomorrow. Tomorrow is Friday and if we have to stretch up to one O’clock, it will encroach on our time for prayer.

THE SPEAKER: And we need your prayer. (Laughter) So, then we shall see - maybe up to midday or half past; then you can go.

Thank you very much honourable members. With this we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned to tomorrow 10.00 a.m. prompt.

(The House rose at 6.33 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 25 September 2009 at 10.00 a.m.) 
