
Wednesday, 30 September 2009

Parliament met at 10.57 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting and I wish to make some alterations to the Order Paper. Item No. 3 will become item No. 4 because the debate on No. 4 had already started. I would like to substitute the Contracts Bill for item No. 5, which we had started on several months back and it is still pending. So, I will substitute the Contracts Bill for the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill. 

DEBATE ON THE ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY YOWERI KAGUTA MUSEVENI, PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA TO THE MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 101(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION 

(Debate continued.)

10.59
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I bring you greetings from the people of Kooki County. 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the President for the address. I thank the UPDF and other security agencies that did a commendable job to quell the riots. 

I send my condolences and sympathies to the people who lost their dear ones and property. I pray that this House develops an attitude to say no to the repetition of this act. 

I was reasonably old enough in 1966, I saw it, I have lived through it; I was in Luzira Prison for five years because I had a detention order. It is incumbent on us, Members of Parliament, because this is the very House where good laws and bad laws are made. One of them was the declaration of a state of emergency in Buganda. It was done here. I pray that we exercise maximum tolerance and that we do not have a repeat of it. And I really sympathise with hon. Kirunda because it is his namesake who was famous for issuing out detention orders. I hope this does not come back. I really pray for that. 

Since yesterday I have tried to analyse the contributions by Members of Parliament and several of them smirk of hatred, cultural bias, revenge, and the desire to hurt instead of dwelling on corrective measures that will ensure no repetition of this. Let us take this opportunity to burn the seeds of hate and revenge in this country. 

Madam Speaker, the challenge we have now is failure to have access to the right vaccines; failure to have the right diagnosis or the right pharmaceuticals to deal with this phenomenon of intolerance and dissatisfaction.

Insinuations have been made in this House to have kingdoms banned; to completely close CBS and some other radio stations. This is an indication that some of us are not ready for corrective measures but want to mete out punitive measures. It is indeed a very unfortunate situation.
 
Ugandans have invested a lot in the peace and development in this country. The world is watching us and it is calling upon us to be highly innovative; to be fearless champions and cool down the emotions in our environment; to define strategies and develop new capabilities to design a winning organisational structure and deliver breakthrough innovations, approaches, propositions and create a strategic partnership that will enhance peace, security and development for all of us. 

On page 3, the President mentions that, “If Mengo kingdom thought that our NRM stand … they should go to court.” Let us not give ourselves an opportunity to slide back, let us go to court. If anybody has wronged you or if anybody has contravened the law, let them go to court. 

I was a bit perturbed when in this speech it was said that our NRM stand is on stopping – this a bit contradictory. I prescribe to the NRM but I was not consulted on this. Now it has come up and we shall have a problem in the villages when they say, “You the NRM did this”, and we will have no explanation for this. 

On page 9 the President came up with a very good innovation: “In order to stop the Kabaka and the Buganda kingdom officials from meddling in politics … there should be a meeting of all the political leaders in Buganda: religious leaders, clan leaders, the royal clan to give contribution to the way forward. This meeting could be called Ttabamiruka.” 

Honourable members, citizens of Uganda, let us look forward to the Ttabamiruka.

11.05
MR ZAAKE KIBEDI (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): I stand to debate the address by His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, to Parliament about what happened in Kampala a few weeks ago.
 
As a leader of young people, as a person who knows that our life expectancy in Uganda today is at approximately 48 years, you find that we the young people have a major stake in this country. So, before we look at who was right or who was wrong, let us first look at what was done or if it was the right thing to do? Is this the way we should continue doing things? As people who want to be leaders in this country - if you look at the composition of our Parliament here, look at the Members of Parliament below 40 years, you find that 60 percent of this House are young people. So, before we look at our political inclinations let us first consider, as future leaders, the act that was done. 

If you want to be a president tomorrow and you continue being happy with people patching potholes in roads - construction of one kilometre tarmac roads costs Shs 1.0 billion. If you want to say that, “Let me inflict pain”, I want to be honest; one of my colleagues here when was discussing said, “Was it really good before we look at who was being targeted?” Another one said, “Anything involving Museveni, I must be happy.” I said no, as future leaders, time is going to come for our generation but now if you find that Parliament is burnt, where will your legislators sit? When you find that people are looting everywhere, what are we sowing?

I would like to share with you an experience which I read. I have read about demonstrations, you may find genuine demonstrations which are more interesting than this one that happened recently. I can give an example of what used to happen in America during the time of Martin Luther King. In America, there were 1st and 2nd citizens in the country. When you were a black and you entered into a bus and a white came after you, you had to vacate and leave for him the seat. When Martin Luther led those demonstrations, he never led any destructive demonstrations. He never did so because he said, “We are losing focus. We want to show to the world, we want to show to the leaders that we have one blood, we are the same people irrespective of our colour”, and for him he was against it. You go and see Ghandi in India; when he was leading demonstrations for independence, he never encouraged any destructive demonstrations.

Therefore, I would like to encourage my colleagues, irrespective of our political inclinations, let us first denounce and disassociate ourselves from destructive demonstrations. As Parliament, we need to set a precedent; today we are here tomorrow some other people are going to be here, but what legacy are we leaving behind? That is why as a youth Member of Parliament who has also ever participated in demonstrations - I can give an example. When I was still the chairman of the youth in Busoga, and we had a problem of constructing the Kyabazinga’s palace, I mobilised to demonstrate such that we put government on pressure to construct that palace. We never had any destructive demonstration. But right now you go to Igenge, the palace is being constructed. This is because we knew how to conduct a demonstration. There are very many ways we can do so because the Constitution allows us to demonstrate but I do not want to see anybody of our generation encouraging what is going on. 

11.05
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): I thank the President for the address he gave to us and I also thank the Third Deputy Prime Minister for the statement he gave yesterday.

Let me first convey my sympathy and condolences to those who lost their loved ones and those who lost their property in particular but also to Ugandans in general.

During these riots, there were certain acts, which were trying to characterise this as a tribal riot. There were things like looking at people’s physical features, things like you sing Ekitiibwa kya Buganda, you tambula and these in my view made this look as if it were tribal. Let me assure my friends who are not from Buganda that this was not tribal; do not take us in bad faith. This was done by a few elements and it should not be attributed to us from Buganda. I condemn violence, I do not at any one time support violence and I appeal to all Ugandans not to support violence.

When we came here on Wednesday, we MPs from Buganda had threatened to walk out but when you came here you told us that you had been talking to the President and he had asked you to tell us to be calm, he was in discussions with the people of Mengo and he was going to meet us. Most of my colleagues walked out but I stayed here because all those were leading to discussions; leading to peace and not violence and that is why I stayed and I do not regret it.

I have told you I do not support violence; I am a great supporter of discussion. The problems we have now can only be solved through three ways: one, we must discuss if we are going to solve this; number two we must discuss if we are going to solve this and number three, we must discuss and discuss and discuss.

This business of, “Get spears, get mbukuuli, get stones”, is hopeless and can never solve this. Madam Speaker, you look at history, after World War I, World War II, any war you think of, they can fight and fight but at the end of the day they end up discussing. Why do you go to fighting and not go to discussions straight away? So, I am a great supporter of discussion, I hate violence and I will fight violence. 

I support the operationalisation of the regional government. This is overdue and should have been in operation by 2007 and I urge government not to bend; it should go ahead. 

I also support the operationalisation of Article 246. In fact, this is one area where I blame government. If they had put an operational law in place on this Article, maybe this conflict between the Bussabanyala and Kabaka, Ssabaruuli, Ssabamooli, wouldn’t be there. So I urge the government to operationalise Article 246 as soon as possible. 

Let me take this opportunity to thank the people of Luwero for not participating in the violence. I have been in Luwero, I thanked them and I want to thank them in this House. They never participated, and I thank them very much. 

I also thank religious leaders – I have been listening to radios, TVs, no single religious leader has been advocating for violence. (Applause) I value that because I am a supporter of discussions of peace. Religious leaders, thank you very much. 

I also thank His Highness the Kabaka of Buganda for deciding not to go to Kayunga because if he had decided so, these supporters of rioting, supporters of war, would have killed more people. But I thank the Kabaka for not going.

I have been in my constituency in my district and people are crying about CBS because of one thing; announcements. I urge the Minister of Information and National Guidance to find a way of getting my people in Luwero, in Buganda, a station where they can send their announcements. People are dying and they are not burying because CBS is not on air. If they can arrange on UBC and allocate time for our people to get their announcements read, CBS can be in the corner. People want to hear announcements. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.16
MR ANTHONY YIGA (NRM, Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank His Excellency the President for his statement and his patience and tolerance. If it were not for that virtue in him of patience and tolerance, maybe we would have seen a different situation in Uganda, in Buganda right now. So we have to commend him for that approach and we urge him to continue like that.

I would also like to condemn whatever happened on that day. I would like to express my sympathy to those who lost their loved ones and those who lost their property. I also condemn those who perpetrated the violence on that fateful day. All this happened yet we have a government and a Parliament and things went wrong on that day. 

But then whom should we blame? For the last 16 years, since the kingdoms were restored in 1993 - and I suppose, Madam Speaker, you were in Parliament and you participated in the law. When I look at my Kingdom of Buganda, I see that a king was restored but the kingdom was never really restored. That makes me wonder how you can have a king without a kingdom; powers were fettered. 

However, what happened? For the last 16 years, we have been having a government at Mengo. There is a Prime Minister, the Katikkiro, and cabinet ministers. There is a Lukiiko, which is the Parliament of Buganda. They have county chiefs, sub-county chiefs, parish chiefs and sub-parish chiefs. They have a radio, CBS, which is their mouthpiece. They have a Buganda kingdom development strategy for developing Buganda and the government has been contributing money for them. Recently, they were given Shs 2.0 billion for development. 

But for me, what I am really seeing is that the NRM Government allowed Mengo to form a government; that is why they have all those things. We have even been giving them money to operate, like the Shs 2.0 billion. So, we in the government are to blame. Now we are saying we want to talk to them. We say they want political power and we are going to talk to them maybe to give them more political space. I do not know. 

Some of these issues were developed in 1995, in the constitution making process. I participated in collecting views for the Constitution in Rakai District. During that time, in 1993, we moved around Rakai with the late Col Sserwanga Lwanga. The people of Rakai said they do not want a political king. This message was very clear. That is why even when we made the 1995 Constitution, kings were divorced from politics. It became very clear. But the problem is that the provision has been there for 16 years and we have never made an enabling law. That is why we are clashing now. 

We have not had any other consultations to amend that Article in the Constitution so we would rather stick to it until when amendments have been made. We should introduce the law to regulate the relations between the central government and our traditional leaders so that we do not have future stand-offs like the one which we had recently. 

Then we should also support talks. Let them talk; let’s not fight. Everybody should be given a chance to make a contribution to the development of Uganda. I heard some of our colleagues contributing to this debate and they were inflaming the situation. We need to be calm. Some were talking as if all the Baganda in Buganda are in agreement and are supportive of what happened. No, it is not true. (Applause) If there are some few individuals who want chaos, my people in Masaka do not want chaos. My people in Kalungu do not want chaos; they want peace and tranquillity. So, when we are contributing here, let us not blame all the Baganda indiscriminately as if all of them sat somewhere and said, “We should go and cause chaos in Uganda”. It was never so. (Applause)

11.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I rise to support His Excellency the President’s address to this House on this subject.

I too, would like once again to convey my condolences to the Ugandans who lost their dear ones on account of the riots that occurred in Kampala and the surrounding areas between 10th and 13th September this year. Furthermore, allow me to extend my sympathy to all those who were injured as well as those who lost their property during the violence.

I stand here to condemn the acts of violence perpetuated in the supposed furtherance of political agendas. I pray that this august House stands with me in complete rejection of this form of persuasion. (Applause)

As the dust settles in respect of the events that occurred, we are left to question why this had to happen. Not so as to heap blame, but to understand as well as expose perpetuators of this violence. What is even more important is to ensure that we avoid a reoccurrence of these tragic events. It is tragic to note that this phenomenon of violent riots is being introduced in our country. We have had a series of riots. In 2006, the Opposition organised demonstrations and riots. These were followed by the Kayiira riots, which later on were followed by the multiple market riots. We also had the famous Mabira riots in 2007. And now we have had the Mengo riots, all instigated by political elements.

These have been characterised by the burning of tyres, looting, destruction of property and business, and harming and killing of innocent people. As this august well knows, this time round –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, I am tired of the blame game. As political groups, we have been accused of organising demonstrations, including the recent ones. We have also been accused of having organised the market riots yet people in the country and the world at large know that the market riots were as a result of your poor policies in this country. We are not in charge of formulating those policies; it is the government of the day. 

The recent demonstrations relating to Mengo were out of your misinterpretation of the law –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR KIBANZANGA: Okay, let me put him to order, Madam Speaker. Is the minister in order to point a finger at the Opposition without substantiating which group castigated the demonstrations in Mengo? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know why you are so excited about the word “opposition.” He did not refer to the opposition in Parliament. You are not the only ones who are in opposition. Please, proceed.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I hope I will be given more time because this is an attempt to filibuster my submission.

Only yesterday, some Members of the Opposition including hon. Mabikke here gave an ultimatum to government that if government does not meet their demands, they will make sure there are violent riots in Kampala –(Mr Mabikke rose_)– you were on television –(Interruption)

MR MABIKKE: Is it in order for Mr Museveni’s minister not to know the difference between a riot and a demonstration? Is Mr Museveni’s chief whip not aware that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda guarantees the right to freedom of assembly and demonstrations in Uganda? Is he, therefore, in order –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you did not invite me to your press conference. So, I do not know what you said. Please, proceed.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, the message I would like to put across is that we have all the avenues for solving and attending to the problems of this country, all of us as political leaders. It does not pay for one to issue such messages to the country.

The question that arises is that, with some of these premeditated actions, what do you expect the state to do? We have a duty to protect the lives and property of every Ugandan, particularly the innocent ones. As elected leaders, it is both our duty and responsibility to guide, lead and legislate for the better future of this nation. It is an abdication of duty and responsibility if we fail to air our voices in the face of tyranny and actions that we clearly perceive to endanger the oneness of our country. We should all be the champions and promoters of respect of rule of law and order.

I, therefore, would like to commend our leaders and security agencies who came out firmly and decisively to give direction to this country. This is what His Excellency the President said in his address to this House and the nation at large. In his address, the President proposed a clear way forward in asking this House to operationalise Article 246 and the implementation of the provisions of Article 178 of our Constitution. This will address the long standing problem of relations between the traditional institutions and the central government.

Madam Speaker, the bigger issue also came out. This was to do with the unemployed youth. Many of the young Ugandans are now facing prosecution on account of being misled. Our view is that these young Ugandans who were misled and caught up in these riots have huge untapped energies, which we must take advantage of to ensure they are gainfully employed so they can help themselves and be in position to engage in constructive work in this country.

Therefore, the proposal by His Excellency the President that resources be availed in order to ensure that industries and other productive ventures for these youth are established, is one that this Parliament should support so that we can be in a position to contain the problem of the unemployed youth.

The meeting that is supposed to take place today between His Excellency, the President, and the Kabaka of Buganda is a welcome move which we should all support. It is our view, on the NRM side, that it is only dialogue that will help us attend to the problems of this country in a sustainable manner. I thank you -(Interjection)- ok, you can clarify.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. First, I would like to admire the courage and the confidence that you have in shifting blame to an entity that was also taken by surprise by the spontaneous unfolding of events on that fateful day. 

Secondly, the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs made a statement on the Floor saying that government was sorry for how they had mishandled the problem because they also reacted spontaneously and it was very difficult for government and the Police, at that time, to vet those who were arrested in order to know who was guilty, who was participating and who was not participating. But now the Government Chief Whip has come up to vehemently point a finger at the Opposition while the Minister of State for Internal Affairs says that they are sorry for the way they handled the problem because it was so spontaneous that they had no time to vet the victims? I am seeking clarification. Who of you, therefore, is telling the truth?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister clarify.

MR KIVEJINJA: First, I just want to correct the record. We are sorry for what happened: for any loss of life, disruption of life and whatever went on. That is the main issue. 

Secondly, it is not there now; we have contained it and I presume you are happy and you have been able to come up to this assembly not worried that you would be stopped by anybody. So, that was the main point. Nobody said that we mishandled it. If we had mishandled it we would have actually escalated it and we would still be in chaos. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, we have always been very consistent in as far as delivering the message on this matter is concerned. I addressed the press and the nation a number of times as you may remember and I pointed out that we are sorry for the loss of life and property. But I also pointed out that in the initial stages the Police had to exercise restraint. Maybe if the Police had not exercised restraint, the situation would have been different. I do not think there are any contradictions in the message that the NRM Government side is delivering. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a group of people who have not been thanked, that is, the ones who rescued the women who were being undressed because they were wearing trousers. I think you should also thank them.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance and protection. As we talk, the precincts of Parliament have been heavily invaded with private security personnel carrying guns even within Parliament. There is even a fire brigade truck within the precincts of Parliament. We want to be told if we are safe. As we talk even the policemen have been relieved of their duties. I am a war survivor and I cannot legislate when there are guns everywhere. So, we need to be guided on whether this is a routine thing or it is because we are debating the Mengo thing. We do not feel comfortable.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I came from my chambers with my policemen. I left our policemen at the gate. The others came with me in the normal way with the Sergeant-at-Arms here. How can you say that they have been taken away? You are safe.

11.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, while debating the paper presented by the President, I want to be on record as one of those Members of Parliament who have stood up and condemned violence. In doing so, allow me to associate my views with those, which have been expressed by hon. Kibedi, the Youth MP when he talked about championing our causes through non-violent means. I am very happy that he cited some distinguished leaders before us: Neru, Tito and Martin Luther King Jr. I am sure if he had had time he would also have mentioned the lady who started it all, that is, Rosa Parks. 

On the first day of December 1955, Rosa Parks, a black lady in the United States, refused to give up her seat to a white man in a bus. As they normally say, she stood up by sitting down. She was arrested, charged, fined and imprisoned. She appealed and a year later, the Supreme Court of the United States nullified the Montgomery Bus Ordinance and that ended legal segregation in the United States. He also cited many others who did the same. You can champion your cause without violence. Even our Bible says it all. When you look in the book of Matthew -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, hon. Ruhindi, for giving way. It is well known that the National Resistance Movement captured power in 1986 after a protracted struggle in Luwero that was violent. It is also well known that the 27 young men who took to the bush swam in human blood and walked on human skeletons into State House, and that they have retained that same power using the same means. It is also a fact that hon. Ruhindi is a very prominent minister in that government, which captured power violently. Is he now in order to lambaste the Chairman of the Movement and the entire Movement for using violence to capture and retain state power?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The two are distinguishable; proceed.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for reminding my friend and colleague that we should not live in the past, but in the present and for the future. 

I was quoting you a verse in the Bible in the book of Matthew, which says that happy are the peacemakers for the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to them. Actually, I see everybody smiling as if that does not make sense. Happy are the peacemakers for they will be called sons and daughters of God. That is very important. 

When these riots happened on the 10th to 12th September, I was out of this country. I was in Sierra Leone and from there I went to Sarajevo on matters of transitional justice. What happened in Sierra Leone and Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, is well known to us. What happened in Colombia is well known to us. What happened down here in Rwanda is well known to us. 

I want to thank the promoters of international criminal justice. As much as one can run away from his or her own country where such crimes are committed, you will be pursued. As I speak, Carabich is in The Hague being tried; Ford Franco in Sierra Leone died while on trial; and Taylor is on trial. So, you may not escape justice here and internationally. 

Therefore, I urge all of us - let me tell you one thing as a lawyer. Here in the common law countries, we apply what we call adversarial litigation. My colleague, hon. Kawanga, knows it very well; but in the civil law jurisdictions, you simply take a matter to court and you leave it to court. When you take it to court, it becomes a matter of court for them to look for the truth. 

When we come here on very serious matters like these, let us put aside our sides and look for the truth. I may not be the source of that truth, but let us not battle each other trying to defend our own sides when the people who we represent and lead are dying. They are looking to us for counsel. 

Yesterday, while at a workshop, I was talking with my friend the Leader of the Opposition. Although you do not want to listen to the Bible, I quoted to them an interesting verse in the book of First Kings, chapter three, verses 16 to 28, where two prostitutes went to Solomon’s court –(Interjections)- the Bible says prostitutes and I challenge you on that. You can call them mothers if you so wish; there is no harm in doing that, as long as it does not change my message. The message is simple. 

They went to Solomon’s court. One had slept on her child and the child had died. She started claiming her friend’s child. When they were before Solomon, he said this is a very simple matter, all I need is a knife to slit this child into two and each will take a part. The one who had killed hers said, the earlier you do it the better; I want my part immediately. The other one who was the actual owner of the child said, “My Lord, wherever this child lives, let it go as long as it is alive”. 

I want to liken that child to our country. We the leaders in the House are the Solomons of our time. Do we want to split Uganda? To massacre it and be like that lady who said split the child? What do we want? All I am urging my colleagues is: in doing our things, and in championing our causes, let us avoid violence. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the comfort of hon. Otto and other colleagues, I have established that the parliamentary Police service is in the usual places. However, the President is attending Cabinet and probably, since we do not usually meet on Wednesday mornings when the Cabinet sits, that is why it looks different; but they are taking charge of the situation. Our Police are in charge so you are safe. 

11.47
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the issues we are looking at here are basically about four: the blockage of the Kabaka from going to Kayunga; the riots in Kampala and other towns in Uganda; the element of tribalism that exhibited itself during the riots; and the future of kingdoms in Uganda. Therefore, when we are looking at these issues, let us not be selfish and hide ourselves like dogs; that when a dog has hidden its head, it thinks it has actually hidden completely and yet sometimes the entire body is in the open.

I was in Kampala and I was supposed to travel to Gulu on Friday. I could not because passing the area of Bwaise, which is on the Gulu road, was extremely impossible. I, therefore, would like to say that what took place was not a demonstration as some of my colleagues are claiming. It was a riot and this riot affected so many people. I do not think there was control even in this process because there are things that came out of the riot that I felt were beyond focus. I do not think that even some of the people who were participating in this riot were actually rioting for Mengo - either they wanted to steal or do some other things and there were a number of things. Therefore, it was unfortunate that the riots took place.

I sat here on Friday; it was only my committee that was available in Parliament. Nobody was available around here and we sat watching the television footage of WBS. While we condemn the riots, I think we should condemn the Police and the military for the response. If I were the Minister of Internal Affairs, having watched that, I would have resigned.

For example, I watched a mechanic who was caught in his garage, in his uniform, and four policemen descended on him with sticks and started kicking him. Two military police officers joined in with sticks and kicked him until he was finally kicked into Nakivubo Channel. I thought that that was excessively extreme and that is why I say, while we want to face the realities and the truth, we should not run away from what took place. 

Everything is recorded and at least those who have the eyes saw. I think there is a problem with the way our security people responded and I thought that if the Minister of Internal Affairs had not resigned, he should have actually come to apologise for the excesses because it is not enough to just condemn the riots. We should condemn even the excessive response that the Police and Military commanded in this area. It is recorded and history will keep it all.

The problem of Uganda is the problem of money and double standards. I know that traditional leaders in this country are getting money from government. If you do not want them to be political, why do you give them political money? Why? I know that people are now clamouring to become chiefs and kings because they want this Shs 5 million allowance every month. Who sanctioned you to give that money? For example, you are giving this to my chief in Gulu; why? Did the Acholi people ask you to support their chiefs? 

The people who want traditional leaders must support them. It must not come from taxpayers’ money. This is double standards by government. You want to use them like you are using others and when they realise and you can no longer use them, then you turn round and you want to punch them. I think this must stop.

What took place during the riots terribly pushes us back. The element of tribalism came in. I was shocked that people were being identified in some places by their nose. I find this unacceptable to a nation that wants to move forward.

If you look at Ugandan history, most of these kingdoms, for example, are Luo kingdoms. If you go to Bunyoro, why don’t we send away people like hon. Kabakumba because they are Luos? But they are now part of Bunyoro. When I look at my brother seated here, hon. Gagawala, he is just from Lamogi in Gulu, but now he claims to be a Musoga. He is purely a Lamogi from Gulu, but he is living very happily. When I see the Bahima and the Banyankole, I know that the Bahima are not Bantu; the Bahima are Hamites —(Member timed out_)

11.54
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had initially not intended to contribute to this debate bearing in mind some history and the seriousness behind this debate. I was provoked yesterday by the Prime Minister when he alluded to something and considering the time available to him, I felt it necessary that he should have elaborated more on the matter that he raised.

I think the most important point which he raised was that Sir Edward Mutesa told him that he had been let down after the storming of 1966. The thing which I really hope the Prime Minister will in time elaborate to the nation and for the benefit of all of us is; who were the people who Sir Edward was referring to who had let him down? From the allusion of what he raised and from other sources which I had the privilege of finding out, it is clear Sir Edward was let down. 

But where we have come round with the facts of history, the availability of the Hansard and the condemnation which has gone on for so many years, it is amazing we find ourselves very close to the same hole. After all the condemnation for the years against Uganda Peoples Congress and my late father, we come so close to ending up in the same hole. I think we are not learning from history or else we are not even concerned about history or some of us have not read the history. 

I have spent a lot of time in the recent days examining the Hansard of the 60s and a lot of debate touched on many of the matters which we are debating here today and which we have been debating over recent times. For instance, today, 46 years ago in this very House, the Members of Parliament were debating the Constitutional Heads Elections Bill. The date on the Hansard is 30 September 1963 – it is a Hansard of this Parliament. In setting up the constitutional heads, there was a first amendment to the 1962 Constitution, which provided that either a traditional leader or a constitutional head of the district, and that time we had very few districts, could stand for the election of President. In that debate, there was an issue of provincialism because the districts of those days covered large communities. 

Today, we have descended to a point where we are even falling into clanism and even clans are being split into sub-clans. The divisions in this nation which our forefathers were warning us about are ripe and are creating a lot of problems. To find the 1962 Constitution; the original Constitution which has the Order in Council in which some of the problems which we are facing or which precipitated the 1966 Crisis is difficult today. You find the reproduction which includes the first amendment but does not include the Order in Council. We are failing to learn or failing to look at what happened and why it happened. 

I thank the honourable minister and Attorney-General for raising the issue of the mothers and I raise this with a concern. We have talked about the 24 deaths, but honestly, in the Uganda of today, how many people are going to die due to the lack of services? Are we only concerned when it is something political that we all stand up and say the right things? As UPC, we could confidently say that during the period 1966 to 1971, social services did not suffer in Buganda or anywhere in the country -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, if you contributed yesterday, you will not contribute today.

11.59
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): On the 15th of this month, the President came to this House and made a statement. Part of the statement suggested that these riots of 10th to 12th September were the third riots, the first ones being caused by Kiiza Besigye and the other by hon. Beatrice Anywar. I would like to start from that point by saying Kizza Besigye did not cause a riot during the time of his arrest. Instead, the population rose up against the manner in which Kizza Besigye was arrested while on his way from Western Uganda to Kampala.

I participated in the demonstration of “Save Mabira” and I would like to tell this House that because the demonstration was mishandled - and by the way it was sanctioned by the government; but because it was mishandled by the Police, it turned riotous. 

As we address ourselves to the issues of the riots of 10th to 12th of this month, I would like to take this House through what happened prior to the riots. All of us know that the Kabaka was due to visit his people in Kayunga. All of us know that prior to his visit the Baganda youth went to make necessary preparations in that part of Buganda. To their dismay, they were confronted by the Police.

It was not the 7,000 Banyala living in Kayunga who accosted these young men - it was the Police. I would like to ask Government why the Police had to stop the youth from erecting stalls; why the Police barred the Katikkiro from visiting Kayunga to assess the progress of preparations. In fact, whatever happened in Kayunga, apart from the lone voice of Kimeze who is supposed to be the leader of the Banyala, there was nothing like a confrontation between the Banyala and the Baganda, or even the youth or the Katikkiro of Buganda as he attempted to go to Kayunga. Instead, it was the Police that stopped the Katikkiro from accessing Kayunga.

I would like to suggest that the mishandling of the proposed visit of the Kabaka of Buganda to his subjects in Kayunga sparked off the riots in Kampala. There is nobody else to blame for the mess but Government. Government should take full responsibility of what happened in Buganda, in the towns around and in Kampala itself, and for the deaths that occurred during the riots. 

I would like to ask Government; suppose the Kabaka had actually gone to Kayunga, what would have happened? Was there a threat? Couldn’t you, a whole NRM Government, provide adequate security for the Kabaka? What are you telling this country? You are incompetent in as far as providing security for the citizens of this country. Is that what you are telling us?

Under Article 42 of the Constitution, we all know that we have freedom to move wherever we want. Everybody in this country including a baby can move wherever they want and this is guaranteed by the Constitution. Why would the Kabaka who is a senior citizen of this country be stopped from going wherever he would wish to go? (Member timed out_)

12.04
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity. My first point will focus on the tribal element in as far as these discussions are concerned. As the Imam of this institution, allow me quote the Oran; chapter 49 verse 12 says, “All you people, I have created you for male and female and I have created you in various clans and tribes so that you may know each other”.

God the Almighty, Allah subahana watállah created us in various clans and tribes and the basic reason why that was done by the Almighty is for us to know each other. 

You may decide to belong to any party of your choice and you may also decide on the religion of your choice. You may even choose your friend but however much you may like it, you cannot choose your tribe.  So, as Ugandans, we must try as much as possible to live as brothers and sisters because that is God’s creation. (Applause) And definitely as leaders, we must walk the talk. In order to be nationalistic, you must have that in your mind.

I have a small firm but if you go to my firm, you will find the whole of Uganda represented there. I have a school and when you look at the staff, the whole of Uganda is represented. And definitely, we cannot believe in those tribal lines. It is, therefore, my humble appeal to all of us here as leaders to walk the talk. Let us try to ensure that we preach unity and also believe in our different tribes. 

By the time the riots happened, I was in Saudi Arabia. While in my room, someone called me and told me to tune in to Al-Jazeera and see what was going on in our country. It was terrible; I watched the interview on Voice of America where Shaka Ssali hosted the IGP and the IGP was trying to say, “Those were hooligans.” 

They brought in another picture where a man was picked from a house with his family. He said, “No, I am not going anywhere. They told us to be in our houses and to remain at home.” So when he refused to go, he was shot. And those were the pictures. Whoever I was talking to was asking: “Is your country safe? Can we come to your country in such a situation?” 

This is our country. What we must do as Ugandans is to own the responsibilities - let us see where the problem came from - because we are now on post-mortem – so that we do not make the same mistakes. As Government, check yourselves and see where you went wrong. Let the rest of us also check ourselves so that we can move forward.

These days, we have heard the Media Council threatening various presenters on radio. It is now a taboo when you are a presenter on a certain radio to say: “Ssabasajja Kabaka awangale.” That is inciting violence. We have indeed been informed that those who are manning the Broadcasting Council are sending messages to the directors of these radios – you are aware that Kabaka has a series of names and among them are: Enyanja temanyirwa, Magulu nnyondo, Nanyinimu, Ssabasajja, Namunswa, the list is endless. But the moment you mention one of those names, you are inciting violence. This is very dangerous because we know that Ssabasajja Kabaka has so many names. To a Muganda, you have to call him Ssabasajja or Ssabatakka meaning landlord –(Interjection)- I will take it.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I want to inform you that it is not only those that you have mentioned but for us in Buganda we also know our Kabaka as Baffee. (Applause)

MR SEBAGGALA: My appeal to the government and the Broadcasting Council – I am giving you an example, someone was winding up a programme on one of the radio stations and he said, “Ssabasajja Kabaka awangale,” and immediately a message was sent from the Broadcasting Council saying that he was inciting violence. But that is one of Kabaka’s names! (Member timed out_) 

12.11
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since I do not have enough time, I will not share so much, but to begin with, I want to say that some of us are products of war and conflict unlike peaceful environments. We found ourselves in Kampala, an environment that was a little bit different. My life in Kampala since 2000 was giving me an environment which was relatively different from the one I lived the whole of my life. 

I spent more than 15 years of my life sleeping in the bushes because of the war that took place in Northern Uganda. On the day the riots began, I quickly remembered what my late mother who died two years ago (RIP) was telling me when she was very sick. She told me: “My daughter, you came to leadership when you are very young, but the kind of current leadership I see in this country, the kind of government I now see, is taking us back to the Amin days.” (Laughter) And I saw what she was talking about when the riots began. 

For the number of years that I have been in Kampala and central Uganda, I have been watching the way in which the Police handle lives in this country. This is how I begin to see the Amin days coming back. I want to refer you to page 4 of the President’s speech where he tells Ugandans that, “However, be informed that any rioter found attacking other civilians will be shot.” 

If I may refer Members to the Constitution, Article 22, which talks about protection of the right to life, I know that our Police are supposed to preserve life under whatever circumstances. The way they handled the rioters was not proper and by the kind of instructions the President is giving, I see us heading back to the days of Amin. Let me read that Article, “No person shall be deprived of life internationally in executing of a sentence passed in a fair trial by a court of competence ….” Before you declare somebody a rioter, he must have first gone through court where he must be proven guilty before he is shot dead. So, here he is declaring anybody on sight –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Is the honourable member on the Floor in order to impute improper motives on the President of Uganda – that the Commander-in-Chief directed those who were in charge of taking care of security to shoot and kill yet he said, “Shoot to disable” –(Interjections)- shoot to disable and not to kill –(Interjections)– is she in order to impute those improper motives?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I read the statement and he said, “Shoot to disable.” It is there in the statement - I was not here but I read it. Proceed. 
   
MS AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I really appreciate your ruling, but you know, in his report he said 15 people died and the minister in his report says we lost 27 lives. I watched on TV the people who were being shot – how can the Police shoot live bullets at people and you call them rioters? The majority of the people who died were not the rioters. I saw a man being shot when he was closing his shop because he was running away from riots – he was shot dead! I also saw a student being shot and he died in this riot. Was he a rioter? 

Why I speak very seriously on issues of human rights - I am not a lawyer and I have not really come up too much on this, but I am a mother. I was not happy to see civilians who were raising their hands to surrender being cornered, shot, beaten and thrown wherever. This is not my first time to say that - I wish the Minster of State for Internal Affairs were here - this is my second time to mention on the Floor of Parliament that the way he handles Police is not proper -(Member timed out_)

12.18
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Madam Speaker, this is why as a country, we shall continue to experience what we last experienced two or three weeks ago. When we are handling a serious matter in Uganda, we take it as a joke and this is a challenge to us as a nation. We should be mindful of our history and the subsequent distortions, and above all, what has followed. Today in Uganda’s Parliament, we would not be debating a matter between the Central Government and the Buganda kingdom, a matter in which people are losing lives and their properties when we have a government and a State. We have people who have come from all over the world to live together in one State called Uganda. It is a very painful experience - I was not yet born in 1966 and did not know what happened, but today, I am here and I saw it myself and I have learnt a lot. 

I have known that we as leaders have always made a big mistake and keep making it in this country. What happened was merely a question of political greed and failure by the State. This was failure to understand the role and responsibilities of leaders at various levels, arms of government and institutions; otherwise there was no conflict at all. Today, 27 people have perished in cold blood, several properties have been destroyed, and we are talking in State House over the same matter. In Parliament, we are joking over it.  When are we going to learn as people of this country? When are we going to solve the problem of the common man in this country? When are we going to stand firm for the truth and we leave a legacy of honesty that we shall be judged for in future? This is my challenge to this Parliament. 

When I speak here, I do not need to talk about what the President said in this document because it is merely a waste of time -(Interjections)- Uganda is a sovereign State and a Republic. Article 5 of our Constitution is very clear. Article 8(a) of our Constitution prioritises the issue of national interest before personal greed. But why do we meander around when we know our constitutional rights and mandates as the State, leaders and citizens? 

The question of traditional institutions does not even arise here because Article 246 clearly defines what cultural institutions are. In any case, do we need to debate it here? I have a cultural leader in Lango called the Won-Nyaci. We do not have any conflict with the Won-Nyaci as political leaders, and we cannot have it because we respect the Constitution and we observe it, and this is the stand. 

We cannot even associate with this rumour that we are going to ban the cultural institutions. How do you ban your customs? How do you ban your traditions? How do you ban your ancestry? We cannot even waste time to go back to it. We only need to respect our Constitution and believe in Uganda as one people, one nation and that is all. It is not merely a slogan but it is a fundamental issue that Uganda as a country should address itself to -(Member timed out_)

12.23
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also wish to express my condolences to those who lost their dear ones and their property. 

I would like to bring to the attention of the House the fact that these rioters’ behaviour is not a new phenomenon. If we have been keen, the international press has been awash with news particularly from West Africa. You have heard about what happened in Gambia. We heard of the President of Gambia ordering troops to shoot at people who were in a stadium, and in Guinea the troops also used live ammunition on the opposition. I think this has a lot to say about the deteriorating human rights situation. Now Uganda is being included on the list because the people that died were shot by armed security personnel. So, it is really a very regrettable event and I think it should not end here. 

The minister reported that we have these people in the cells and that they are going to be prosecuted. I think it is time for government to own up to the excessive use of force. On page 4 of the President’s statement, he said that when dealing with civilian demonstrations, the security forces are required to use minimum non-lethal force. In the same statement, however, the President actually gives the order to shoot to kill, contrary to Police procedures of anti-riot and UN Principles. 

Was it really necessary to deploy mambas and give orders directly? I do not think so. I happen to be party to a grieving family. A parent with only two children at Mawanda Road here in Kamwokya lost one of them to a stray bullet from a mamba. So, this was use of maximum lethal force as opposed to what the President was saying in the same statement. 

I have also been interested in what the President said on page 7 and how he presented it. When communicating a message, people should be able to decipher or read through the message that you are communicating. I personally found the manner in which the President talked about how kingdoms evolved in Uganda very cynical. To the people he was communicating to, if this was not provocation, then it was actually an indictment on the institution of the Kabakaship. 

He gave a litany of the kings and at the end of it all he actually said all present dynasties including the Kabaka’s, the Babiito’s, have their origins in Ankole and specifically the Basiita clan. So, there is an attempt to reinvent and to reengineer the history of this country for personal interests which, I think, is unfortunate. Personally, I feel his communication must have been interpreted differently by the people who were supposed to receive that message –(Member timed out_)

12.29
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. I would like to start by thanking the President for the statement he made to Parliament and I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for his statement as well. 

I will restrict myself to the statement of the President, but before I do that, I would like Parliament to know that I lived in many parts of Uganda and in Buganda. I lived as a student for three years at St Mary’s College Kisubi. So, I know the geopolitical identity of Buganda. I did not at any time hear of anything about tribal sentiments in Buganda during that time, but now at my age, I am hearing them. I do not know why. 

The President talked of the riots which took place recently as being caused by the Opposition political parties using Mengo, without elaboration. This is a very serious statement and I think the President would probably like to elaborate on this. This is because political parties are represented here and the President is saying that the political parties represented here used Mengo to cause the riots.

Madam Speaker, Uganda is an entity and if we want Uganda to be peaceful we should not use scapegoats. We should be transparent and direct to the point. We know the cause of the riots that took place recently; why is the Government beating about the bush? Why didn’t the Government prevent these riots? They could have been prevented by simply using the Constitution. 

I am amazed with the President when he said, “…it was also a problem in 1966, although Obote also had his own mistakes of not following the Constitution as it then was in resolving the problem.” Has the President followed the Constitution to resolve the problem? What I would like to say to political leaders in this country is that if you want Uganda to become a nation, we have to be transparent, direct and have some integrity to lead the people of Uganda. 

I agree with the President on page 6 when he said that the legitimate interests of Ugandans are peace, security, health, education, employment, access to local markets et cetera. I agree with him entirely. I also agree with him that intimidation and manipulation is not part of the legitimate rights of anybody in Uganda. As somebody has said, we should walk the talk.

On page 10, the President says, “We mean what we say and say what we mean”, and he goes on further to say, “It is advisable that everybody checks himself and sticks to the Constitution.” Are we sticking to the Constitution of Uganda in whatever we are doing? Let us not manipulate the Constitution because in doing that we are exposing the lives of innocent Ugandans to unnecessarily brutal activities.   

People talk of lives as if lives are sold in markets. Lives cannot be compensated; once lost, they are lost for good. I think Ugandans should start to value lives –(Member timed out_)

12.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you very much. I would like to start by thanking the very many members who contributed to this debate with a view to addressing the challenge that we face as a country. 

I was not here when the riots took place, but on the 4th we had a debate in Chicago and I told the people there that we have challenges in our country that we must deal with. I told them of what I called - and I coined this when I came to Parliament - the law of cumulative error. In politics, every mistake you make does not go away. Unfortunately, it is like weighing sugar in the dark. If you have 5 kilogrammes to weigh and you are using a mug, you will scoop the first, second and third mug knowing very well that the scale will not tilt. However, as you reach the 5 kg mark, in the dark you do not know how much sugar to put and you do not know when the scale will tilt. 

Many of our colleagues contributing stood up to condemn. That was not right. All of us should have stood up to regret what happened, to regret that we can still precipitate crisis in our country to an extent that life can be lost on matters that we could resolve through dialogue. It says a lot about our country. I deeply regret what happened because those Ugandans who died, the property that was lost, the uncertainty that has been created should not have occurred. Our biggest problem is that we do not listen. 

When I was responding to the President this year on the 2nd July, and members have copies of my response, in my last part I talked about the software and then there are a number of things which I said which I want to re-state here by reading. I said, “Right hon. Speaker and hon. Members - and you were presiding - as we conclude, we cannot help going back to the reality that the President’s address was totally lacking in the software aspect of the state of our nation. Beyond those concerns that we brought out in our reaction to the President’s address, there are real non material issues that afflict our nation.” 

In one of the paragraphs - I said this as I was posing questions about how we are going to be: “What about the current balkanisation of our country and the boiling hatred amongst Ugandans whether arising from political elites, perceived dominance of one group over the rest of the country, wicked accumulation of wealth by those in power while the rest of the country wallows in poverty or fight over ethnic identity on account of new districts and land? What about the collapse of our common sense of belonging that in the past bound us together as one people and one country?” 

I then posed these questions in conclusion and I said, “Reflecting on our circumstances now, if the Amin coup took place today, what would the response of our people be? What would happen to our country? Honourable members, should we continue to judge the performance of this government and define what we all must do for the future of our country and children merely by using rosy economic figures and selfish gains? Can we continue to bury our heads in the sand and disregard the realities of our country that we all hate to talk about but we cannot run away from? If we sit and do nothing, how will history judge us?” This was in July and then there were riots in September. 

We want to suggest that there is a problem between the state and the Kabaka that warrants the death of Ugandans; no, not at all! If you look at the President’s address, in the first paragraph he conveys his condolences, and in the second paragraph he extends his sympathies; then in the third paragraph, this is what he says - this is the third paragraph and even the preamble to what he is saying is not there: “This is the third time these elements are causing riots, killing Ugandans and damaging property.” Then he talks about Dr Besigye and Anywar Beatrice, and then in paragraph 4, this is what the President says: “Those who think that Uganda is a banana republic and think that they can change leadership by riots are wasting their time”, and there was applause. That was paragraph 4. 

When you go to paragraph 6, the President says this: “So, in 2006 because I had committed myself to host CHOGM here, we had to suffer the arrogance of some of those elements.” Are we arrogant because we contested against him and his party? He goes on to say, “We are now here by ourselves; we do not have any international obligation.” In the next paragraph he again says, “Why does a political leader like Dr Besigye or any other leader promote riots?” 

In paragraph 13, he says, “Be informed that any rioter found attacking other civilians will be shot.” In paragraph 18, he says, “The recent stand-off between the government and the Opposition political parties using Mengo was not just about Kayunga or Bululi tensions.” The last quote is from paragraph 80, and he says “Because of what Uganda went through, we do not want people to play around and there has been too much playing around.” 

The problem we face is very simple: it is politics and dirty politics. Over the years, we have been telling President Museveni and his government that your policy of UPE, your policy of neglecting agriculture, the economic policy that creates disparities between communities and peoples, that renders people unemployed, will cause us problems. The President actually acknowledges by talking about this youth thing. It is a simple political problem. 

The challenge for the NRM is that you are in government and we are in opposition. Our intention in being here is very clear; that at the next election we occupy where you are. Everybody who has been in politics knows that probably 50 percent of your opponent’s victory is derived from your own weaknesses. If you do what you must do as a leader, there is no chance that they will remove you, but if you fail to do what you must do as leader, you bring wrath upon yourself. 

We have a saying in Acholi that, “Romo dengo wange ikom layango”, meaning that a sheep stares steadily at the ones killing it. When it is being killed, actually the sheep closes its eyes. So, we in the Opposition are merely skinning the sheep. The thing that has killed the sheep is its mischief; the sheep does not listen. If only it could listen and correct some of these things. You know, people say simple things about why the leadership of the forces come from one place and you say, “No, you are fomenting sectarianism.” The problem now is that when the Security Council sits, it is a village council. When something goes wrong, it is that village that is looked at.

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): I think let us put the records of the nation correct. There is a National Security Council, which is chaired by me as the Minister of -(Interjections)- that is your problem. That is what you think. The Minister of Internal Affairs is the chairman. There is the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Minister of Defence, Minister for Security and the Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs. That is security. If you are talking about the Army or the High Command, that is a different matter. Do not mix the National Security Council with any other organ. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: What we see now will take a long time to correct. The only thing that we must do is to start correcting. Correction means that we must stop this “we” and “them”. It does not work. It is either all of us or none of us. That is why I am coming to that. 

In other countries, when serious things like these happen, government consults the opposition. They share the decision making processes. They seek for advice from those who will at one time be responsible. Here it becomes a political opportunity to paint the Opposition in bad light on two grounds. One is in the eyes of the security agencies. If you hear everything, it is “We thank the Police, we thank the Army.” When the Opposition condemns, we are told, “You see, these are your enemies!” If you read the President’s statement carefully, and I understand the President fairly well, the message is, “look at those elements; deal with them.” It is very deadly for our country. 

Secondly, there is something which costs nothing except time and willingness. This is sitting and talking together. You cannot sit and talk with me when you make blanket, unilateral, unjustified accusations. That angers me and even prevents me from approaching you. It cannot work that way. 

All I am asking for now, my honourable colleagues and fellow Ugandans, is that let us stop the blame game. Blaming the Opposition will not take away the challenges that we face. We in the Opposition also do not want to inherit a country that is in chaos. The price of leading a country in chaos is too high. We do not want that. So, anybody who is suggesting that we want chaos in this country, please stand back and watch.

I suggest that the Government defuses this tension first because riots occur. Rodney Glen King was shot in California - one black man shot. Whether it was intentional or accidental, but because the Police had always been loading it on the black person, when people saw this picture of the man being shot, there were riots in California the scale of which makes what happened in Uganda look like child’s play. Buildings were burnt; but after that, the government just knew that in moments of emotion there can be excesses. They resolved it by correcting the conduct of the Police. They did not spend time looking for terrorists during riots.   

My first suggestion is that the government withdraws these charges. (Applause) I can assure you, it will do a lot of good. You can then follow up specific cases if they are there; but I can also assure you that it does not help.

Secondly, let us stop the propaganda that soils the politics of this country. Let me give you one simple example. I have a secretary for elections. We had a party meeting the other day and somebody called him – he is from Western Uganda - quarrelling and asked why FDCs were allying with Baganda to finish Westerners. The propaganda is going on out there that FDC is allying with Baganda to finish Westerners. Fortunately, I am going to Mbarara this weekend; I will address a rally there too. So the second appeal I am making to the government is, let us stop the propaganda so that we have an opportunity to work on the challenges that we face. 

The last appeal to the government is for it to have a long and hard second look at its policies. This is so important because if we continue with the current policies on the economy, agriculture and the kind of funding we give to agriculture policies, I can assure you that you will generate an explosive mix that will sweep all of us from leadership.

I have no reason whatsoever to even imagine that the Kabaka of Buganda has any ill intentions towards the wellbeing of this country. (Applause) He maintained a very dignified poise. There are certain things the President said relating to his refusal to answer his calls. We have no way of verifying because the man who is called has not spoken for us to know if he said this or that. (Applause)

That the traditional kingdoms are here pestering will not help us address the challenges related to them. Hon. Reagan Okumu made reference to our traditional leaders. I have one in my place who got 250 iron sheets, but we had a problem because that traditional leader is interested in Government land, something I opposed. So, he has always considered me a bad person. However, I got information that one time he asked someone why he should not support the person who has given him something. If I were to take the position of the President versus the Kabaka, I would rein that traditional leader and even hound him out of that place. However, I realised that in doing that I would not solve the problem that he personally faced. 

It is very sad that this happened to our country, but it is also a big eye opener that mistakes and the politics of this country must be addressed well. If we do not do it that way, I can assure you, let nobody deceive you that ours is a different world. The chaos we have seen in Somalia and Rwanda, if we do things the wrong way will happen here as well. So, it is incumbent upon us to address these things correctively. Thank you very much.

12.59
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that I would not have stood up to contribute to this debate, but I would like, with due respect to my colleagues from Masaka, to say that on behalf of the people of Masaka, which is my constituency, I thank the President for the manner in which he handled this matter. Had he not intervened at the right time, things would not have been the way they were.

I also stand to thank the Mengo Government for reacting the way it did. It showed professionalism, dignity and calmness. I stand to convey condolences to those families which lost their relatives. I also stand to express my sympathies to those people who lost their property. 

Further, I stand to oppose colleagues who think that whatever took place was tribalistic as far as the Baganda are concerned. I would like to refer my colleagues to history. On so many occasions, we have had friends thanking Buganda Kingdom for having tolerated, accommodated and housed many tribes in Buganda. Therefore, on behalf of Buganda, let me reiterate Kabaka’s effort to behave as a father and be accommodative by doing what he did to ensure everybody lives in Buganda peacefully.

I would like to say that I have stood to challenge Parliament and the leadership to trace the root cause of this problem. I think all of us have not been able to articulate the root cause of this problem yet it is our challenge to tell the people we lead that actually we are in charge of solving this problem. However, we cannot solve it unless we pinpoint the root cause. I, therefore, challenge this Parliament to do the work rather than accusing one another. We should come up with the right solution to this problem.

On behalf of the people of Masaka, I appeal to the President to open up the radio stations. My people are trying to organise a delegation to meet the President to appeal to him to open especially CBS Radio –(Interjections)– yes, for many reasons. I am partly an economist and I know communication has been one of the industries which Uganda has been trying to develop, and CBS Radio is one of those industries that have been employing Ugandans. 

Many of my brothers and sisters who had been employed by CBS and other radio stations –(Interjections)– Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for protecting me. What I was saying is that the radio stations are one of those industries that offer employment to Ugandans, which the President has been concerned with so much. My brothers and sisters that had been employed by these radio stations would like to keep their jobs. If government has any directions to give as far as broadcasting is concerned, I think they have got a right way to do so. I appeal to government to really open these offices so that our employment may be in place. I appeal to government to ensure that communication is one of the ways through which we do training. I know that three quarters of CBS radio’s programming is not about attacking government but to train people using the Luganda language. It has been training us a lot in many aspects –(Member timed out_)

1.04
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Forty seven years after independence, as an advocate of national integration and nation building, I must say I was saddened on that day when an equivalent of urban terrorism without clear command and control – which some people have called sporadic, spontaneous riots - took place in Kampala. 

On that evening, Members of the Committee of National Economy were traveling to Jinja and they were trapped. The two vehicles had to return to Parliament although some of us who had taken the Goma-Kayunga Road managed to get to Jinja. The others joined us in the morning, but on coming back, we were again trapped at Seeta on Friday evening.

When I tried to travel to my constituency with some of my workers, the situation could not allow. They had to hand themselves over to Kawempe Police because it had proved unsafe for them to proceed. They had moved ahead of me and I had to pick them from the Police station. 

That was an ugly scenario, which should not be happening in our country. It is a regrettable situation and I would like to condemn, in the strongest terms possible, any extremists and anybody who took part in abetting the riots. 

But as a social scientist I would like to say that as we discern, diagnose and possibly try to prescribe the ills and maladies of the body politic of this country – could this be an economic problem as the President rightly talks about unemployment of the youth? Can we make sure we get these people gainful employment so that whichever selfish people may want to use them does not find them redundant? Could it be a problem of the haves and the have-nots? I am saying these things because I am aware that those with businesses could not be involved in this kind of mischief. Is it a resource problem –(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Recalling the history of this country, we are informed that in 1980 a group of people aggrieved by the way this country was being managed, particularly the management of the elections, went to the bush and started a war. That, I understand, is the reason we are here today –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MS KAMYA: The point of order, Madam Speaker, is: is the Member in order to impute that whoever disagrees and finds a way of disagreeing with the others, the way the people who went to the bush to fight the famous Luwero war did, is redundant and unemployed, when people who are employed and not redundant can actually go to fight a war?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have been here since the debate started – on both sides of the House there has been this view that some of those people were actually idle and that is why they were captured and put into prison. It has been said from both sides of the House [An Hon. Member: “We are going to check the Hansard.”] I said “some”. So, he is in order because both sides of the House have said it. Please, proceed.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for your usual wise ruling. What I was saying is that we need to discern, meaning that the problem is complex and you may be making a superficial analysis and sweeping a lot of things under the carpet. I actually used the word “discern” deliberately.

I do not support the abolition of kingdoms. I can tell you that in the inter-lacustrine region, all tribes you are talking about consist of people who belong to one nation. We did not have these extreme levels of problems. What I would like to say is that if we accept the cultural institutions and kingdoms as they stand in the 1995 Constitution – we have made one omission. The cultural institutions are used in community work, primary health care, and Prosperity-for-All to fight poverty. They could help us in environmental protection except the modern state has not used them to fight these problems by financing them through budget support. If we financed them, they would be more relevant to the modern times. We can have modern kingdoms in modern states. That can only happen if they are financed by the state through budget allocations, not hand outs.

I also would like to add that we need this time to use our Parliament. I do not know whether we are communicating effectively now but given the scenario that happened; given the threat this country is facing, I do not see effective communication as Parliament. How I wish we could communicate and be understood out there to condemn violence and to advocate for peaceful means of co-existence! We can have unity in diversity. It is a blessing for this country to have multiple tribes; it is not a curse and –(Interruption)

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Mukitale who was a leading crusader against the Balaalo to make a U-turn and pretend that he is now championing for unity in diversity when we all know his true self? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Hon. Mukitale’s problem was different; the Balaalo just invaded his area. (Laughter)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As leaders who protect and lead the weak people, you must stand up and be counted among those who protect the weak when they are invaded by the powerful -(Member timed out_)

1.14
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I watched the riots in Kampala from Papua New Guinea where I was delivering a paper on affirmative action in Uganda. You are aware that Papua New Guinea is a member of the Commonwealth, but out of a Parliament of 109 they have only one woman who is not only the only Woman Member of Parliament but the only woman minister. Having delivered a very powerful paper, which has enabled that country to agree to adopt to preserve seats in their elections next year, which will bring in 22 women, you can imagine my horror when I watched on BBC what was happening in my own country, which I was very proud of. 

A 17 year old girl then asked me, “Are you from Uganda?” I said, “Yes.” I wish hon. Franca Akello were in the House. Unfortunately, she has moved out (Whereupon Ms Franca Akello entered the chamber) There she is; I wanted you to hear this! This young girl asked me, “Are you from that country, Uganda?” And I said, “Yes.” She said, “That little country where they like fighting all the time?” I asked her why she was saying that and she told me, “I have watched this film about this other president of yours, Amin.” I had no words.

I want to tell hon. Franca Akello that she is extremely lucky that she was too young to have lived during Amin’s time unlike some of us. Otherwise, I very much doubt whether you would stand up on the Floor of Parliament and say what you just said today. You are lucky you missed that experience -(Interjections)- I want to say that the riots which happened really took us back very many years and I am particularly pained that not only did the riots happen in Kampala but -(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: The Constitution of Uganda is very clear that anybody above 18 years with the qualification of A’ Level can be elected a Member of Parliament. Is it, therefore, in order for the hon. Lagada to belittle hon. Franca Akello that she is too young to represent people in this House and yet, Madam Speaker, you know that the reason we go to school is to study history and to learn from it? 

Earlier on when I said that the Bahima are not Banyankole because they are Hamites. I was not there when they were migrating from Ethiopia but I learnt from History that actually the Bahima are not Bantu. Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable member to come to this House to belittle others by saying that they do not understand anything because of their age and yet we are all here at par and we are representing old and young people equally from the various constituencies we are coming from?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think hon. Lagada is belittling the capacity of hon. Akello. She is only taking issue with something she said today. That is all.

MS LAGADA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling. I was saying that it pains me to have heard that not only did the rioters target very innocent people - we all know the stories of what happened. I have learnt with a lot of pain that women, and specifically women originating from the Western region of Uganda, were raped and they have taken to Mulago Hospital and they have been referred to Police to go and make statements. So I wonder! They were raped by their neighbours by the way and we do not want to know who did because you know who did it. It is painful. Why is it that men always want to fight their wars inside the bodies of women? How can I be living with a neighbour all this time and then something silly like a riot takes place and he comes to rape me? And now we are sitting here in the comfort of this Parliament and saying that we should not even condemn the rioters!

Madam Speaker, this country has taken too many strides backwards. I want to say to my honourable colleagues and to the nation that people say that history repeats itself but we all know that it is not history that repeats itself but it is foolish men who never learn from the mistakes that they made in the past. Therefore, even as we sit here, we must rise to the challenge if indeed we are the calibre of people that hon. Reagan Okumu was raising a point of order about. If we are that calibre of people then we must rise to the challenge that Uganda faces. 

I want to quote 2 August 1993 -(Interjections)- I am not worried about coming back. It is the people who are worried about coming back who are taking this nation backwards because you speak for the gallery and the voters and not because you have conviction. I am a woman of conviction and coming back or not never worries me.

I want to quote from that address of the President to the Lukiiko in August 1993: “With the revival of democratic governance by the National Resistance Movement in 1986, a process that is being deepened all the time, we have a very good opportunity to define the relationship between modern, democratic, and national institutions on the one hand and traditional institutions, which by the nature of the present evolution of our society tend to cover only parts of the country, on the other hand.”

I have quoted this because I would like this House to rise to that challenge. As we make a law to operationalise Article 178, we must make a law that enables us to co-exist peacefully as a nation unless we, the Members of this House, want to kill Uganda as a nation.

I was in the Constituent Assembly like some Members I am seeing here and as we sit in this House and debate, I feel a sense of déjà-vu. Article 178 was created specifically to address the question of Buganda –(Member timed out_)

1.23
LT COL BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the communication and presidential address to Parliament. On behalf of the people of Isingiro and on my own behalf, I convey condolences to those who lost their dear ones and sympathies to those who were sick, aggrieved and in hospital, those who were raped and the policemen who died as well as those who suffered in the process of executing their cardinal mandate of keeping law and order.

The riots that befell the Kampala City and surrounding areas were a regrettable incident. That fateful evening, I was in Kumi and travelling with hon. Dr Epetait. I came across these riots in Mukono at night. What I want to say is that while it is the freedom of people to demonstrate peacefully and while we must uphold people’s rights, when the riot turns out to be a riot for killing people, raping women, stealing property and capturing public facilities like roads; in Mukono I found a truck burning and many international trucks stuck. As leaders of this nation, we must come out and condemn this act regardless of where we belong politically and culturally.

I want to speak on behalf of those people who are not here; the enforcement agencies. In the President’s communication on page 4 he says, “Law enforcement officials shall not use firearms against persons except in self defence or in defence of others against the eminent threat of death or serious injury, to prevent the perpetration of particularly serious crime involving grave threats to life, to arrest a person presenting such a danger and resisting their authority or to prevent his or her escape only when less extreme means are insufficient to achieve this objective. In any event, international lethal use of firearms may only be made when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.”

In this city sometime back, a renowned lawyer resisted arrest and opted to lie down. The mode of peaceful arrest or maybe by invitation collapsed and they lifted him. When police posts and stations are attacked, when a bus carrying people is stopped and set ablaze, the mode of operation changes from use of tear gas because it has collapsed. I think we should stand here to help these enforcement agents to pass laws that enable them to protect our lives. 

I do not agree with those who think this was a Baganda thing. The truck that was burnt in Lukaya was a Muganda’s truck. The one, which was burnt in Mukono was also a Muganda’s truck. Raping women, grabbing women’s necklaces and handbags, all sorts of things! We should come here not to condemn these enforcement agencies but to condemn the acts and to help them execute their mandate by passing laws that actually meet the challenges –(Member timed out_)

1.29
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): I thank you, Madam Speaker and I take the Floor to join those who have appreciated the President’s communication to Parliament on the situation we witnessed recently. Let me also join those who have regretted and I do very much regret the loss of life, property and business that we witnessed over that period. I would like from a point of view of information to let you know that this situation could get worse; this situation could have precipitated our country into a very serious crisis.

I, therefore, take this opportunity to commend the Army as an institution, to commend the Police for having arrested that situation. (Applause) 

There are situations where the dividing line between personal liberty and stability of the country can be very thin. There are times when the dividing line between personal liberties and the stability of the country can be very thin.

I will just give you one example. We are always praising countries like the US, countries like the UK for the liberties that those people who live there enjoy. We have had occasion to be told on the Floor of this House that in the UK when they were struggling to deal with terrorism, the government took a Bill to the Parliament to request that they should be given authority to detain people for a period of up to three months [Mr Mabikke: “It was opposed”.] It was opposed, you are right hon. Mabikke but Parliament was realistic enough not to oppose it completely and they gave 28 days and of course, you can imagine having to detain someone for 28 days without knowing or without recourse to go to the courts. This just shows you that there are times when the dividing line between liberty and stability can be very thin.

We are working against the background of a country with a very young population, against a background of high levels of poverty and unemployment and in a situation where we seem to be adopting politics based on populism. That is why you find people attracted to speak in a way which they believe will give them popularity but at the same time, that way you can incite violence that you probably did not intend to do so.

I have had people saying that the riots were spontaneous. That is far from the truth. This violence, this riot was very well planned. It is true that some of the people who joined the riots did not even know where the riots started. Some people thought this was a time to break into a shop and get a radio. Some people thought this was a time to go into a bank and get money. Therefore, we as leaders when we speak, it is different from when an ordinary person speaks. We have to weigh the words that we use in the type of situation that we are dealing with.

Unfortunately, the Leader of the Opposition left after speaking, but I take solace in the fact that hon. Okumu, hon. Kibanzanga and hon. Bihande are here. On the occasion that my brother hon. Bihande was wedding in church, I spoke in the presence of these brothers and I appealed to them that although were at a wedding, we were leaders. And of course my sister is here. I said that the way we lead this country must be nationalistic. We must speak the truth at all times even if it is not in our favour. I said so and I gave two examples to demonstrate what I was saying. 

I quoted the late Mwalimu Nyerere who was enemy number one of Amin but when the Israelis came to Entebbe to assault our country, Nyerere was the first leader to condemn the Israelis. (Applause)

I also commended Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu, although he is on the Opposition. I said two things about Muntu. Number one, when the late President Milton Obote said, “No, those people who killed people in Luwero were NRA but they said this was UNLA.” Muntu had the option, because he is in the Opposition, to side with the late President Milton Obote but he said “No although, I am on the Opposition, I was there, I know the people who killed.” I commend Muntu for that.

During a by-election which brought hon. Bihande to Parliament, people came to me and said, “The people of FDC are bribing people”. I said, “Like who?” They said, “Muntu”. I said, “No, I do not believe that Muntu will bribe people”. He is on the Opposition but when I have worked with someone, I can differentiate between the facts that he is in the Opposition, I am on a different side and this is what we need to -(Mr Akena rose_)- Hon. Akena, if you could wait a little bit; let me first make my point, I will allow you a little later. So, it is very important that we as leaders must walk an extra mile beyond populism in order to save our country. 

I have listened to honourable members who have spoken this morning; I just want to pick on two colleagues as a way forward.

First, there was what hon. Akena said about quoting history and I walk along with him. He said that in 1966 something like this happened. I would like us to continue debate on that theme because what he was saying were facts but we can also explain it differently.

Secondly, the Leader of the Opposition; I really want to request him – I will paraphrase what he said because he said government should consult the Opposition. I would go an extra mile that from either side, we should make every effort to consult. It should not be a one-sided thing. (Applause) I would love the day that hon. Latigo would go and sit at the gate of State House and say, “President Museveni, I want to speak to you about Uganda.” I would riot with him; I would join him and sit there too because in that way, we would be able to solve our problems using means, which are not destructive.

So, honourable colleagues, we must condemn violence. We must always use dialogue to solve our problems and the Opposition itself has a role to play in initiating dialogue between it and government. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sixty nine Members have contributed. So, let me invite the Third Deputy Prime Minister to make brief responses. 

1.38
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): I first of all thank Members for such lively contributions to this debate on the President’s address and also response to the statement, which my ministry gave to Parliament. 

I think the gist of the debate as I followed it throughout was that nobody actually condoned the riots. The riot’s after effects were disastrous and I could see melancholy on each and everybody’s face that it actually happened in our country during our term of office, we who are in government both in the Opposition and on the Government side. So, I think that is a very good sign and a starting point that we all wish good to each other and wish good to the whole country. 

There are some specific areas whereby the security forces have been condemned as it were for what was called excessive force. But as it has been pointed out by one of the contributors, once the situation changes, the rules of the game also change. We knew exactly - and we are still following that up – that this thing was not spontaneous. We only took precautionary measures hoping that it would not be able to escalate. But as soon as we faced the situation, we found ourselves in a very destructive situation and we had to take the unpalatable decision to ensure that all things must be done to stop it and bring the country to order so that we could have time to reflect on it because it is something that is not happening everyday and on which we have got experience. 

But we are happy it ended so that we can then have time for a post mortem; to examine why it happened, how it happened, how we handle it and get a way forward. And this debate has given us that starting point. I thank everybody who has contributed in that direction very much. (Applause)

I would want to ask everybody to take advantage of some of us around. These situations, if at all they are not handled badly, as it has been pointed out by the youth leader, the majority of the population which is under 50 will be able to again undo what has been done and set a new pace for their generation. So, please, let us be patient. I would like the young fellows to be patient and study their history because most of these things happen because we seem to appear to be the first fellows to witness them as if there have been no other ways of how things have been handled. If we do that, we shall be clearer. 

In the President’s speech, he pointed out that maybe the mistakes, which we saw, were due to the laxity in government not implementing some of the constitutional provisions and that is the job of Parliament. For example, Article 178 does not leave a cultural leader in a vacuum; there will be an elected government and the cultural leader will be the head, as the Queen in England is. There will be no room for people to smuggle themselves behind those courts and begin pursuing their political ends under the guise of a cultural leader. So, I think the solutions will come and I will ask that the Opposition should be very interested in how we are going to make laws because this is our job. We must make good laws, which can govern this country and make this country governable. 

We should stop imagining that we should only worry about the next elections. We should advance a little more and be statesmen so that we worry about the next generation. For whatever elections we have, you are producing children and you would want to leave them in a country, which is peaceful. 

The points about the Police, I have insisted that this time I want the organs of the state to be seen by the population so that the whole thing does not hinge on the political whims of a political leader. And you have seen that they have not been political statements from the ministry because Article 212 gives specific responsibilities to certain organs. These are functions of the Uganda Police Force, because there have been riots and demonstrations in France and Germany but you never hear the Minister of Internal Affairs but the force that is supposed to keep law and order. 

The functions of the Uganda Police Force shall include the following: “To protect life and property; to preserve law and order; to prevent and detect crime; and to co-operate with other civilian authority and other security organs established under this Constitution and with the population generally.” 

In other words, once the Police detects that there is likely to be a problem, they are the ones supposed to bring the matter to us and do not think that this thing came out of that. We did receive conclusive reports that if at all the Kabaka’s visit went on without being harmonised, it was likely that there would be problems –(Interjections)- just hold on because that is not the way to do it and that is exactly what I did because now, the very reason - if you could see that riots could go on to that extent because of blocking only the Katikkiro, I do not know what would have happened if the Kabaka had gone and something had happened to him. That is my job and responsibility of the State and, therefore, preventive action is part of security action. 

I would also want my friend the –(Interjections)- no, there is a friend who quoted the Qoran –(Laughter)- the one who quoted the Qoran – I think at this time we are also trying to learn. I could also tell him one incident. You know that Mohammed himself started his preaching in Mecca. He was driven away and he had to go to Medina. He stayed there for ten years and came back to Mecca with a force ready to conquer. When they went there and the people saw they were likely to be overwhelmed, they said, “Please do not attack us, but let us make an agreement that from next year onwards, your people will be free to enter,” and they made an agreement. 

One of his diehards started writing down the agreement – he of course started with, “In the name of God the most merciful,” and he says, “I, Mohammed the Prophet of God,” the other person says, “No. If at all we had accepted you to be the prophet of God, there would be no problem. You are Mohammed, the son of Abdullah.” 

The diehard who I said is the equivalent of those who say, “Kabaka tayogera”, said, “I cannot even put that in my writing. I know you are a prophet of God.” He said he knew Mohammed knew it was likely that there was going to be bloodshed. But what he could do? He said, “What is it that you want? You do not accept me, okay.” He then took his pen and crossed out “Mohammed the Prophet of God,” and put, “Mohammed, the son of Abdullah,” and he saved a situation. From then onwards, even the people in Mecca up to the present know that Mohammed is the Prophet of God. So this is the foresight of a leader. You should always weigh a situation that, when I do this, I can save a lot of blood. 

About going to the bush; you must understand that we went to the bush; we announced and made a memorandum for Obote that we are declaring war on him because of this and that. Let the people who want to oppose also go and do it –(Interjections)- that is it; it was declared and we did it. Please, in other words, do not compare situations that are not the same -(Interjections)- No, please! (Laughter) No, I am not going to be personal, but I am just giving you part of that history so that you do not compare the two things -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I rise on a point of order. The Third Deputy Prime Minister and the former MP of Bugweri has just stated that those who want to go to the bush should make a pronouncement before going. Is that the spirit of someone who is concluding the whole debate; a person of his age to encourage people to make pronouncements before going to the bush and bringing memorandum? Is he in order to bring his rebel mentality back to this House? (Laughter) Are you in order? You were not even among the 27; you were a morale booster. (Laughter) 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I heard him actually talking about Mohammed – yes, that is what he was talking about. 

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you very much. I did not call on - I said, “You do not need to cause riots in order to get back into government.” The Constitution is here and he who wants, the way to come here is clear. Go to the elections and if you are defeated that is it; you are defeated. If you come, you come –(Interjections)- I was defeated; but I was elected -(Laughter)– the Movement Government is still in power - it was elected and the Constitution allows the President to nominate. So we are not acting outside the Constitution –(Interjections)– whichever but it is through the Constitution and so the question does not arise. 

Let us not take these matters lightly; they are not a joke. Let us know that when we want to get power, let us not make riots when there is a proper way of doing it. If the proper way is followed, then everything will be good for you. You wait; take your time and you will be around. I also started the struggle when I was 19, but did not become a cabinet minister until 53 – so please, be a little patient. I do not want to go into that, otherwise we shall lose the gist of the debate. 

The government is really happy that you have debated the speech of the President and you have taken the facts. I think from these ones, we should take a vow that such a thing should not again occur in our country. We should all make everybody take whatever steps they can in a small or big way, to ensure that, that path we visited as a country in the unfortunate month of September 10th and 11th should not again occur in our country. Thank you very much for the debate.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you. I rise to move a motion under rule 46. Considering the gravity of this matter and the fact that we need to dig deep into the root cause and all problems associated with this chaos; and the fact that the minister left some information in the statement; we do resolve that a select committee –(Interjections)– be established to probe further into these matters and come up with recommendations to address these issues in this House. I do move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ordinarily we do not debate this kind of statement from the President, but because it was a matter of public concern, we allowed the debate and I have allowed so much time for you to express your views, including the way forward. 

Secondly, part of the issues we have been discussing are in court and investigations are going on. People are in court and they have been charged; some of them are on remand and some are on bail -(Laughter)

The third reason is that as a Speaker, I am concerned that even the committees which have got work in this House are not doing their work. I am not prepared to add another committee to waste time when the ordinary work which we have is not being done. So, there will be no select committee. Let our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs look at it because we have members from both sides of the House. They can follow it up in the normal course of events, but there will not be another select committee. 

1.53
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Central Division, Kampala): Madam Speaker, maybe if the select committee cannot work, there are pertinent issues which we need to investigate but not necessarily probing into matters which are in court. One, we were told that the people who were killed were 27, 20 of whom were killed by security agencies and we do not know about the seven. These are matters of – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, let the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs follow it up on our behalf. It has got members from both sides of the House. Where is the time for you to do it? 

1.56
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Madam Speaker, in the course of our debate, there were some important matters that were alluded to. I do not know whether the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs will be able to handle some of them. For example, the Deputy Prime Minister raised an issue that after the loss of elections in 1980, there was a memorandum which was put out before people going to the bush; I have never seen or heard of that memorandum. 

The Minister of Defence alluded that the UNLA were the only forces killing people in Luwero; I am not sure what the NRA or their predecessors were also doing. Will the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs really be able to holistically handle these matters including the history? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under the Constitution, the powers of Parliament have got powers of the High Court. They can summon anybody to receive evidence on any matter. Yes, they can do it, and if you want, they should continue doing it. 

1.58
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Madam Speaker, my concern is that there hasn’t been consensus on the cause of the riot. It has been said that the riot was caused by the Opposition and the Opposition say we did not. We are seated in this Parliament with the hope that the past problems are over and we can continue to sit in this Parliament as representatives of the people, but this riot of a few weeks ago actually pre-empts that perception. 

I think that important matters concerning the security and stability of this country have been raised and for that matter, I beg and request that the question of a motion be given due consideration. If we are giving it to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, we should give them a timeline and a reference. We need to get to the bottom of this matter because it could happen again and then we shall sit here and debate it again, and more people could die. 

Madam Speaker, let the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs take on this matter within a timeline because like someone said, there are looming matters. There is the Ssabamooli; what are you going to do about that? We haven’t even addressed that issue and it is in two weeks time. What if it happens again? I think we should not sweep this matter under the carpet. We need to give it the seriousness it deserves so that we even know how to handle the Ssabamooli. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NDEEZI: Madam Speaker, all Members here are aware that the decision of the Speaker is final. A Member proposed to move a motion and you gave good counsel and advised the Member that you could not establish this so-called committee. Is it in order for some Members to challenge the ruling and try to bring up this debate again?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they are not. Hon. Members, let our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs deal with this matter. We ask them to do it expeditiously in view of the other looming problems. 

The other matters of whether it was the government or the Opposition are in court and after hearing evidence, the court will decide who was responsible for starting what. But the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs should give us a report in two weeks. It is very urgent. Thank you. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE ON THE SUICIDE BOMBING AT THE AMISOM HEADQUARTERS IN MOGADISHU ON THURSDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2009

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you requested the Minister of Defence to give us information about this suicide attack and it is ready. 

2.01
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you have just clarified, the statement is being distributed. The main objective of this statement is to formally inform honourable colleagues and Members of the House of the sad incident that happened in Mogadishu on 17th of this month. But I would also like to take this opportunity to briefly update honourable members of Parliament on the situation in Mogadishu in Somalia, and the status of our troops in that country. 

On Thursday, 17 September 2009, suicide insurgents belonging to the Al Shabab joined a convoy of the Burundi contingent leadership. The Ugandan troops are housed in one place and the troops of the Burundi Army are also housed elsewhere, but from time to time, they meet to discuss their work in Somalia in Mogadishu. 

On this fateful day, a number of Burundi troops were moving from their area of operation to go and join their fellow leaders on the Ugandan side. Unknown to those who were moving, these Al Shabab, who in the past had stolen vehicles belonging to the UN – they stole these vehicles from Baidoa. So somehow they watched their movements and they got into - I think - two or three UN vehicles and joined the convoy to go towards where the Ugandan troops were housed. They had wired themselves and the vehicles with bombs. When they arrived at the gate they started exploding the bombs. That is what honourable members you should appreciate; that on this particular occasion, there was deceit. Vehicles came unnoticed, joined the convoy and that is what caused the tragedy that happened that day. 

A total of 21 people were killed; 12 of these were our brothers from Burundi including Major General Juvenile Niyoyunguriza who was the Deputy Commander of AMISOM. There were also four Ugandan soldiers killed, one Somali civilian and the insurgents who came to blow themselves and kill others. We pray that the souls of these brothers rest in eternal peace. 

The four Ugandans that perished in this tragedy were Warrant Officer, Okumu Donald from Nebbi District; Wabumba George from Manafwa; Turyasingura from Rukungiri District; and Ahimbisibwe George from Kanungu District. 

There have been questions from responsible leaders and we take them seriously that soldiers who die at war fronts should be received at public ceremonies. We take that suggestion very seriously. But I also want to take this opportunity to inform you what the practice has been to date. Whenever a soldier dies, whether in combat or from natural causes, we make every arrangement possible to deliver the soldier to his home village and appropriate military honour is given to that soldier when he is being buried. 

We are always very careful in the Army leadership – if you want to involve policy you have to be sure that you have thought through the matter. For example, if a soldier dies in Karamoja, you take him to Kasese and bury him there, the way we are already doing. Then another soldier dies in Congo or Mogadishu and when he arrives, you give him different treatment, we can have problems. That is why we have to think it carefully before we can adopt it as policy.   

So in as far as this incident was concerned, that is the brief of the events. But as I said, I thought that I would also take this opportunity to brief you on other aspects on what is happening in Somalia. You will have learnt from the press that some disease attacked the troops in Somalia in Mogadishu, and up until now, we had not officially spoken about this situation. So I want to take this opportunity to brief you on it as well.

This disease presented in certain forms; the most constant feature was that whoever was attacked started having both their legs swelling. In addition, a combination of other features were also observed including muscle pain, joint pain, palpitations, meaning that you become conscious of the beating of the heart; abdominal pain, headache, fever and chest pain. 

I have here a table which helps us to lead to some conclusions. At the time this epidemic occurred in Mogadishu we had 1,630 Burundi troops. Out of those, 73 were attacked by this disease and in medical language there is something we call ‘attack rate’ – the percentage of the people attacked. In this case, that was 4.5 percent. And of those who were attacked, four Burundi soldiers died. 

We also talk of the “case fatality rate”. Of those who got affected, how many die and the percentages are there; I do not need to go over them. But the total number of troops affected by the disease was 153 out of whom seven died, giving us a percentage of 4.6 dying out of those attacked. But I am glad to indicate to you that the disease has now been contained and no new cases have been reported for some time now.

At the time we framed this document, we had not received the final report from WHO, but I have the pleasure to say that just as I came to the House, I got the report of the examinations that have been going on. But at the time of the attack, the doctors were following three trends: Was this an infection? Was this poisoning? Or was this something to do with deficiency in the diet? Therefore, supportive measures were being taken. In case it is infection this should be done; in case it is poisoning this is done; and in case it is a food problem, this is done; and that helped. That is why, although 153 people were attacked, we lost only seven troops because steps were taken to try to contain the situation.

The final results are out and they have indicated that this was not an infection or poisoning. It was a deficiency in the food that the troops have been eating and the deficiency identified is called Vitamin B1 or thiamine -(Interjection)- I am still on page 2, and I did say, hon. Lukwago, that as I came to the House I received the final report. So, as far as paragraph 2.4 is concerned, I am giving additional information arising out of the report that I received.  

While I said that the cause is not known, I am now saying that it is known because we have the report. The cause is a deficiency of Vitamin B1 which is presented not in the usual classic way. Normally, if you have a severe Vitamin B1 deficiency, your whole heart fails, but in this case only one side of the heart was failing. So, that is what confused the scientists, but finally they have found that it was Vitamin B1. 

Fortunately, since the three rules were being followed including the suspicion that food might be deficient, multi-vitamins were already being given and that helped in this situation. Following this report, three measures are being taken: preventive measures are being heightened; diet is being improved including supply of fresh fruits and Vitamin B complex, whose supply will be continued and the troops are going to be supported by experts in diet so that we do not go back to that situation. That was the disease where you had claims by Al Shabab saying they were the ones who had killed the troops; but that is what the scientists found. Those were false claims on the part of the insurgents. 

I also thought that I should update the House on what has happened in terms of loss of lives since we deployed the forces in 2007. We have lost a total of 22 soldiers, either by being hit by improvised explosives or bombs being thrown at them, but we have also lost 22 from natural disease, meaning that those soldiers could have died while here. They died from natural causes that kill other people as well. But those 22 include the three that have died because of this deficiency that I have just outlined. 

What has been our response to this situation? Only this month, Madam Speaker, on the 24th September, I invited my colleagues the Hon. Minister of Defence of Burundi, the Minister of Security of Somalia, the Special Envoy of the African Union Commission Chairperson, and also some representatives of the UN office for field support. We had a full day’s meeting reviewing the situation in Somalia and we made some key decisions that we want to follow through. We condemned this 17th September attack and we urged the AU to further clarify the mandate of AMISOM. 

The situation under which the troops are working in Mogadishu is that unless they are attacked, they cannot open fire. They have taken it so seriously that even if they know that in Wandegeya the insurgents are gathering and they are coming to attack, they cannot move to attack them because of the way their mandate has been framed. 

This meeting I talked about was attended by the current commander of AMISOM, Maj. Gen. Mugisha, and the outgoing commander Maj. Gen. Okello. And they say that this mandate is very restrictive and not very helpful. 

In this meeting, we agreed with the African Union and the UN to be more facilitative in terms of the mandate that the troops should use when in that country.

The third decision we took is that we should accelerate the rate at which the Somalis themselves are being trained because they are willing to form the new government of President Sheriff. 

Fortunately, there are also other countries, although they are not bringing troops, who have offered to train Somalis. The faster we can generate Somali forces, the better for us, but more particularly, the better for Somalia. So, we want to accelerate the training. 

The countries that are willing to join that part of the struggle are Djibouti, Rwanda, Tanzania and two other West African countries. I could not get their names before I got here, but there are two countries in West Africa that would like to join in the training. 

We want to keep pressure on the international community to bring more resources. They are already bringing something; we want them not only to pledge, but to bring money and equipment as well, and not just do the talking. We also agreed that we should be meeting more frequently to review the situation in Somalia. 

Colleagues, what are the prospects for us to stabilise Somalia? The prospects remain good and our judgement is based on a number of observations. First, the transitional Federal Government of Somalia under the leadership of President Sharif remain committed to reconciliation. They have not closed the door. They keep appealing to the insurgents and some keep returning to them. That is a very good indicator. If they had taken a hard line that they cannot talk to insurgents, that would be negative, but they remained open.

The issue of generating more Somali forces has the possibility of moving much faster. If other African states can bring troops; that would be better but if they cannot and we generate more troops within Somalia, this will even be a better solution provided we have resources. 

The international community, apart from not bringing forces, has become more supportive. For example, the UN Security Council has so far helped us in two ways: There was equipment which was in Eritrea which they gave our troops. As I speak now, food and medicine is now being financed and delivered by the UN system. Over and above the UN system, other rich countries have so far pledged US$ 213 million towards stabilising Somalia. Of that US$ 37 million has already been paid. That is why I said that we need to put more pressure so that more of this money is paid and it helps us with the situation.

And as I said, it is a very good thing that other countries are offering to train Somalis. I have told you that about five countries want to train over and above Burundi and Uganda. So, if we are seven countries training and each country trains one battalion in a year, we can generate seven battalions of Somali fighters and they go and manage their own situation. 

In conclusion, the security situation in Somalia remains difficult; we cannot underrate it. However, the call by the Somali on our Pan-Africanist credentials and commitment must be answered. Uganda remains committed to assist Somalia and the growing international support for the stabilisation of Somalia is of added value to the efforts so far being made. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members that was the information we requested for; we do not really require a debate, but let us ask a few questions.

2.21
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): I would like to thank the hon. Minister for this report and the efforts of our soldiers, but unfortunately, this incident took place; we have lost our brothers who were supposed to bring peace to Somalia.

I want some clarification from the hon. Minister on a few issues. While I condemn the acts, the position that I do not understand is, as we train Somalis to take over and equip them, the picture is not clear, is there an ongoing war between the rebels and the government? May I know; is it Mogadishu that is free? How about the countryside? Which areas in particular are in the hands of the government now? 

Another thing that I still get worried of is: money pledged by the UN and other agencies filters in and as the training goes on, the efforts you have mentioned here about reconciliation; how many attempts have you made between the government and these rebels to meet and discuss the way forward. This statement means that you are prepared to fight as long as the insurgency continues without any timeframe; without urging the other side to talk. What efforts are you trying to put as bodies that have come to keep peace in Somalia between Government and those that are rebelling, to stop fighting?

One thing that has not been mentioned is that America has also come in; I was also told that Ethiopians also came back. The picture of what is happening in Somalia as you have stated, that the security situation is still very difficult; I do not understand how we are going to continue keeping peace in Somalia without supporting the other side, maybe to go to war with the rebels outright. Because if we want to go there, while the two bodies are fighting each other, then what worries us is how long it will take; it needs a lot of resources. Now you can see the cost of peace keeping in Somalia resulting in some strange diseases that have just been identified and other diseases may also in the long-run attack and we shall still not know the causes. Our concern is that for how long are we going to sacrifice our children to keep peace in Somalia, because we cannot keep on there.

Then another question that has always concerned us is that, can’t you tell the rebels that we go to war if they do not want to talk peace, and what would be the response? This is wasting people’s resources and time. You have gone there to keep peace and the number is now sizable enough to enable you to demand for peace or go to war.

I see that the UN and other bodies like the USA would like to finance this war, and then the mandate that you are trying to tell us. Why, therefore, don’t you declare total war on these rebels so that they see the wrath of causing destruction of life and property? 

Next time we are going to demand that our children be brought back, and it is our right, so that other countries can take over in case we reach 100 deaths. We have a right to say that bring back our soldiers so that other countries can do that. It is our right.

This is a very sensitive report and as far as those who died in Somalia and their burial is concerned, I wanted to know what measures have we put in place to support the families of these people. Because nothing has been mentioned in this report; we must be constantly reminded about those who died naturally and those who were attacked. Because when you are attacked and you were sent there to keep peace, and you are killed without defending yourself, then I think there must be a difference to appease the families of these gallant children who have fallen. 

So we would like to know, what is there for their families; because they had family members whom they used to support? To what extent will the support reach? Will you give support to just the family members or also those that they were supporting? They might have been young, but were supporting their fathers and mothers, and also children in those families. So, what is the extent of the support to the fallen soldiers’ families? That should be our concern. 

I recommend that we give support to our soldiers who are in Somalia by going to visit and see the situation there. Yes, we are willing to go. Those of you who are cowards can remain here, but we can go, see, support and talk to them. If possible, we can arrange to talk to the government in place and then suggest a possible, fast reconciliation process. Why should we fear this? If our children, our soldiers can go there, why not us? I think that is in one way supporting it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are not supposed to be debating, please. 

2.29
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three questions. 

One is about this AMISOM force. Originally, the information we had was that it was supposed to be 10,000 troops. Now what we have is that the total number of troops there is 3,679. That is from Burundi and Uganda only. The question is: hon. Minister, aren’t you putting our sons and daughters at risk if originally after assessing the situation you needed 10,000 troops and you only have a quarter of the required force? Aren’t you putting these sons and daughters of this country at risk?

Two, have you totally given up on following up on the promise by other countries like Nigeria who had pledged to give in troops? You are silent on this. Now that they have not honoured their promise for a long time, have we lost hope? Are you in touch with those countries?  

Again concerning the funds, you said the pledge was US $213 million but they have only managed to give you US $37 million. Surely, if the resources are inadequate and you can see how our brothers and sisters are dying of these epidemics and what not - we have already lost 45 and we do not know whether they are even going to be compensated or not. We are wondering: if the international community cannot honour even their financial obligations, why don’t you give them an ultimatum that, “If you do not honour this pledge by such a period, we are withdrawing our troops?” We can’t risk any more!

2.32
MR OGWEL LOOTE (Independent, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving facts and information to us, which were actually required. I also want to thank the government and this Parliament for supporting Pan-Africanism in our country as the way forward for Africa by helping our sisters and brothers on the African continent. I thank the government and Parliament.

I need a few clarifications. I am normally very keen on following issues in Somalia because we have our citizens there - to see how they are surviving. The first clarification I am seeking from the Minister is; I remember there are some African countries within the African Union which wanted to contribute to the forces in Somalia. I remember very well they estimated 8,000 troops to be taken to Somalia if they are to bring sanity to Somalia. But when you look at it, it is only Uganda and Burundi that have sacrificed for the cause of Africanism. What has happened to those other countries? Has that idea been lost? 

Secondly, the minister had also said the government in the transitional federal government is committed to reconciliation. I do not know since you met as the African Union and also there was our representative, is there a way for you to get this group Al-Shabab to pursue reconciliation and peace? I believe in any movement there should be a master planner behind who may be sponsoring and supporting. Can the international community not use those countries that may be funding and supporting this group so that they can go for peace? Those are the few clarifications I wanted. 

2.34
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the Minister of Defence for this report and in the same vein I pass on my condolences to the families of our gallant soldiers who lost their lives in the quest for peace in Somalia. 

I have two issues I want to raise with the Ministry of Defence. First, we understand that the Somalia society is very complicated. We also understand that clan headship is very vital in this community. Apart from the military option, have we exhaustively utilised the clan heads in pacifying Somalia? If so, to what breadth have you achieved this? 

Secondly, the question of Uganda and Burundi contributing the most human resources in form of soldiers; we know that this is a matter, which the African Union undertook. We wholly support that an African problem be solved by ourselves but when you talk about contributing, training soldiers by other countries, I feel there is something lacking. Just last week the commander of the allied forces, including the US in Afghanistan, clearly called for more troops in Afghanistan and indicated that without sending more troops to Afghanistan, the defeat of insurgents in Afghanistan would not happen.

Mr Minister, what is the problem now? Do you have enough troops or you do not have enough troops on the ground to defeat the insurgents in Somalia? Are you lacking money because as you have showed us here, out of a pledge of US $213 million, you have received only US $37 million? This is a very small amount that has been appropriated –(Member timed out_)

2.37
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to add my voice to those of others who thanked the minister for the statement. I am concerned about the suggestions that some people have made that receiving our sons who have died from out there should be a public ceremony. I would like to differ from that. I suggest that we do not take that line because once it is taken it will cause a lot of emotional problems to the whole country. It is better to have a ceremony in the areas where people may be coming from; it should be done from within their communities because the people within will realise the respect and contribution that our soldiers are making to this continent.

I also would like to encourage Members to take heart; I know that in every war you must expect some people to die. I know it is very painful that we have lost our sons and daughters, but we need to take heart because it would be very strange to imagine soldiers will go to the war front and expect not to lose even one. If you remember very well, the day these people died, the next day a taxi crashed into four vehicles and six people died. That tells us that there is death everywhere. We only need to take heart because I know that the contribution of these soldiers has raised the image of our country. 

Today many people regard Uganda very highly for its contribution to peace in Somalia. We need to support this programme, except my point is that we need to know whether our country is putting in finances besides the personnel that –(Member timed out_)

2.39
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. May I also join other colleagues to thank the minister for the statement he has made to this House because the matter of our sons and daughters in Somalia is an issue of concern to our people?

The issue of Somalia is a big test of the seriousness of the African countries in resolving their own problems. And if Africa is to stand as a continent, it must show seriousness that it is willing to resolve issues like these ones. It has been long since we started complaining about the unwillingness of other African countries that had promised to support this project. 

As we do that we must definitely think about our soldiers who have been very gallant in handling this situation. I know that the war is a very serious one, but the other problem relates to the mandate. The only mandate that our soldiers have is to keep peace and not to be on the offensive. That is a serious matter. I would like to call upon the minister to review this matter so that our soldiers can be able to defend or be on the offensive at all times.

As other colleagues have said, I think there must be something going on. This Al Shabab are scattered everywhere in small groups. They are like a gorilla group within Somalia. I think we must look for ways of eliminating this group. Or there must be a force within Somalia trained to handle this. 

On the matter of reconciliation, I would like to say that the Somali elders need to be brought back to the negotiation table –(Member timed out_)

2.42
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister. I know that hon. Kiyonga is a performer; however, I think this time he is a little bit late. I would like to inform him that if he is to give a statement to Parliament, it should not be after a long time or just after being urged to do so. My point is that there should always be immediate updates whenever something happens.

My other concern is about the mandate, which is becoming a very critical issue. We are supposed to be keeping peace, but there is no peace in Somalia. We have also had strong statements from government asking AU to give them additional mandate. I thought the best our government should do is to start from this House. I am saying this because when we agreed that our soldiers be taken to Somalia, that agreement was based on the mandate of peacekeeping. When we supported this thing from the Floor of this House, it was about playing a neutral role of bringing all these people together, but now we are not doing that.

So, I would like to inform the minister that even negotiating with the AU for additional mandate would not suffice before coming to the House to obtain a clear mandate from the citizens of this country.

Lastly, let me say something about training. When I watch television, I see Al Shabab are everywhere. My reading of the Al Shabab is that you can never negotiate with them; they are extremists. I even see them conduct their courts in Mogadishu and kill people. So, if they can conduct courts from the capital city and kill people in public, where is the Somalia army –(Member timed out_)

2.44
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I basically have two brief points. The honourable minister informed us that the disease in point 2.3 is caused by Vitamin B1 deficiency. There is a point on the features of the disease, which you did not mention in that the disease, prior to leading to death, causes confusion and the muscle pain comes as a result of muscle wasting and affects the nervous systems.

In the circumstances, by the time we reach a stage where our troops have got to the point of death due to a vitamin deficiency, and assuming that all the troops who are there are basically on the same diet, it must have had less effect on other members of the team and that raises a lot of concern because in the cases of fighting insurgencies, the likes of Al Shabab, the real battle is the battle for hearts and minds. If we cannot take care of our troops in the theatre of battle, what message are we sending to the people of Somalia? Because if we cannot win the battle of hearts and minds, I think ultimately we will be wasting our time. That is where the war can actually be won. So, I wish the honourable minister would clarify other aspects of the disease. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.46
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A commander-in-chief cannot commit troops in a foreign territory, which he cannot access in order to assess the situation on the ground. That is why, however fluid the situation in Iraq and Afghanistan is, we watch on television and see that the President of America or the Prime Minister of UK have visited. Why has the Commander-in-Chief of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces failed in his duty to visit Somalia and assess the situation on the ground and the condition of our people on the ground? That is question No. 1.

Question No. 2, when you analyse the US, France, UK, Italy, Germany, Canada and Australia, you find that these countries have got something in common and they are pursuing strategic interests in a place like Afghanistan. That is why they have committed troops in that place and they have been able to mobilise themselves to defend those strategic interests. Part of their strategic interest is the defence of their way of life. They claim that Al Qaeda is trying to attack their way of life. How come we in Uganda have failed to mobilise like-minded countries on the African continent to pursue our interests in Somalia? Why have border countries like Kenya, Djibouti, Ethiopia and Eritrea failed to committee troops to Somalia? That is a very critical question. 

2.49
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank colleagues for the very important comments they have made following the statement I presented this afternoon. 

I would like to start with an observation that hon. Katuramu made that NATO is in Afghanistan and because the situation is not quickly resolving they call for more troops and indeed they get more troops. This is almost in the same spirit with what hon. Mabikke is asking. 

Talking about fundamentals, honourable brothers and sisters, we should admit we are part of the leadership of the present generation and we have this challenge to stabilise Africa so that Africa can start on the path of development. One of the acts that we have not performed is to put in place a robust security system for Africa. Attempts are being made and we should all support them. You are all aware of the initiative of the African Standby Force. You are aware that we are trying to build brigades on a regional basis. If this work had already been completed, Somalia would be no match for Africa. 

But let me also tell you that although there is that commitment to build that African Standby Force, it is not easy going even now. People go, they vote and when it comes to act, it is not easy. So, really the fundamental issue of the situation in Somalia and other African states where we still have these problems of insurgency is that Africa as a continent which must move together, if it is going to stand the test of time, we are yet to put in place a robust security system. Even NATO was not put in place that easily as you know the history. So to colleagues who have asked, “Why are you not bringing more forces and why are the other people not coming; we must build the African Standby Force and if we do we will be able to resolve all these issues. I am sure that response does address a number of other observations that colleagues made.

There was this issue, although I did address it before that is so critical that I must repeat myself. It is the matter of compensation, which my counterpart on the other side raised. When we asked for the permission to go to Somalia we stated carefully that a soldier who goes to Somalia is on duty, first and foremost. That means that if he dies the same arrangements, which are in place for his brother who has not gone to Somalia will apply. He will get his pension and there will be survivor benefits through the arrangements of the Government of Uganda. 

But for the soldier who has gone out there, because there are other people supporting us, he has additional repayments in regard to death or if he gets maimed or injured. In the case of death, the soldier’s family is paid US $50,000, which is about Shs 100 million. For those who died in the first phase, some payments have been made. This compensation is there and is got from AU and the regular payments of the Government of Uganda.

The third issue is that of reconciliation. Have we made progress in so far as reconciliation is concerned? I would say massive progress, although more needs to be done. The present President of Somalia, President Sharif was, until January, a rebel himself. Sharif was in another organisation called the Alliance for Re-liberation of Somalia but through this spirit of reconciliation, the TFG that was there in the first place agreed to discuss with the faction that was led by President Sharif and they have expanded the Parliament and the Cabinet. The fact that now we have Sharif who was on the other side; is a clear indicator that reconciliation is being achieved, progressively.

I do believe that even the Al Shabab who are causing problems, with more effort, some more people will come over on the government side so we need to uphold the efforts in the internal community.

How long shall we stay in Mogadishu, Somalia? I could also ask another rhetorical question. Will the problem in Somalia be resolved by taking 8,000 or 10,000 forces from outside? To answer that question, I would like to relate the experience of the NRM. There were pressures on NRA/NRM to sign so that peace keeping forces come to Uganda. That line was completely rejected and as you can see, we have been able to advance to a level that we have a very vibrant Parliament in Uganda. Incidentally, a study has just been completed, which has shown that the Parliament of Uganda is one of the most vibrant in Africa. This I can inform you.

The centre of resolving the Somali question is first and foremost broadening reconciliation and two, whoever is running the state, the Parliament in Mogadishu, the Cabinet and President in Mogadishu, must quickly build up Somali forces for security. That is ultimately what is going to be the solution. It would have been good if these other brothers who had made commitments had also come forward but finally the solution is within Somalia itself. 

Our assessment is that the situation is difficult but there is progress and we should keep going. As I said, although you have observed that these people have only brought US $37 million, for us this is good news as before, that money was not there. At least now there is some money and we will just keep pushing them to bring some more money.

Hon. Reagan Okumu has asked a very fundamental question. Our mandate is peace keeping and when we are asking clarification of the mandate, we are not saying that we go for peace enforcement. If we were to do that - you are right, we do not only have to come here but also go to the UN because the AU itself cannot operate under peace enforcement in this structure.

The clarification we are asking for was discussed in the meeting we held here, because in general terms they say we should take all steps to protect the government. Up until now we have taken that to mean that it is only when they shoot at State House that we respond. However, when we asked them and there were lawyers of the UN and the AU there, they said it can also mean that if you have credible information that the rebel is organising in Wandegeya, you can carry out pre-emptive attacks. 

So we are saying, “Write that. Don’t just tell us that that is an interpretation. Write it clearly so that the commander has this mandate”. So we are not fundamentally changing from the chapter under which this approval was given, we are just seeking more clarification. Indeed, if we are to change the mandate, you are absolutely right that we would have to return to Parliament.

If my colleagues can allow, I think the other question can be subsumed –(Interjections)- I have heard that question but I don’t think I should answer it as I don’t think it helps our situation. There are many other things we could say but it would not be wise to do so under the camera as we are debating in the public.

Hon. Okumu, you are right that we could come here more frequently but I want to inform you that we do get a lot of briefings with the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and we think it is safer, most of the time, to keep there. I thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for that information. I have a death announcement. Our colleague, hon. Ssezi Mbaguta, the Minister of State for Public Service, lost her mother this morning. There will be a vigil at her home in Nakasero Plot 3, Lourdel Road opposite the Ministry of Health. On the 2nd of October at 10.00 O’clock, there will a requiem Mass at Christ the King Church then burial will take place on Saturday at a place called Kashaya in Bugangari, Rukungiri starting at midday. As is our tradition, let us observe a minute of silence in her mother’s honour. 

(Members rose and observed a minute of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I did indicate that we have other business to do so I will suspend the House for one hour and fifteen minutes. We shall come back to deal with the Contracts Bill. We shall resume at 4.15 p.m. In my communication, I said that.

(The proceedings were suspended at 3.01 p.m.)

 (On resumption at 4.21 p.m. the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

BILLS
 SECOND READING

THE CONTRACTS BILL, 2008

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Justice.

4.21
THE MINSTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I would like to move that the Bill entitled the Contracts Bill, 2008, be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, you can proceed.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to codify the principles of the English Common Law and case law applied in Uganda in regard to contracts in line with the socio-economic needs and values of the people of Uganda.

At the moment, as my colleagues maybe aware, the current Law of Contract is the Contract Act. This Act is not codified, but the law reflects that provision of the Common Law of England relating to contracts as codified by the doctrines of equity and the Acts of Parliament of the United Kingdom listed in the schedule of the Contract Act.

The common law has also been subject to general public statutes in force in England on the 1 August 1902 until an amendment was produced by the Judicature Act to remove those statutes from the applicable Law of Contract in Uganda. Indeed, all statutes of general application of England are since 1967, no longer applicable in Uganda at all.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, you find that the lack of a codified law in this area makes transactions very difficult. It impedes on business in our country and there is need to have these principles codified, hence this Bill. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Okay, chairperson.

4.24
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Contracts Bill, 2008.

Introduction

The Contracts Bill, 2008 was read for the first time on 17 June 2008 and was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedures of Parliament. In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.


Methodology

In the process of analysing this Bill, the committee discussed the Bill and received memoranda from the following stakeholders: The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Uganda Law Reform Commission; Uganda Law Society and Uganda National Chamber of Commerce.

Madam Speaker, the committee also made a comparative study of different legislations in different jurisdictions that have enacted legislations on contracts such as India. Reference was also made to various text books on contracts such as the Halsbury’s Laws of England and the Law of Contract, 3rd Edition by Lexus Nexus Butterworths.

Objectives

Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to codify the principles of English Common Law and the case law applied in Uganda in regard to contracts in line with socio-economic needs and values of the people of Uganda. 

The current Contracts Act, Cap. 73 is not codified, but the law reflects the provisions of the Common Law of England relating to contracts as modified by the doctrines of equity and the Acts of Parliament of the United Kingdom, listed in the schedule to the Contracts Act.

The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for the first time, a comprehensive contract law for Uganda and to codify the contract law taking into account, the social, environment and the international relations of Uganda. It also seeks to repeal the Contracts Act, Cap 73.

Observations

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that:
    1. Since the inception of the Contracts Act, Cap.73 has never been amended and the Act has only three sections making reference to common law principles and other laws enacted in England.

    2. The principles of the Law of Contract have not been codified and as such there have been several lacunae in it making the courts to rely on the doctrines of equity and common law.

    3. The Contracts Bill, 2008 has consolidated the different types of contracts in addition to the general principles of the Law of Contract, namely, bailment, indemnity and guarantee, and agency, thus a comprehensive contract law of Uganda.

    4. The Bill is part of the commercial laws undertaken by the government to support the private sector development, commercial justice reform and encourage private investment.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the Contracts Bill, 2008 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.28
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I also thank the chairman of the committee and the minister for bringing this Bill. One of the biggest problems in this country has been that the commercial laws have been getting archaic or have not been clearly known. But it is good there has been a consistent effort to now update them. 

I wish to thank government for that. I hope that one of these days the Attorney-General will also look at the Company’s Act because it is extremely archaic. All these amendments that are being done will not be of much help if the Company’s Act is not amended. But as it may, I do not think it is good enough to just amend the commercial laws; the judiciary is very important in this regard.


Those of us who are in constant private practice get the feeling that some of the Grade I magistrates, and sometimes Chief Magistrates, do not have sufficient exposure to these new amendments that keep coming into play and the changes that are being effected, which are supposed to be implemented. The distribution of these amended laws is not good enough. That is why when we go to upcountry courts, we get a feeling that the magistrates sometimes appear not to know that certain changes have been made to the commercial laws. It is necessary for the Attorney-General’s chambers to liaise with the Judiciary to ensure all the changes that take place get to be known by the Judiciary staff.

Also, it is not only about the Judiciary; even the population must know of this. Sometimes, after we have passed the laws here, the population does not get to know of the changes that have been effected onto some of those laws. The people do not use them appropriately. I do not know what mechanisms should be put in place to ensure all the changes effected on commercial laws – including, for example, the Mortgages Act which is not yet known to many of the people who are supposed to be using it, especially the population; notification is very important. Otherwise, I am very happy to see the Contracts Act coming up in this form and codified so that lawyers can find it in one place, to be able to use it like any other Commonwealth jurisdictions are. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Maybe to augment what hon. Kawanga has said about the issue of the public finding out and accessing the laws, let me share something that I saw in Zimbabwe. In that country, there are distribution centres in each region. Any new laws are sent to those centres so that the public do not have to come to the government printers to look for them. I do not know whether we could also do that to make our laws accessible. Otherwise, it really takes time for the magistrates, state attorneys and so on to pick up the updates; it is a problem.

4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Gagawala Wambuzi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Certainly, I support the passing of this Bill into a law because it is one of these laws that are affecting the number of investors supposed to be coming to Uganda. The absence of this law has always made us not as competitive as we would be if this law was in place.

I must thank the Attorney-General for starting to fast-track the laws that affect trade and business in general. I hope that after this law, all the other laws will be brought forward. I beg that when they come here, we fast-track them so that investors can pick more interest in Uganda. This will make us more competitive and our rating as a country on the list of countries that do business will improve. 

The passing of this law will give confidence to our business. It is important because the private sector has been in very much need of these laws; so many laws are not user-friendly to our business community. I must thank you, Madam Speaker and members of parliament, for accepting to have this Bill read for the second time. I pray that it is passed into law. 

I also urge the Attorney-General to quickly look at more laws that will boost our trade and our competitiveness rating to improve our image as quickly as possible. I support the motion.

4.34
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I find myself unprepared to discuss this Bill because I had prepared for another Bill only to find this on the Floor. Anyway, what I have seen in the Memorandum to the Bill is that any contract the subject of which is more than Shs 200,000 must be in writing. I would like to seek clarification either from the minister or the chairperson of the committee – I do not see anything wrong with entering a verbal contract to sell my house to someone. Why should we restrict people from entering verbal contracts? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, on the issue of what we had on the Order Paper at first, I would like to say that the Deputy Attorney-General told me that actually, that Bill is still being handled by the Attorney-General himself and that he was not prepared for it. But since this is his docket and had also been outstanding, I find no problem; there were no ill intentions.

4.36
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I am not an expert in these matters because as you know, my area of specialisation is political science. But what I would like to say is that verbal contracts evaporate and so it becomes very difficult to remember everything. But when you codify things, they become much more lasting and in case of a dispute, one can get to the courts of law with evidence. This cannot be possible in a situation where matters are verbalised. It also becomes difficult to have mediations, which maybe necessary especially when the amounts of money exceed Shs 200,000. That would be my answer to your question.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, it appears the Prime Minister did not get my point. I believe that if it is because of evaporation, then even contracts of Shs 10,000 should be in writing because if that is done verbally, it can also evaporate. My question is why do you draw a line? What are the reasons?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the rationale behind the Shs 200,000? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, actually, we are referring to clause 10(5) of the Bill, which says, “A contract, the subject matter of which exceeds ten currency points shall be in writing.” There is a proposal for an amendment from the committee to raise it to Shs 500,000. I have actually discussed these amendments with the chairperson of the committee and we are in agreement on most of them.

Where the essence - and on the face of it one would readily agree with hon. Okello-Okello - it is a contract, why are you interfering? That is actually prima-facie, but at the end of the day, you seek redress when there is a dispute and that dispute finds its way in the arms of the enforcing Government organs like the Judiciary, arbitration centres and so on and so forth. The idea is to also facilitate them to do their work effectively rather than calling a person who has sometimes actually forgotten and begin saying was it Shs 1.5 million; was it one million? That state of affairs is to be guarded against and that is why in my opinion, the ordinary way to better this provision is the way the committee has gone about it. Government proposed Shs 200,000 and the committee is proposing Shs 500,000. Maybe you can improve it by raising the figure or lowering it, but the rationale in my opinion is that it facilitates the due process of law. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I am just trying to see if I understood because hon. Ruhindi talked like he is in court – facilitate due process of law - now what does that mean? But I agree with the committee raising it to Shs 500,000. You just think of all these disputes over Shs 10,000; Shs 15,000; going to court; you will just clog the courts. 

Secondly, these are normally very small matters and taking them to court is simply to split society over small things. It would be better that they resolve these matters through their local mechanisms. And I agree, therefore, with the committee. In fact the Shs 500,000 allows for a fair cut-off of unnecessary burden on the court. I believe that facilitates the due process of the law - that was my understanding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It seems Members are satisfied that we need to amend the contracts law. Do you have anything hon. Chair to wind up or Minister?

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker and colleagues, for the useful contributions on this subject. I want to assure my colleagues that the process for commercial justice reform is ongoing. As I speak, I believe we have passed three commercial law Bills and this should be the fourth. We have passed Trade Secrets, Partnerships, Hire Purchase and this is the fourth. As I speak, about six Bills are before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. The Company’s Bill is not yet with them, but it will soon be with them. The Bankruptcy Bill is already with them and as you know, we read it for the first time. In fact, they have a workshop in Entebbe tomorrow and on Friday, with the Law Reform Commission. So, we are abreast.

I know we have been a bit late in some respects, but we are abreast and we urge everyone concerned in this process to cooperate. 

I agree that we need to have effective publicity of our laws, but I also believe that we need to improve our culture of reading. Our reading culture is not as good as one would expect. I do not know how many of us read all the materials that are put in our pigeon holes. By reading, I mean reading and understanding them; of course that is without prejudice to those who do effective reading. The culture of reading, in my opinion, is certainly still lacking amongst us and the public. We need to improve on it. 

I agree with the Speaker that we should devise means of having regional distribution centres for our publicity materials. But as members of parliament, let me give a tip; the Law Reform Commission publishes our law books and by the way they are updated. If you go there, you can even enter into an arrangement with them, if you wish, with my guidance and assistance, where they can defray costs. For instance, a set of the red law books is Shs 2 million and one needs it. Through your salary deductions, with all due respect, if you cannot manage paying the lump sum upfront, it can be offset against your salary as we have been doing in most of our places. A volume of Statutory Instruments is Shs 1,500,000 and that too is affordable. And related books – I have a book here, for instance, which I believe every legislator should have, “Compendium of Electoral Laws”, and when we come here with electoral laws amendments, it would be very facilitative in debating those amendments. It costs only Shs 150,000 at the Uganda Law Reform Commission, 8th Floor, Workers’ House. Thank you.

4.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to reiterate our position on the contributions from Members on this Bill and as the Attorney-General has reported, we have considered a number of commercial Bills as part of the commercial reform and we are prioritising them in our committee. Hopefully, by the end of this year, we should be done with these Bills. 

May I add that some of these Bills are relatively detailed and are in a language that may be a bit difficult to understand, especially when it comes to in-depth discussion? I would like to take up what the Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, advised that Members of Parliament, especially those who have particular interest in some of the Bills could join us when we are discussing these Bills and have their input at that stage. 

We are very grateful for the contributions that have come up and we are looking forward to considering the Bill in detail. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the Contracts Bill be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONTRACTS BILL, 2008

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much. In clause 9(2), the words, “in words” should be deleted and replaced with the words, “either verbally or in writing” and the justification is for clarity. 

We are also proposing an amendment in clause 9(3) that the words, “in words” should be deleted and replaced with the words, “either verbally or in writing” and the justification is for clarity.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you. In clause 9(2), I do not see how inserting the words, “either verbally or in writing” caters for situations that are not verbal or in writing. We are tying our hands to those situations that are verbal or in writing, but we can have situations that are neither in writing nor verbal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What kind of contract is that? Contracts are either oral or they are in writing. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes, I understand that they are either expressed orally or are implied, but what they are amending here is that they are replacing, “in words” with “either verbally or in writing”. So, I am seeing a situation where you might have something which is not verbal or in writing and yet a contract would have been entered -(Interjection)- yeah, I can just nod. What we are changing is replacing words but not replacing the contents expressed or implied.

MR RUHINDI: Hon. Odonga Otto will agree with me that for a contract to be valid there must be consideration; that is elementary in contracts law. Let him tell this House what consideration would pass by a person nodding. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: If we could read the actual Bill, in 9(2), it is saying, “A promise is expressed where an offer or acceptance of a promise is made in words.” We are now having problems with, “in words”. 9(3) provides for implied. So, clause 9(2) is an expressed contract and 9(3) is an implied contract. By nodding, it is already a consideration; it is an implied contract. We do not have to tie our hands. I am just appealing to the learned Attorney-General that we need to broaden it and not tie our hands to only in writing or verbal. There still can be other forms of contracts. Supposing I am in a contract marriage; it is not in writing or verbal, but we are together - where does that provision come in?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think we are talking about contracts in commercial transactions. We are not talking about marriages and related laws. (Laughter) That example is not covered by what we are discussing now.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether the example I give would follow some words, but I hear that the diamond dealers do not write contracts. They shake hands to consummate an agreement. In the negotiation process you must have used words and reached a stage where you agree. The words may be through sign language. So while hon. Odonga Otto suggests this, I think what he is referring to is the consummation of that agreement, but the process of negotiation will involve that exchange of words. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But in a contract there must be the issue of consideration. That is the key element here. How will consideration move by shaking hands? It is a question of evidence. Where is the consideration in a handshake? It must be a different kind of consideration which is visible and which you can demonstrate. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I was just posing a simple query to the Attorney-General. Can’t you enter a contract on anything which is verbal and not written? 

MR RUHINDI: Of course, Members may not have had adequate time to internalise the Bill. The problem has always been, and I always tell colleagues, that the rules of a statutory interpretation are, for instance, that you read every provision which is related to the subject matter on a given statute in order to comprehend and understand that subject but any isolated reading –(Interjection)- a promise and a contract go together and if you scroll down a little bit and check clause 10(2), it comes into what you are saying because it says, “… a contract may be oral or written or partly oral and partly written or may be implied from the conduct of the parties.” I think that answers your query. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. This is in regard to what hon. Okello-Okello questioned and the committee proposes that for clause 10(5) the word “ten” should be deleted and replaced with the word “twenty five.” The justification is to increase the value of the subject matter of the contract that should be in writing. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 14(5), the committee proposes that the word “be” be deleted and the justification is for better reading.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Read the sentence without the “be”.

MR TASHOBYA: It is “… a party is said to be stand.” We are saying the “be” should be removed for clarity and better reading.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, we propose that in clause 15(1)(d) the word “another” should be deleted and replaced with the word “other” and the justification is for better reading. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How will it read?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: The sentence is grammatically wrong. We are just correcting a grammatical error. It cannot just be for better reading.

MR TASHOBYA: I concede.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Still on 15(1)(c), they say, “the following shall constitute an act of fraud…” and they say “…a promise made without any intention of performing it ….” I want the chairperson to guide me on how a promise made without any intention of performing it can become an act of fraud. For example, I can issue a cheque as security for getting something when I very well know that I have no intentions of performing that particular contract that would arise because of the cheque. So, how does it become possible to impute fraud in that particular circumstance where I deliberately do not have the intention of performing the contract? 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: While Hon. Odonga Otto’s query is one perspective, the other perspective is, how do you prove that there was no intention of performing it? How do you demonstrate the lack of intention?

MR RUHINDI: Well, these are fundamentally good questions. But the concern is why we want this to be an element of fraud. Yes, by operation of this law when passed, that would be the first way of looking at it. In other words, we want fraud to have any of these ingredients when we are proving it. Intention is proved by evidence. This is why, for instance, in offences there is what we call acts reus - committing the offence; and mens rea – intent to commit the offence. These war crimes and offences are attributable to individuals because we want to prove that you really did it. Now, mens rea - the intention - can only be proven by the available evidence adduced. It may be difficult because of the burden of proof since you have to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt. That is why most crimes are very difficult to prove beyond reasonable doubt. 

This is why at times, for instance, a case of strict liability, or if you reduce murder to manslaughter where you do not have to prove intention, then the burden of proof becomes a little bit lighter and normally for such cases, it is always relatively easy to adduce the evidence. 

But should hon. Odonga Otto feel that this should not be an ingredient for proving fraud, I maintain that it should. Why should he make a promise without the intention and if there is evidence that he did not intend to make it, why shouldn’t it be taken to amount to fraud? But should he feel he wants to amend it, it is up to him.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, Attorney-General, I do not think so. Concerning the issue which he raised about the cheque, supposing hon. Otto came to me and said he wanted to buy my house and I say “okay”. I promise to give you my house, then you write a cheque but on the very day that you write the cheque, I go and transfer that house to hon. Tashobya; isn’t that fraud? I have made a promise; you have acted on it, but I never intended to fulfil it and that is why I transferred it to Tashobya. That is fraud because I said I have got a house, you have paid me and then I dispose of it. It means I never intended to – my intention was to get your money, but not to sell to you my house.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I understand; but in this case, consideration is moving from me to you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, it has.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: So, the provision would save you, but what about me who issued that cheque?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is why it is fraud. That is why it is here. I plotted to defraud you by that promise.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, listening to the Attorney-General make his explanation helps. I think this provision helps where you have a genuine difficulty to honour a promise you made. All efforts must be made - I think based on this provision - by somebody whom you owe something or made a promise to ensure he addresses the difficulties faced. For example, if I issued you a cheque and then by the date the cheque was due, I had financial difficulties and I told you, obviously I cannot then be taken to court and say this guy is a fraudulent person. This is because the evidence is that I have a difficulty and I have not run away from my promise. So, I think that provision in that context is useful to honest people.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is important for people who really plan fraud.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I am now seeing a situation where a promise made without any intention of performing it is now becoming fraud. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR ODONGA OTTO: But this is a promise made in a contract. The ingredients of fraud are defined clearly in the Penal Code. So, why can’t we make this an offence under the Contracts Act? Other than supposing I breach 15(1)(b), that means I should be charged with fraud. I do not know whether it is civil or criminal because fraud is a standard offence in the Penal Code.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Evidence of fraud can give rise to an award to damages. If one of the people proves that you fraudulently made a promise and he or she acted on it, that evidence can give you damages. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 15 (1)(b) “…active concealment” - this implies that we have three types of concealment: Active, passive and the normal one. Why don’t we remove the word “active” and just leave “concealment”? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: An “active concealment” is for a fact the person having knowledge of -

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Okello-Okello could be supported in his submission. I think the drafts person wanted to help a tribunal or a court in evaluating the evidence that may be adduced, that this really should amount to this grave matter.

As you rightly put it, hon. Odonga-Otto, the standards of proving fraud are very high and the ingredients should be equally strong and high placed. This is why I think there was use of the expression “active”; but I do not think that is redundant. I think it is “active” in terms of evaluating the evidence that may be adduced. Thank you.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, I would not agree with the proposal of hon. Okello-Okello to remove the word “active”. The word “active” can be translated to deliberate concealment, but if you say “concealment”, something can happen where you did not intend and the person who is pursuing you then says this was deliberate and you run into a problem getting the judge or the tribunal to arbitrate the matter. So, active concealment means that the person then should produce evidence that you were actually deliberately doing it and so the word “active” should really remain.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Attorney-General, for instance these are people in land transactions; I want to buy land and then the registrar of titles conceals the fact that there is a caveat on the property and assures me that there are no encumbrances. I will go ahead and buy but there is a caveat. Isn’t that active concealment? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, the moment active concealment stays here, a prudent lawyer’s first defence will be, “mine was passive concealment”. I would automatically raise that defence. The moment we leave it as active concealment, then the other types of concealment would not arise. Besides that, the drafting is, “… active concealment of a fact by a person having knowledge …” So, what we are proving is whether you had knowledge. So the word “knowledge” already caters for the concerns you would want to bring under active concealment.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, I think we should concede because concealment presupposes that you actually know. So we concede to the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think you should start from 15(1). Read it out before you go to 15(1)(b). We are not talking about one party; we are talking about agents and others. The opening statement is talking about more than one person. What harm does it do to say “active”? You are talking about the connivance of a party over the agents of that party et cetera, with the intent of deceiving the other party to the contract or the agent of the party or to induce certain action.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, what I was saying is that if we talk of concealment, it presupposes knowledge. Once there is that knowledge, then I thought the “active” is not very crucial, in my view.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 15(1)(b) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes that under clause 17(3), the second line, the word “to” should be deleted and it should read, “An erroneous opinion as the value of the things, which form the subject matter of an agreement, shall not be deemed a mistake as to a matter of fact.” The justification is for good English as corrected by the professor.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There are two “tos”. Actually, there are three. Which ones are you deleting?

MR TASHOBYA: The word “to” in the second line – “…shall not be deemed ….”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Ok, I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes that we insert new clauses 25, 26 and 27 under part three, which were formerly clauses 45, 46 and 47, and the Bill be re-numbered accordingly. In other words, the current clauses 45, 46 and 47 would become clauses 25, 26 and 27 respectively. The justification is that those clauses relate to void contracts and that is where they belong.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: They are already part of the Bill but they are just being moved from one part of the Bill to another. Is that ok? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: The original 25 - contract contingent of a happening –(Interjection)– yes, 25. Were we still on 24?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we are looking at clause 45, agreement to do impossible acts; 46, reciprocal promise to do legal and illegal acts; and 47, alternative promise one part being illegal. That is what the chairperson is seeking to move to create a new 25 and then re-number. So, is it the 45?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes, the 45 because we are saying if you make a contract on the presumption that something will happen and that thing does not happen, then the contract becomes void.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the problem with that?

MR ODONGA OTTO: The problem is if we pass it the way it is, if I issue a cheque on assumption that probably someone would buy my car in the next month and someone does not buy my car, it means that event I was expecting did not happen which by default now invalidates the ordinary contract we would have entered. That is my interpretation of 45(2). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is not that. It would go to issues like force majeure. For instance if you had a building and then a Tsunami came and cleared the whole street and there was no road and no building, that is where this would apply, or you are prevented from reaching town because of the riots.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, there is this agreement with this company that was to build Bujagali, I think. In part of that agreement they were asking government to guarantee water levels, which was nonsense. If we had this provision, maybe that element would not arise because there is no way that government can guarantee water levels. That is a case in point.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that those three new clauses, 25, 26 and 27, be created out of 45, 46 and 47. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes that in the new clause 25(4), which was formally clause 45, that the words “the Constitution” should be deleted. The justification is that those words are redundant. That would read as the former 45(4) which is: “For the purposes of this section, an act shall be taken to be impossible of performance if in law or the course of nature no person can do or perform it.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 25 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to

Clause 27

MR TASHOBYA: In the new clause 27, which was formerly clause 47, the committee proposes that the word “the” should be inserted after the word “and”. The justification is for better reading. In that respect, the clause would read: “Where an alternative promise, one part of which is legal and the other illegal is made, only the legal part may be enforced”. So we are adding “the” before “other”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 27 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much. The committee proposes that we insert a new sub-section (5) after clause 36(4), which would read as follows: “A joint promisor who bears the loss referred to in sub-section (4) may recover from the defaulting joint promisor the amount contributed by him or her arising out of the default.” The justification is to enable the non-defaulting joint promisor to recover from the defaulting joint promisor.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the new clause 36 is “person to perform promise”, which was the former 33. 

MR TASHOBYA: There is no amendment. We are on the old 36.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have not reached there; I am renumbering. We are now on the old 33, which is now 36. The present 36 is the old 33 after bringing in those others. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: This clause, which the chairman is saying they should insert, ties the hands of a joint promisor only to recover the amount contributed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have not reached there. I put the question that clause 36 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think this is where you have an interest, honourable chairperson. 

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, we are proposing to add a sub-clause (5) immediately after sub-clause (4) which would read as follows: “A joint promisor who bears the loss referred to in sub-clause (4) may recover from the defaulting joint promisor the amount contributed by him or her arising out of the default.” 

The justification is to enable the non-defaulting joint promisor to recover from the defaulting joint promisor.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, what I am saying is that this new insertion we are going to make allows you only to recover the amount so far contributed. It has nothing to do with any other cost, like interest, that may arise, other than the amount contributed. Assuming we even go to court, the provision will not allow some extra costs to come in.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But does it act as a bar to any further relief that one may apply for? 

MR RUHINDI: Maybe the chairperson can justify his amendment, but in my view sub-clause (4) was enough because it says, “Where a joint promisor defaults in a contribution to the performance of a promise, the other joint promisors shall bear the loss”. This means that the loss may or may not include interest according to their contributions that they made and according to the agreements that they made arising from the default in equal shares. The chairperson can justify his amendment.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee was of the view that if the joint promisors bear the loss arising out of the default of one of the promisors, then those joint promisors should be able to have relief from the person who defaulted. I think this is a reasonable position.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, in the first line it says, “A joint promisor who bears the loss…” and then in the second line it says, “…will recover the amount contributed.” So, there is already a discrepancy between the loss and the amount contributed. If we could, as the Attorney-General suggested earlier - because now you may suffer a loss of Shs 50 million but the amount you contributed is Shs 10 million. So, why would we only recover the amount contributed yet you could have probably suffered greater loss?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think what the chair is seeking to say is: where a joint promisor has suffered loss arising from an act of one of them, that person should be able to recover from the one who caused the fault. He should not be left to suffer. He should be able to recover from that person who caused the loss. That is what he is trying to do. He wants him to be able to recoup from the person who caused the default. I put the question that clause 39 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes that in clause 38(3), which is now 41(3), the words, “the extent of the obligations in the extent of the joint promisees” should be added after the word, “obligations”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Read the sentence in full. Is it where it says that where all the persons who make a promise die, their representative shall fulfil their obligations? Isn’t that the one you are talking about?

MR TASHOBYA: Yes. It would now read, “Where a person to whom a joint promise is made dies, the representative of that deceased person, jointly with the surviving persons to whom the promise is made…” We delete “shall fulfil obligations” and insert -(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: I had just written it in my clauses here. It should read, “Where a person to whom a joint promise is made dies, the representative of that deceased person, jointly with the surviving persons to whom the promise is made, are entitled to the fulfilment of the joint promise and shall perform the obligations made as consideration for the promise.” Isn’t that it?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But there is a problem. “Where a person to whom a joint promise is made dies, the representative of that deceased person, jointly with the surviving persons to whom that promise is made …” isn’t there a problem there? I thought the person who has died is the one to whom a joint promise has been made? Isn’t there a problem there?

Okay, the successor of that person joins hands with the others in fulfilling the promise; isn’t it? So, what are you trying to take out because they jointly promised then one died and his successor in title takes over the office and fulfils the promise?

MR TASHOBYA: No, Madam Speaker. I think it would read, “Where a person to whom a joint promise is made dies, the representative of that deceased person jointly with the surviving persons to whom the promise is made shall fulfil the obligations to the extent of the obligations in the estate of the deceased joint promisees.”

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: The word “obligation” is being used here; if a promise is made to me, is there any obligation on my part? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what I was saying; there is a problem here.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: It cannot be an obligation. The obligation is on the part of the person who made the promise to the person who died.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is a problem in the original text. There is a problem because the person who dies is the one with whom a joint promise was made but now his or her representatives are being told to -

MR RUHINDI: I propose that we stand over that clause. Let me look through it carefully together with the chair. 

Clause 42 

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Speaker, the committee proposes that under clause 39(1), the words “depending on the nature of the contract” should be added after the words “reasonable time”. It would read as follows: “Where a promisor is to perform a promise in a contract without a request by a promisee and time for performance is not specified in the contract, the engagement shall be performed within reasonable time depending on the nature of the contract.” The justification is that “reasonable” is a question of fact which should be dependant on the nature of the contract.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, if you introduce that you eliminate the element of circumstance of the contract. The reasonable time will not only include the nature of the contract but will also provide for circumstances that may make the performance difficult. Therefore, “reasonable” allows the arbitration to be broader in its consideration. 

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, I concede to that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR TASHOBYA: On 42(3), the committee proposes that the words “shall apply for the performance of” should be deleted and replaced with the words “may request the promisor to perform”. The justification is that the use of the words “shall apply” is inappropriate. The clause reads: “Where a promise is to be performed on a specific day and a promisor does not undertake to perform it without a request by the promisee, the promisee shall apply for the performance of the promise at a proper place within the usual hours of business.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Specific performance is a prayer in contract; are you eliminating that?

MR RUHINDI: The Bill is mine, Madam Chair, but the amendment makes sense because it is up to the person who is aggrieved to apply to enforce his or her rights or not. That is why normally it is, “may request the promisor” or “may apply for the performance”. Certainly, I find the word “shall” a little bit redundant because it is up to the aggrieved party to choose to exercise his or her rights.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you read it with the amendment in full?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, what if you replace “shall” with “may” without amending the rest? Don’t you meet the same objective? Because then we do not have to encumber our minds with trying to fit in very many new things.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, the former clause 39, which is now 42, would read as follows: “Where a promise is to be performed on a specific day and a promisor does not undertake to perform it without a request by the promisee, the promisee may request the promisor to perform the promise at a proper place within the usual hours of business.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why do you make it optional? There is a promise. I have made a promise for a Sunday but no specific time; why do you leave it? 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, I think the intention of using the expression “shall apply” is more or less to allow for a directive to perform because if it is your obligation, I cannot request you to fulfil your obligation; it would not be right. In other words, if I write to you and I say, “Do this tomorrow”, that directive to you becomes evidence against you in terms of failure to meet your obligation rather than just a request. A request can be denied. You are obligated to me, why must I request you?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You make a promise to me to do something on Saturday then you do not do it and then you say “I may” or “I may not”. I am the promisee; I want to fulfil your promise.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, I think what we are saying is that yes, you have a right, you may apply but you may also choose not to. This does not negate your right.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How are you protecting me, me as a promisee; you make a promise, I act on it, I get a loss and then you don’t and then you say, I ask or I don’t ask? 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, if you request you are not obligating the person who made a promise to you to fulfil; if you are requesting, you are not obligating. But you may chose to apply, in other words you chose to direct in writing, for example, that the promise be made. It becomes an obligation for fulfilment and if that is not honoured then you have a right to say that the man is trying to defraud me or something and you proceed. But if you say “may request”, I don’t think you would have a solid basis if you want to advance your case in courts of law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chairperson, these circumstances give rise to an implied contract.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I would still appeal to your earlier queries. The controversy to me is not shall or may; the controversy to me is applying this because what form will the application take; is it an ordinary letter; is it a notice of motion? Because once a contract is in writing then the remedy is now probably in court. 

So, I think the whole clause 3 to me seems not to solve any problem; instead it is creating difficulties for someone to consider whether to apply or not; in what form they should apply; and the proper place. I don’t know whether the proper place is where you should apply from or where you should deliver what you have applied for. So, I still think the controversy is applying; what amounts to applying? Applying to you to meet your obligations is probably asking too much, and I should do it in a proper place.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, let us read all the provisions. The head note is time for performance. I think that one should be captured. We have already disallowed the amendment of the committee to add the words “depending on the nature of the contract at the sentence”. So, it remains, where a promisee and a promisor is defined as the person who makes an offer. So, where a promisor, or if you want to substitute “a person making the offer” is to perform a promise in a contract without a request by the promisee, that the person who accepts - and time for performance is not specified in the contract - the engagement shall be performed within reasonable time. That is very clear. 

Where there is no specific time mentioned, reasonable time - and most lawyers here know that reasonable time has been decided in court cases, and it depends upon the circumstances and the nature of the contract. Where a promise is to be performed on a specific day; in other words, there is an agreement that there must be some specific day and a promisor, that is the one who makes the offer, undertakes to perform it without request by a promisee. In other words, he will perform without a request first being made. Then the promisor, the one who makes it, may perform it at any time during the usual hours of business on that day, at the place at which the promise ought to be performed. I think that too is clear.

Clause 3, that is where our problem is; where a promise is to be performed on a specific day and a promisor, that is the one who makes it, does not undertake to perform it without a request by a promisee; in other words, there is reluctance on the part of the promisor to perform the obligation, then the promise, that is the one who accepts the offer, to say “shall” is certainly inordinate because it is exercising his or her right and it is up to him; you don’t bind him to doing it. So, it should be, “may apply for the performance of the promise at a proper place within the usual hours of business”. 

For application; according to hon. Odonga Otto, I think if we were to go into the nitty-gritty of applications - of how they should be made - we shall end up making more regulations and statutory instruments in an Act of Parliament.

These are residual powers which can be emphasised normally under enabling provisions, and I think this can be provided for in other terms. But I think the fact of the matter is the use of the word “shall” or “may”. I think the word should be “may”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR RUHINDI: I think the next one in sub-clause (4) should be consequential. In 3, “may apply” and then in 4 should also be “may apply.” That is consequential.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, on 42(5) which was 39(5), the committee proposes that the words “subject to provisions of this section” should be put before the word “performance”. In other words, it would read, “subject to provisions of this section, the performance of a promise may be made in any manner and at any time which a promisee proscribes or sanctions.” And the justification is to subject the performance of a promise to the provisions of the section.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Read it again. 

MR TASHOBYA: The new clause would read as follows: “Subject to provisions of this section, the performance of a promise may be made in any manner and at any time which a promisee proscribes or sanctions.” The justification is to subject the performance of a promise to the provisions of the section.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 42 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 42, as amended agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47 

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes that in clause 47(4) which was 44(4), the words “do so” should be deleted and replaced with the words “claim compensation”. The current sub-clause would then read; “Sub-section 3 does not apply if at the time of acceptance of performance at a time other than the agreed time, the promisee gives notice to the promiser of his or her intention to claim compensation.” The justification is for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The sub-heading is “Failure to perform within a fixed time”. 

MR TASHOBYA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How does it relate to what you are saying? Sub-section 3 does not apply if the time of acceptance of performance at a time other than the agreed time, the promisee gives notice to the promiser of his or her intention to claim compensation. 

MR RUHINDI: I think in that clause or section in 2, it is “entitlement to compensation”. So it is for the avoidance of doubt and to specify claiming compensation. He is correct.   
   
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 47 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 47, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 48 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that the original 45? 

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much. The committee proposes that clauses 45, 46 and 47 should be deleted because they were transferred to the other side and the Bill should be re-numbered. The justification is that they have been removed under – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But we already transferred them.  

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: The committee requested for a re-numbering. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which we did. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: After renumbering, we fall back to 48 as the original. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 48 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that in clause 54(2) the words “Section 45 (2)” should be deleted and replaced with “Section 25 (2),” which is a consequential amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 54 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that in clause 54(2)(c), the words “payments or other advantages which would have been due to him or her under the contract had it not become void including an advantage on part of an advantage, discharge of payment not greater in value that the…” should be deleted. The justification is that they are redundant. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Read it in full. 

MR TASHOBYA: So if we start from 2, “Where a party to a contract incurs expenses for the purposes of performance of the contract, which becomes void after performance under Section 25(2), the court may, if it considers it just to do so in all circumstances, make an order that the party recovers the whole or any part of any expenses incurred.” So we delete from “payment,” which is in line two up to “the” which is in the last line of the same clause. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the justification? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I support the proposal of the committee because the old provision was trying to tie the hands of the court in terms of putting precisely what those expenses would be excluding. In my opinion, if you put it as broadly as it is, it enhances the performance of the discretion of court because you are giving it a broader spectrum. You make an order that the party recovers the whole or any part of the expenses incurred; it is precise. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But are there no other advantages in addition to the payments? 

MR RUHINDI: It really comes to the same thing. Because you see, make an order that the party recovers the whole or any part for as long as you have said, “The whole or any part…” now it goes further to read, “of any payments or other advantages which would have been due to him or her under the contract had it not become void including an advantage or part of an advantage this charge of payment not greater in value than the expenses incurred.” Now there is some kind of conclusion. The professor seems to have a different view.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, I do not see that these long elements here are redundant because they are not expenses. If they were expenses, then they would be redundant and you would just go straight to expenses. What the committee now does is to eliminate elements that you would claim. For example, I would have already rented a house for two months. That is not part of expenses but it would be advantage accruing from the contract. So if you eliminate them, then there is no provision for the person to recover because 2(a) allows retaining – that is what is already there. Sub-clause (3) actually allows you to make claims, not just on expenses but claims related to the contract. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are even locking out interest. You say you spent 200 and no interest; you know a court can award you the compensation plus interest on this and that. I do not know why you are excluding that? You should leave it open.

MR RUHINDI: Let us read the whole of it, Madam Chairperson: “This is an obligation of the person who receives advantage under a void agreement -(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, we stood over some provisions and rather than locking ourselves to these provisions, we could we also stand over this so that we consider this with the rest of what was stood over and we proceed with the rest of the business. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us stand over that. 

Clause 54, stood over.

Clause 55

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 55 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we delete clause 60. Clause 60 reads that, “A person to whom money is paid by mistake or to whom anything is delivered by mistake or under coercion shall repay or return the money or thing delivered ….” We think that this is already taken care of by the law. It does not have to come under this law again. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, even if the chairman talks of coercion, this one talks of retrieving a benefit from someone who got it by mistake. I do not see how coercion comes in. I think it would still do no harm to – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why do you want to delete it? “A person to who money is paid by mistake or to whom anything is delivered by mistake or under coercion shall repay or return the money or thing delivered ….” If I deliver something to you by mistake - 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, this part says, “… relations similar to those created by contract …” and if you look at clauses 57, 58 and 59, they do not cover what is provided in clause 60 and, therefore, clause 60 cannot be redundant if it is not covered. But this law now recognises it and I think it is important to do that. So, clause 60 should stand. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: The chairman may have a case because the way this provision is may make getting money difficult in any circumstance. I may give hon. Ruhindi money and then tomorrow, I come and say it was by mistake. So, when does the story end? And by the way, I can do it deliberately so that he receives it and then I come back at a time when he cannot return it. So, maybe the chairman has a case. We may open the flood gates and we do not know where it will end. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Supposing someone intends to enter into a contract with the Attorney-General, Dr Khiddu Makubuya, and then when he arrives at the office, he lands at the office of hon. Ruhindi and hands over money to him with the belief that hon. Ruhindi is the Attorney-General and then later on, he discovers that actually hon. Ruhindi is not the Attorney-General but Dr Makubuya is? Shouldn’t hon. Ruhindi refund that money? This is what he is saying.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Maybe, Madam Chairperson, we can then say, “a person to who money in a contract …” to be specific to a contract. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But the whole thing is on contracts.
 
MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes, but supposing we state that in a contract if we receive the money, and probably by rightly holding out we can tie it to a contract so that someone who receives money and is not in the contract cannot have this contract provision enforced on that person. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, this is really to try and bring contractual obligations to those things that happen in life. For instance, we used to play Monopoly and we used to have this thing of the bank error in your favour, where you would collect 200 pounds. Now what this provision is saying is that if you receive money on your account by mistake, you have an obligation to return the money and I think there is nothing wrong with this. But if you do not provide for this, I can eat the money and that is it. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Chair, my concern in this clause is “…or under coercion” if you come and give me money at gun point and I take it for fear of being killed, then you later on come back and ask me to return the money, then it is not fair. When forced to take it, really nobody should bother me later. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Should we limit it to “mistake”? 

MR RUHINDI: We can leave it up to “mistake.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So should we delete “coercion”? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, my concern still remains. If we leave that provision without inserting the word “contract”, then it is by default another way of entering a contract. You may enter a contract unknowingly. You may just find money in your account; you will already be in a contract.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Otto, earlier, we looked at implied contracts and express contracts. A contract can be implied from your conduct; you may act in a way that you commit yourself. I think we should delete “coercion” since a mistake is understandable. 

MR RUHINDI: Of course, this is why we are the Parliament and making these laws. Sometimes if things keep on coming up –(Interjection)- I now see the bigger picture in this provision. Should we specify that, “The person knowingly receives” because if you have a bank account and money is credited on your account – and it happens in these banks sometimes – and you keep on operating your account, at the end of the day, they may come to you and say, “We want Shs 20 million”. For people who have got hefty accounts, they may not actually realise that Shs 20 million has been credited on their accounts. And the bank says, “We want our money,” and at that time you have no money. So, should this delivery be by the knowledge of the person to whom it is delivered? If we can capture the, “with the knowledge of the person who receives”, it would be important.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, what this provision merely says is that if they challenge hon. Ruhindi to the fact that money was wrongly credited to his account, he would accept that he received that money once the evidence is put before him and that becomes almost a kind of contract that he pays back. All he would have to do now is talk with the bank. The bank cannot say that, “Pay back today”. He will say, “I do not have the money. It was not my mistake”, so you agree on the terms. They can convert it into a loan or something, but this allows the bank to follow such monies. 

If you sent a kid to deliver money and the money was delivered to somebody else, obviously you cannot say, “Because the kid made a mistake, the money cannot be claimed or the person who received the money does not have an obligation to give you back the money”. This is what this provision is saying. Let us be obligated - where it is not yours it is not yours for heaven’s sake.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This will bring in the principle of implied agency also. We should remove coercion. Yes, but leave the mistake. I now put the question that clause 60 be amended as proposed.
   
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 60, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61 

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes that the words, which arose in the usual course of business, which the parties knew when they made the contract would be likely to result from the breach, should be removed. In other words, the new sub-clause would read: “Where there is a breach of contract, the party who suffers the breach is entitled to receive from the party who breaches the contract compensation for any loss or damage caused to him or her.” We think that the committee thought that the subsequent words are not really necessary. It is clear enough if we stop at her.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 61 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Clause 61(4) which reads, “In estimating the loss or damage arising from a breach of contract, the means of remedying the inconvenience caused by non-performance of the contract, which exists shall be taken into account.” The committee is of the view that this is actually the law. It is straight law and the courts would in normal circumstances always 
take into account consideration of this matter and, therefore, the committee recommends deletion of that sub-clause. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I agree entirely with the provision. In fact when I read this 
provision, it seemed like putting into law a provision beyond what we want to do, which is the law of contract. We are even trying to direct the court on how to implement this very law. It is not appropriate. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So we stop where - the whole of sub-clause 4? Can’t you say, “Taken into account”? Supposing I do not plead mitigation, where will the court wake up to commit me? You have said you have moved the common law - if I do not plead it? How do I get relief? 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: The problem then would be, what about those other I things that the court has not spelt out? What happens? Once you begin to specify like this, then you cause a problem because the court will say, “The law says I should only take into account this”. A lawyer defending the person says, “No, the law says you only take into account this”. The process in court will become very difficult. This one causes loss to none of the two parties to a contract. But it just burdens the court with restrictions that the court does not need. The court is objective enough to consider all elements and they take into account all elements. That is the duty of the court. We should not tell the court what to do. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I would have a contrary opinion that we retain that sub-clause (4) because 61(2) is tying the hands of the court. That compensation referred to in sub-clause (1) is 
not to be given for any remote or indirect loss or damage sustained by reason of breach. If I cannot in my pleadings claim any indirect loss or damage and then we are eliminating 4, it means virtually, the pleadings will be very shallow. Some would rather delete sub-clause (2) instead and retain sub-clause 4. A pleading can be stuck out just because it is asking for indirect losses, which has been provided under 61(2). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why didn’t you remove “shall” and put “may” so that we are 
not directing but we are giving an option to the court instead of closing the door completely? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think the best thing is to leave the word “shall” if we are to retain it because then those that exist shall be taken into account. When you say “shall be taken into account”, it does not mean that we shall apply them. You take them into account and consider them. You may consider them and find them inapplicable or not relevant and you leave them but you shall have taken them into account. That does not tie the hands of the court in applying others that are not directly specified here but those that exist shall be taken into account. We would be better off by retaining the provision as it is.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: After reviewing this and having listened to hon. Odonga Otto, this particular section should be retained as it is. Because what they are saying is that if I can no longer deliver what you said, but I have some alternative that is valid, the court should accept it so that the person to whom I am obligated does not unduly cripple me on account of what we signed in the contract. They are saying the means of remedying the inconvenience caused by non performance of the contract exists. I mean if I can pay you money for these things, why would you insist on penalising me?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, even if we are to leave it, I would suggest that in the second line, the words “the means of remedying” could probably be deleted so that it would read “in estimating the loss or damage arising from the breach of contract, the inconvenience caused by the non performance of the contract which exits shall be taken into account” because I do not know what value “means of remedying” would add to the section. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, earlier we were talking about a situation where when we had riots, maybe you had a contract on that day on Kampala Road, you could not arrive because the roads were not accessible. Then the court says, “But you could have gone through Gayaza Road via Wandegeya and reached the place”. You know, those are mitigating factors. This is dealing with mitigating factors. Let us leave it as it is.

I put the question that clause 61, as amended, do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 61, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I request that we stand over the amendment to clause 62 so that I can have a little more consultation with the Attorney-General.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Stood over.

Clause 62, stood over.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that in clause 64, sub-clause 2(f) the word “substantial” be deleted and be replaced with the word “fundamental”. In other words it would read, “…the claimant committed a fundamental breach of his or her obligations under this contract ….” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is fundamental breach the same as substantial breach?

MR TASHOBYA: The clause concerns fundamental breaches.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, they are not interchangeable.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: And also there is a problem where you say “but where the breach is minor”. How can it be fundamental and minor at the same time?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is comparing levels of breach; a minor breach and a substantial breach. Fundamental is really complete breach.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: If it is fundamental, it cannot be minor.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Fundamental breach is total breach. Fundamental is bigger than substantial so this one is dealing with grades of breach.

MR RUHINDI: I think let us read from sub-clause (2). “A party is not entitled to specific performance of a contract where the claimant committed a substantial breach of his or her obligations under the contract but where the breach is minor, specific performance is available to him or her subject to his or her paying compensation for the breach”. 

In other words, where the specific performance of the contract cannot happen at all, that is where there is fundamental breach. I tend to agree with the proposal of the committee. I do not know where my team had gotten the word “substantial” from. The normal word used where contracts are fundamentally flawed is “fundamental”. Of course, hon. Odonga Otto’s memory must still be sharp with the case of Karsales v. Wallis, where the vehicle that was actually delivered was a shell and that is the basis of the fundamental breach of contract principle breach of contract. The root of it cannot hold at all. So, the expression that is normally understood in such terms is fundamental. Even if you were to look at the levels of breach, you would see that actually the one fitting is fundamental because there is no specific performance at all right from two.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, the opposite of minor is major. Major breach would be better. If we are to retain minor then definitely major is better.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, as the Attorney-General said, fundamental breach is now a legal concept that can be ground for specific performance to be denied. Like if I ask you to supply me with a trouser and you bring me a skirt, it amounts to fundamentals. So instead of using the word substantial, which will bring a new concept, I would still agree with the chairman and Attorney-General that for legal consistency, we just put the word, “fundamental”.

MR RUHINDI: Since we have dealt with fundamental and no specific performance, rather than using the word “minor” because that would also create problems, why wouldn’t we say that in cases where the breach is not fundamental then specific performance is available to him or her, subject to his or her paying compensation for the breach.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 64 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 64, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR TASHOBYA: In clause 72(1), the committee proposes the word “by” should be deleted and replaced with the words, “after giving reasonable notice”. Then it would read, “A continuing guarantee may, with regard to the future transaction, be revoked after giving reasonable notice by a guarantor at any time by notice to a creditor”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think you have jumped. We are on 71. What are you amending? You are removing something?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I don’t see the problem with the way it is. What that provision says by using the word “by” is that by that act of giving notice, you have revoked. In other words if you posted yesterday, you have in effect given notice so there is no need for change.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If I no longer want to be your guarantor you say in future anything you do is not mine. Why shouldn’t you allow me to do that? Okay, I put the question that clause 72 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to.

Clause 79

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes on the head note of clause 79 that the word “the” should be inserted after the word “discharge” which would read “release of one guarantor does not discharge the other”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that is a harmless amendment. I put the question that clause 79 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 79, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 81, agreed to.

Clause 82, agreed to.

Clause 83, agreed to.

Clause 84, agreed to.

Clause 85, agreed to.

Clause 86, agreed to.

Clause 87, agreed to.

Clause 88, agreed to.

Clause 89

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, we must be tired for the simple reason that if you look at what we passed in clause 79, the committee recommends that we add the word “the” after “discharge” and the word “the” is there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In the heading? It was not there in the heading.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Oh, in the heading. But still, we are tired. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you tired? But I think there are only three amendments remaining. 

Clause 89

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 89 do stand part of the Bill. Clause 89; do you have something to say?

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, the head note of clause 89(1) should be deleted and replaced with the following, “bailment by person in possession of goods.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Instead of modes of bailment?

MR TASHOBYA: Instead of modes of bailment. Further, sub-clause (1) should be deleted and the clause should be re-numbered. The justification is that there is no clear distinction between the definition of the words “bailee” and “bailment” in clause 88 and clause 89(1).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The bailee is the person to whom things are bailed and bailment is the act. The bailer is the one who bails. What is the problem? Okay, I think let me ask the minister to -

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports there to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.67
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled the Contracts Bill, 2008, and stood over provisions 41, 54 and 62; considered the Bill up to clause 88 and passed those clauses with amendments except those ones which were stood over. I beg to report. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do adopt the report the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

 (Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we had issued a legislative programme to run until 8 October, but yesterday I informed you that the Cabinet is proceeding for a retreat starting tomorrow. Consequently, we cannot sit tomorrow and, therefore, I am proposing that we adjourn the House from today up to 13 October so that the Cabinet finish their retreat; you take your brief recess, go for Independence and we will resume on 13 October. 

In the meantime, I want to remind you that there is a meeting of the Appointments Committee tomorrow at 10 o’clock. So, please ensure that you attend. 

The Office of the Clerk is directed to reschedule the legislative programme and issue it as amended. Hon. Members, I want to thank you very much for the work we have done. The House is adjourned; and I wish you a happy Independence Day. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.51 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 October 2009.)

