Tuesday, 11 September 2012 
  
Parliament met at 10.40 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 
  
PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)
  
The House was called to order. 
  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you very much for coming for this sitting. We are starting a bit late and so we should go straight to business. The next item.  

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Chairperson. It looks like the committee is still working and they have not quite finalised on this. So, we may have to stand over it and we see how we move forward. This also means that we cannot handle item three. We will also need to suspend items four and five. We shall stand over items four and five and go to item six.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that a report of the committee was presented and we allowed the honourable member who had a minority report to present his report today. I have now received a copy of the minority report as I had earlier directed. I will now allow the honourable member responsible for the minority report to present his report in 15 minutes. Proceed.

2.31
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, my colleague was given 30 minutes and I hope –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. We will see.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I thank you very much. Well, as the main report, which has already been presented has attempted to outline the themes of the Bill, it has failed in my humble view, to address the core issues and omissions that would otherwise guide this House to avoid the Bill’s contradictions with the Constitution. 

Under Article 2 of the Constitution of Uganda, the Constitution is supreme, and whatever this House does in terms of legislation, it should be measured from the yardstick of constitutionality.

Under Article 2(2) of the Constitution, if any law is inconsistent with the Constitution to the extent of that inconsistency, that law is null and void. 

I took trouble to exclusively look at the Bill titled, “The Petroleum Exploration and Production Bill, 2005” and I found a number of omissions, which greatly impact on the Constitution, and that is why I have found it absolutely necessary to point out these omissions. 

The committee report, for example, fails to live to its own test of addressing these core issues, and I feel that a programme of oil production that is going to take over 40 years should address itself to the confines of the Constitution. 

Uganda is one of the most outstanding countries in terms of beauty. It is a beautiful country, and that beauty must live on even after the production of oil, to avoid becoming a curse. So, these particular laws should save the ecological wonders which provide the beauty we see, and what beauty will be seen by our next generation. 

The Albertine Graben is a unique diverse ecological treasure, harbouring over 50 percent of the birds present in Uganda, including a unique species of the Crested Crane, 39 percent of the mammals, 19 percent amphibians and 14 percent of the reptiles. If any ecological error is made in the course of oil production, we may not only end with an oil curse, but we could also weaken the state of water flow, hence killing the waters of the Nile. When the Nile waters die, you have no hydro-electricity guarantee in terms of productivity because dead waters rarely flow.

My first concern is about the title we give to the Bill. Uganda now has a national oil policy known as the National Oil and Gas Policy, 2009. The two Bills, including the Refinery Bill on Petroleum, owe their existence to the National Oil Gas Policy.  That being so, means that the current National Oil and Gas Policy should be amended to read, “National Petroleum Policy” so as to be in line with the proposed two Bills. A contradiction of the two would be very bad because in law, oil and gas is not necessary synonymous with petroleum.

Parliament in 2005, noted the mistake the CA Delegates had made by deleting the contents of Article 244 and replacing them with a new provision stated hereunder. You can look at Article 244 of the Constitution. I would like to propose that the definition of “Petroleum” pursuant to that provision is too mild, lacks precision and is, therefore, ambiguous. 

I would like to invite Parliament to re-examine the contents of that provision so that when challenged in courts of law over the contracts we have made, we do not regret. 

I have proposed a very precise definition of the word, “Petroleum” to avoid ambiguity, which is very common in regard to the present provision under Article 244. It is, “A naturally occurring liquid or solid material that is found in certain sedimentary rocks, and is composed of hydro-carbons formed by anaerobic decay and of the organic matter.”  

I propose that you look at Chris Park Oxford Dictionary of Environmental Science and Conservation, and also propose that petroleum can be defined to produce gasoline, paraffin, and diesel oil, also known as crude oil. The emphasis belongs to John Ken-Lukyamuzi the man.

I have also invited you to look at the many contracts Uganda has signed. Many of those contracts have problems. Some of them were signed before we got a multiparty parliamentary democratic system. They are still binding on us even if they have excesses. Some of them were signed under duress. Others are bad enough to be nudum pactum. And when they are nudum pactum, Mr Speaker, you can imagine how much of a task you would have should we be challenged locally and internationally.  

The other very important point which I have discovered is that, assuming we have about 10 contracts, even if those contracts are unique because they are about oil, they should be commensurate with the existing Contracts Act, 2010 and the Companies Act. You cannot isolate them from the existing law. I did not see any substance close to that in terms of connectivity in regards to the two Bills, including this one that I am discussing.

It is important for us to look at the situation in Ghana so that we don’t work in isolation, because Ghana is a Common Law country with which we have a lot in common. Under the Ghana Constitution of 1992, Article 268 states, “Any transaction or contract involving the grant of concession to any person entered into after this constitution, including a concession on mineral oil, would necessitate a vote of 2/3 of all parliament’s approval.” 

It is unexpected of this Parliament to leave all the authority regarding the approval of those contracts with the Executive. Parliament is there, under Article 79, to take action, examine these contracts and advise accordingly. 

I, therefore, propose the following amendment. That the Petroleum Bills should clearly provide for the re-negotiation of the existing PSAs in Uganda, through compliance with the Contracts Act, in order to address the economic gaps created by misrepresentation. The doctrine of promissory estoppel should be applied to redress Uganda’s bad petroleum contracts. The Bills should have provisions for negotiations for all existing PSAs. A number of the oil contracts already signed have a lot to be desired.

In regard to the oil royalties, I would like to invite Parliament to take with caution the voices of people from Bunyoro. They have spoken and many other people have also spoken. We should avoid a situation that can culminate into the creation of a movement organisation like the one in Ogoniland called MEND. MEND was initiated to fight for the equitable rights of the people in the area where oil is extracted. If you ignore the people of Bunyoro, they could also generate a movement of that kind to fight for the equitable rights of the people of Bunyoro and the kingdom at large. So, you should listen to the people of Bunyoro.

I have not seen the contents of the Finance Bill regarding the royalties, but I propose that this House gives chance to the people of Bunyoro; to hear and listen to them so that we collectively find a solution.

One very important point; you all know that it is not enough for the Environment Act to address environmental excesses in terms of gas emissions when it stops at the legal level. There is need for the hazards related to oil production, because of their extremity, to be seen to be derived from the basic law so that all oil investors know that if you mess up with Uganda’s oil, you can be described as good as a murderer. And this is not sufficiently stated in the Constitution. 

Article 39 of the Constitution says that Ugandans have a right to a clean environment. That is a mere observation. It is not a penalty. It is not a sanction. There is need for us to develop a clause which addresses the atrocities related to negligence in terms of oil production, so that we guard against unscrupulous oil investors and that demands for the creation of a Constitutional provision as is the case with the Constitution of Nigeria and Angola. 

A case study in Nigeria is also interesting, if I may quote Article 134(i):

“There shall be by federation to each region, a sum equal to 50 percent of:

a)	The proceeds of any royalty received by the federation in respect of any minerals extracted in that region;

b)	And any mining rents derived by the federation during that year from within that region.

The federation shall credit to the distributable pool account a sum equal to 30 percent:

a)	The proceeds of any royalty received by the federation in respect of minerals extracted in any region, and 

b)	Any mining rents derived by the federation from within any region.”

This is just an example to demonstrate to you that you cannot isolate the area where oil is derived. You must address the constitutionality of their demands. 

I propose, therefore, that we go back to some examples of living nations that have got oil so that we can avoid the curse. 

I have also proposed - I am not going to mention the details of proposals for amendment within the Bill, but I would like to invite you to look at the commensurate date. For example, it has been queried. I find it queer that the Bill seeks to shift these legislative powers from this House to the minister, who will at his or her discretion determine when a law enacted by this House can have the effect of law. The decision should lie with Parliament. 

I am also inviting you, therefore, through a humble submission -(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, three minutes.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Five minutes? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Five minutes.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I have proposed that this Act shall come into force in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Constitution. The purpose of the Act is not defined in tune with the constitutional demands. 

Under Article 1, power belongs to the people. Why do you isolate the definition of concern in the Constitution from the Bill? The Bill’s intentions should be re-examined.

Mr Speaker, the purpose of this Act is to regulate the exploration, development and production of Uganda’s oil and gas resources, and to establish an effective legal and governance regime to ensure that the oil and gas resources of Uganda are utilised and managed for the benefit of the present and future generations. 

Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section 1, this Act should be seen to ensure transparency, and accountability in the conduct of all activities regulated under this Act, whether undertaken by Government, corporate or private entities, or individuals.

Mr Speaker, I propose that the provision that over empowers the minister be revised. Parliament should not be a spectator. Why should you give the minister all the powers? As Members of Parliament, you represent people’s interests. That is why they elected you. And when you reach here and you throw away those powers, what do you expect the people who elected you to do? The next course of action will be to take caution and be pushed to reprimand you. But do you want to be reprimanded because you have ignored the concerns of the people on oil?

So, I have proposed amendments in the provision related to the minister’s powers. I have also proposed amendments to how the National Oil Company should be constituted. I have further proposed the conduct of the members of the board and authority, and the directions of the board to the minister. This is because you left the ministers so free that they can do anything. But I have also drawn away the powers you had given to the President, on oil matters. For what reason would you be giving the President powers on oil matters? You own these powers as people’s representatives and you should also transact business in such a way that those powers are not wilted away by the President. I don’t see why you have to bring in the President. He should only appoint certain people for Parliament to approve.

I have also proposed the content and the constitution of the members of the board and the authority.

With those few words, Mr Speaker, I do think that the honourable members will have mercy on the minority report. Speaking by precedent, in 2004, I moved a one-man minority report on the provision necessitating amendments in the Land Act. That was a clarion call that caused Members of Parliament to re-examine something of a specific nature in the Land Act. My minority report on the amendments took over those in the main report and became law. This one can equally take over the main report and become law. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the honourable member for Rubaga South, for the exposition on the view the people who did not quite agree with the majority report of the committee. It is now well articulated.

Honourable members, this is the time for us to start the general debate, which will be based on the principles of the Bill, and not the actual provisions. We will be dealing with those provisions at the committee stage.

The motion for the second reading is that the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Bill, 2012,” be read the second time. The debate is now open and will take an hour for today, with each Member using four minutes. Thereafter, we will see how it goes. Debate begins now. Are we ready to debate? Do I put the question for the motion for the second reading? Yes, hon. Richard Sebuliba Mutumba.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence on this matter. I came prepared for the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. In fact, I have been caught offguard. I thought that hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi was bringing this in lieu of the fact that he would prepare us to compare the two reports – the main one and this minority report before we debate the two. And as I speak, and with all due respect to the House, I have been caught offguard; I cannot compare the two now. Yes, I have some facts, but I think I need to be more informed on very important aspects of our society.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the issue of the principles of this Bill and not the actual provisions? Can we have a report from the Budget Committee before we decide on how to proceed? Yes, Chairperson of the Budget Committee, can you take us through?

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This morning, the Budget Committee sat, but we didn’t harmonise the figures. And as I talk, the figures are just being worked upon. We will be ready tomorrow. But in the process –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you came in earlier; the chairman stayed longer. Maybe he has some more information. Yes, do you have any updates on the status of the Supplementary Appropriation Bill?

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My problem usually is producing copies, and I don’t know why this happens whenever my committee is to present a report. Anyway, we are ready to present our report, but what I am sure of is that Members will ask for copies which are still being photocopied. So, should I proceed, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the Supplementary Appropriation Bill?

MR TIM LWANGA: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, appropriation will be ready after supply. We should handle this supplementary appropriation to close the last financial year before we get to discuss issues of this financial year.

MR TIM LWANGA: So, should I proceed, Sir?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, because the motion has not been moved. So, we will have to adjust the Order Paper and come back to it later. We have moved to item six on the Petroleum Bill. And that being the agreement by Members, that we defer debate until they acquaint themselves with the facts in both the main and minority reports, we can now go back to item three. This item is on the Supplementary Bill. If the copies of the report are ready, we can ask the minister to move the motion before we determine how far the committee can proceed with this business, because this is mainly about figures that we passed in the last Parliament as a supplementary budget. I think we can handle that, not so?

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2012

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija):  Mr Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2012” be read for the second time. I beg to move.
   
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is your motion seconded? Okay, seconded. Justify your Bill’s motion for a second reading.
 
MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, the object of the Bill is to provide for a supplementary appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund, under Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 a sum of Shs 638,455,051,000 to meet the additional expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

You will recall that Shs 10,323,750,828,000 was approved by this august House for the financial year 2011/2012 Budget of which Shs 8,902,187,020,000 was appropriated and Shs 1,421,563,806,000 was for statutory expenditure.
 
In accordance with Article 152, (2) and (3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, allow me to make the following highlights on the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2012: 

You will recall that a total supplementary expenditure of Shs 733,196,527,000 was approved by Parliament during the course of the financial year 2011/2012, of which Shs 94,721,476,000 was for statutory expenditure and the balance of Shs 638,455,051,000 was appropriated as provided in the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2012. The breakdown of this supplementary expenditure is shown in the table as follows: 

Schedule I: The recurrent expenditure was Shs 161,715,629,000; and development expenditure, Shs 25,888,243,000

Schedule II: The recurrent expenditure was Shs 300,770,606,000; and the development expenditure, Shs 150,080,394,000

The supplementary expenditures above were approved by Parliament as follows: 
Supplementary Schedule I, including the statutory figures was Shs 215,604,052,000; and Supplementary Schedule II was Shs 517,592,475,000.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I wish to request this august House to consider and approve the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2012 amounting to Shs 636,445,051,000. I beg to move.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, our committee is ready with the report even if its text is still in print. The chairman of the committee has a copy; can we in the meantime allow him to report to Parliament on that? This is a fairly limited issue. 

3.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Timothy Lwanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on Budget on the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2012. 

Introduction

On 5 September 2012, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to Parliament the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2012. The Budget Committee has scrutinised the Bill and it is my pleasure to present the committee report. 

The committee closely examined the figures in the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2012, vote by vote, and confirmed that the figures stand as passed by Parliament under Supplementary Schedule I and Schedule II; and when you get our report, you will have the schedules attached. 

Observations

(a)	While Parliament duly approved the supplementary expenditure, the committee was dismayed to learn that some of the funds under supplementary requests were not released to the respective sectors. This raises the question as to whether the supplementary requests were actually of an emergency nature. 

(b)	The supplementary expenditure constituted 7.1 percent of the approved budget. This was on the high side and outside the regulations. 

(c)	Supplementary budgets affect output and outcomes originally intended for in the budget, and also undermine the budget process when its targeted outputs are not realised. Supplementary budgets erode the credibility of the budget process and the effectiveness of the public expenditure management reforms and practices. 

Government should come out with a law that discourages supplementary expenditure. 

Recommendations 

The above observations notwithstanding, the committee recommends that the House passes the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2012 since the figures as approved were the same when we checked them, except for a difference of Shs Shs 2,000 resulting from a rounding off error. That is all I have to report, Mr Speaker. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion before Parliament is that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2012 be read the second time. We have debate on the principles of this Bill, if necessary. Is it a matter that will draw debate on its principles? 

3.09
THE SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I did expect Government, particularly the Minister of Finance, to make a response to the observations made by the committee. For example, there was non-release of funds that had already been authorised on the request of Government to various Government institutions. 

The indiscipline of Government in terms of budget performance should be addressed. They come here and spend valuable time with us and don’t eventually release the funds, and there is no explanation at all. So, before we rush to pass this, we need an explanation. Why were the funds not released, yet you came asking for those funds and identified those particular areas as priority areas of spending?

The fundamental question, which the committee actually raises, is whether there is really need to pass these supplementary expenditures if we don’t show its urgency. Supplementary expenditures should always come to cater for something unanticipated or unforeseen, but it has just become a routine. Government just walks in and sometimes they are asking for a supplementary release of monies yet they have already undertaken those activities. 

Parliament becomes just a rubberstamp and I don’t think we should allow this indiscipline to continue going on, and the Leader of Government Business says we should pass it. We demand an explanation; you don’t have to waste our time. 

For example, departments under the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs have been complaining that you asked for a supplementary, Parliament passed it, and yet you never gave them the money and the activities remain unfunded. These are the explanations we need from the minister before we can go to the stage of passing the Bill. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.13
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am equally disturbed because from my elementary English, I thought that supplementaries refer to emergencies, and if they are emergencies, I am surprised that even the money we appropriate is not given. This draws me back to one of the observations we made; that even after the end of a financial year, there are residual amounts - monies that remain after the financial years, but are not captured, and we start from zero as if there is noting that has remained.

One fundamental question is, Where do we get this money for supplementaries from? That is why the Chairperson of the Budget Committee observed that it has affected the entire process because it is about planning. One of the things we have been blaming the colonialists and donors for is that they are putting pressure on us on how to budget, and even read the budgets of the East African countries; but to me, Mr Speaker, passing this without getting to the nitty-gritty of why they never spend the money we appropriate, defeats the whole logic of us sitting here and appropriating money. They have rightly said it has affected the budget process, and they are proposing a supplementary law, but why should we even propose a supplementary law when whatever we are appropriating is not used?

I sit on the Physical Infrastructure Committee, and most of the supplementaries which were supposed to go into that sector were not released; and that is why we have all these bad roads. So, like my colleague has said, it is high time we put our feet on the ground and they gave us the exact details of what happened and why the money was not utilised as appropriated. 

After all, when we pass these budgets, everything has been catered for. Why should we turn around after two or four months and then we come back with - it may mean two things; one maybe that there are some funds, which are below the line account, and which they are holding; or they are not being straight with Parliament on the way their activities are being proposed. We read the policy statements, take our time on them, and scrutinise the figures, but at the end of the day, things are not done. 

Yes, we are in a hurry to appropriate this, but I think there are certain questions which need to be answered as to why these figures are not balancing, and what happened to those which were appropriated and not met.

3.15
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will direct my concern to the Chairman of the Budget Committee. My understanding is that the figures that are in this Bill are not planned expenditure, but monies, which have already been spent. So, there should be no question as to whether they have actually been spent or not. The point is that they were spent and he has actually told us that.

It is surprising that the same chairman has told us that some of these figures, which are indicated there, were not actually released, but at the same time, in his conclusion, he says that we should go ahead, consider and pass it. It is a contradiction, because, why are we passing figures, which we have already found were not released?

I would have expected the chairman, for instance, to suggest that an investigation be made into why these monies were not spent; but to bring figures, which you know are actually wrong and cooked up, and then at the same time tell us that we pass them, is like we are simply performing a ritual here in Parliament. So, what are you really telling us to do? To pass the wrong figures, which we have found out were never released? I need clarification on this, Mr Chairman. Thank you.

3.17
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Chairperson, Budget Committee. I have some comments on the observations. Here they are telling us that some of the funds that we appropriate or that come as a supplementary are never released, and also, in that recommendation, they are saying these supplementaries really undermine the budget.

I have a question to Finance. Sometimes, when we are supplying to some of these ministries during the budget process, they give specific Indicative Planning Figures (IPFs). Why don’t they consider increasing such figures so that we don’t go for supplementaries, because at the end of it all, we as parliamentarians do not know how much we have spent in a specific ministry? 

It surprises me in a situation where some ministries bring to us a supplementary budget to approve retrospectively. It is bad. The Ministry of Finance should be considerate. How does such a ministry spend such monies without the approval of Parliament? If money that is being spent by a ministry should be approved by Parliament, you should not bring us something that you have already spent and ask us to approve it as a supplementary budget. This is wrong and needs to be corrected.

It is my appeal that if possible, the Ministry of Finance should not limit too much the specific ministries that demand money that they bring to us in form of a supplementary budget.

In their recommendation, they are saying Government should consider bringing a law to discourage such supplementary appropriation, because we lose money in such ways. You bring it, somebody utilises what we have approved in the budget and brings it as a supplementary or they utilise that and the accounting officers do not disclose these monies to them, and they find shortages. Then we have to come and approve a supplementary budget. This is too much for us! Can you please correct it? Thank you.

3.20
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This country has got very bright economists, and we have people in the Ministry of Finance who are very bright, and when they come out with a budget, the Parliament - first I want to thank the chairman for the report he has just presented. He has come out boldly to point out exactly what should be done by this Parliament to protect the budget when it is made.

Three months down the road, after the budget, ministries come and ask for supplementaries, which means we do not have discipline in following the guidelines and the budget we have presented to Parliament. It is as if it is a joke. You plan, you bring the budget here, Parliament sits and appropriates it, but three months later, you come and ask for supplementaries! We are not going to be taken seriously in this country. 

Secondly, seven percent above what is required! We are just taking this country for a joke. I agree with the chairperson that this House should come out with a law stopping this Parliament from approving supplementary budgets. We must stick to the budget so that departments can function properly. 

I also keep wondering where Government gets this money which they request as a supplementary, after the money has already been spent. Where does this money come from? Some of these issues should be looked at seriously. Otherwise, we shall not be taken seriously by our neighbours.

MRS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I look at this report, out of 28 members, only eight people signed. Is it procedurally proper for us to proceed, since the law states that at least a third of them should sign the report? Is it proper for us to continue debating this report when it is not properly endorsed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, we are not debating the report; we are debating the motion for second reading of the Bill. (Laughter)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I was appealing to colleagues in this House that we must pass a law to stop this unnecessary expenditure through supplementaries, which at times are not followed even when we pass them here. I recall that the Minister of Health came here and asked for money (supplementary), and this House passed a supplementary of Shs 7 billion for the Nodding Syndrome Disease, but this money was not provided for. So, we should be serious and pass a law stopping Government from asking for supplementaries. Thank you.

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your indulgence again. Surely, if this report has got fewer signatures, should we own it or discard it? Since this is a motion – because we should be clearly helped- should we continue owning this without enough signatures on it, and then we discuss only the motion? Should we respect the procedure question raised by hon. Kiboijana, and we disown this, since you have already said that we are on a motion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me just go through the list and find out who signed. Hon. Rose Akol Okullu – are you part of this committee; do you agree with this report? (Interjection) She signed? But it is not shown.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I signed on this but –(Interjections)– no; normally what happens is that we sign on two reports; one to be laid on Table while the other one goes to the Clerk for photocopying. But the copy the chairman is holding has my signature, and he can lay it on Table and read the names of those who have signed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, let us first confirm this; let us not make – 

MR LWANGA: Mr Speaker, I want to confirm that hon. Akol signed this report and maybe I should lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What other name is not reflected in this report?

MR LWANGA: Hon. Tim Lwanga signed – that is me; hon. Amoding; hon. Wamakuyu; hon. Ann Nankabirwa; hon. Kataike; hon. Nebanda; hon. Acayo; and hon. Ruhunda also signed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, those are eight members, and that would bring the number to nine, which is not a third of the members.

MR LWANGA: Mr Speaker, if you divided 28 by three, you would get nine and a third. Mr Speaker, I could not find a third of a human being. May I lay this on the Table? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From the original signature list here, I see nine signatures. That is not exactly a third of the membership as required.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The situation the House finds itself in is having two reports being presented at the same time. And I think the report that was presented to us has only eight signatures. But even if there were nine in any case, still they do not make a third of the committee. So, it is my prayer that the chairman goes back and re-organises himself; gets his members to sign then we proceed. Even the figures have issues, Mr Speaker. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The whole world is looking at us and I want to be honest with my statement, when the ministers are seated in front here and the Opposition is around. I did mathematics and passed it very well. If you consider this document given to us, eight divided by 28 makes 28.5 percent and if you round it off to the nearest person, it becomes 29 percent. If you want to go by what has been laid on Table (with nine signatures) it will give us 32.1 percent. Mr Speaker, the laws we made, we cannot break them. 

My problem is, Why do we have two different reports? These are two different reports. Maybe the Clerk has concocted her own signatures and put them there. Let the chairman go back and bring us a final one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Bitekyerezo, hon. Rose Akol said she signed on one of the reports and on the copy –(Interjections)– just hold on, honourable members - and on the copy that was laid on the Table, indeed her signature is there. But what I am saying is that even then, it still does not make a third of the members. 

So, honourable members, I need to seek your indulgence on this matter. The indulgence I am seeking is that this is a supplementary appropriation Bill. Pertinent issues have been raised that the minister has to address. Do we now stop the minister from responding to those issues? Because, one signature is missing on the report. Should we do that? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Or should we allow the minister to respond to the pertinent issues? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Then we will stand over this matter again and then - guidance from Bulisa.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and colleagues for raising the pertinent concerns regarding our rules. I would like to request, if possible, that we allow the chairman and his members, a few minutes as we continue with the next item, and they come back with a fully composed document. I thank you so much.

3.32
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We make rules as a Parliament and we should be seen to respect the very rules which we put in place. If we have said the committee report should be signed by at least one third, then we should observe that and, therefore, it would be unfortunate if we proceeded to consider a report which is not fully signed as per our rules. So, I agree with hon. Mukitale that the committee should be given time to bring a report which complies with our rules. 

And secondly, Mr Speaker, I do not appreciate the wisdom of having a report tabled with enough signatures and then you photocopy a different one. So, I think you need to guide us as a House, and the chairpersons who present reports; the very report which is tabled on the Floor of Parliament should be the very one circulated to Members. Otherwise, it causes confusion and we fail to understand the wisdom of having different reports with different numbers of signatures. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the explanation which I also seem to understand is that at the beginning, when we were starting, only the chairman had the report. Nobody else had the report, but we sought the indulgence of the House. Since the matter is limited, can we allow him present while we wait for copies of the report? Which means it is, therefore, possible that the copy the chairman carried had these nine signatures, because I did not see hon. Akol crossing over to sign from here. This report was with the chairman here, but still the nine members cannot answer the issue of one third of the membership of the committee. 

Can we, therefore, ask the Chairman to go back, revert to the committee, and harmonise the situation and then come and lay it on Table?

3.34 
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They will photocopy the signature page and attach it. The report is the same; it is only the signature page that is different. Shadow Attorney-General

MR KATUNTU: This drama just shows one thing; that there is a very big problem with our committees when they are debating and writing reports. There is a practice that has been going on for so long. The signatures are solicited even before the report is completed, and this is something which is sort of coming out now. 

Mr Speaker, I think you will need to caution the chairpersons of the committees, and indeed the clerks, and maybe even honourable members, that before you append your signature to that sheet, you must have read the report and participated actually or debated that report, then you can append your signature. But Members go, the clerk circulates the signature page, and they sign it when they have not read the report. And soon you are going to have even another confusion on the Floor when people disown their signatures and the report and we will continue being in this sort of embarrassment. So, I think the hon. Tim Lwanga’s team should apologise to us. We do not want this sort of thing to happen again.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have guided the House and this is arising from the different reports presented. It would, in my view, probably be procedurally considered that the chairperson is advised to go back and harmonise the position with the committee members, and to also withdraw the very report which has already been distributed to the Members, and we wait for an already harmonised and agreed upon report to be distributed tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have just ruled on that subject. I have read both reports; it is a very small report. The text of the report is the same; it is only the signature page. [MS ANYWAR: “How do you know?”] I have read; they are here. You will compare the two and if there is a difference - it is only the signature page that is different. I have read word per word and everything is the same. It is a small two-page report, really. 

So, what I am saying is that let the signature page be harmonised and we attach it once it is circulated, and that will be it; because the report is the same. If they are ready, we will be able to proceed. If the signatures are not there, we cannot proceed. The report is just one page in text, and the second page is figures. That is all. Really, it is not anything controversial.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like you to guide me on whether, when the committee was considering this report, they did interface with the minister to have answers to the points that they have raised, which the minister is going to respond to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you know the history of this particular Bill, then you would not be asking that question, because the Bill was presented basically on Thursday evening - was it Thursday evening - and I directed the Budget Committee to meet on Friday morning, and they were also doing the reconciliation of the figures for supply, and they were with the minister full time anyway. But to ask questions that relate to this specific thing, it could not have been possible; and yesterday still, the figures were not tallying, So, they were still dealing with the same issues. 

It is only today that they are here with this report, which also just came this morning. It was finalised this morning. So, I am sure these issues that are being raised by the Members, even if they had been raised with the committee, they would still be raised by Members here.

The point raised by the honourable Shadow Attorney-General, the honourable member for Kawempe South, are all related to what the committee has reported really, and they are demanding for answers from the minister. But now we cannot go along those lines because we have taken a decision on that subject. So, let us look at the Order Paper and see. Can we go to the item that is ready? Item seven.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE WORKSHOP ON PUBLIC EXPENDITURE AND FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY FRAMEWORK

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Nebbi District.
    
3.40
MRS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to present a report on the training workshop on Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Framework (PEFA). 

The training on Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Framework was organised by African Development Institute and sponsored by African Development Bank. It was held between 2nd to 5th July in Tunis, Tunisia. The participants were drawn from 14 African countries including Uganda, Benin, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Kenya, Mali, Morocco, Mauritania, Nigeria, Senegal, Tunisia and Zambia. 

The participants included politicians and technocrats involved in the whole budget process and cycle, specifically: 
•	Members of Parliament. 
•	Directors of finance in the national assemblies/parliaments. 
•	Directors of national budgets in the ministries of finance. 
•	Clerks to parliamentary budget committees. 
•	Senior accountants, economists, fiscal analysts
•	Principal auditors. 

The delegation from Uganda comprised of Acayo Christine Cwinya-ai, member of the Budget Committee, and Mr Nsamba Bukenya Fred, Principal Internal Auditor in the Ministry of Local Government.

Background

It is critical that the preparation of the national budget is guided by the National Development Plan and Government policies. The contribution of all the stakeholders to the national budget should translate into better service delivery, poverty reduction and improved standards of living. 

To achieve the above, there is need for three budgetary outcomes: aggregate fiscal discipline, strategic resource allocation, and efficient use of resource allocation.

The PEFA framework is to provide the following:
1. 	A high-level overview of all aspects of a country’s public finance management systems performance including revenue, expenditure, procurement, financial assets and liabilities.

2. 	Measures progress over time through diagnostic and standardised indicators. Uganda was the first country in Africa to carry out a PEFA assessment in 2005. Another progress assessment was done in 2008 and in 2012 a repeat assessment has been done.

3. 	Builds capacity of public financial management reforms through diagnostic and periodic progress monitoring.

4. 	Facilitates donors’ decisions on use of a country’s systems and promotes joint country analytical work.

5. 	Fosters stakeholder coordination around one common assessment tool.

It is, therefore, imperative that parliamentarians, whose role is oversight and appropriation, are equipped with the tools/high-level indicators for assessing an effective and efficient budgetary process and cycle.

Objectives of the Workshop

The objective of the workshop was to build and strengthen capacity of stakeholders at different levels of the budget cycle with tools with which to scrutinise and analyse Government budgets. The training programme provided a forum for exchange of views, ideas and experiences on an effective and efficient budget hence benchmarking of best practices and high level performance.

Methodology

Appropriate delivery methods were used and these included lectures, open discussions/participatory approach, group discussions and presentations during plenary sessions, sharing of practical experiences on PEFA assessment, post PEFA assessment and action plans for public finance management reforms.
 
Content/Training Coverage
A number of papers were presented by consultants and senior experts in public finance management, public sector management and senior economists.

The programme covered the following:
•	The PEFA initiative and programme.
•	The Public Finance Management Performance Framework and its indicators.
•	Public finance management out-turns, that is, credibility of the budget.
•	Key cross-cutting issues such as comprehensiveness and transparency of the budget.
•	Policy based budgeting.
•	Predictability and control in budget execution.
•	Accounting, recording and reporting in the budget cycle.
•	Legislative scrutiny of the annual budget law and external audit reports.
•	Donor practices, that is, predictability of direct budget support, and financial information provided by donors for budgeting and reporting on projects and programme aid.

Relevance of the Training

The training was relevant. It was also an eye opener and even an empowerment because it equipped participants with the tools for critical scrutiny of the national budget before appropriation, tracking of expenditure trends, oversight during budget execution and scrutiny of audit reports. All these are crucial in order to have a pro-poor budget and a budget where resource allocation is according to the National Development Plan, poverty reduction strategy and existing government policies. 

It is not uncommon for Parliament to receive supplementary expenditure for appropriation. This training therefore raises the question of financial discipline, credibility of the budget, comprehensiveness and transparency of the budget process, which must be critically addressed as a matter of urgency.

The high level of poverty, with 68 per cent of people in our society in the peasantry domain, still remains a big challenge. This can only be addressed through credible pro-poor budgeting where aggregate expenditure outturn is as was in the original approved budget. Currently, Uganda is using output based budgeting, which is a product of diagnostic assessments, which is commendable.

Lessons Learnt, Best Practices and Recommendations

a) 	Appropriation Bill

It was found out that a number of countries in Africa do not pass vote on account; they simply pass the Appropriation Bill before the new financial year. This is possible because their budget cycle begins with the beginning of the new financial year. Examples of such countries are Ghana, Kenya, Tunisia, Senegal, Zambia, Mali and Rwanda. 

This is one of the key learning experiences from the above countries which can be emulated by the Executive and Legislature of Uganda. Why should we in Uganda appropriate several times, for example, vote on account, Appropriation Bill and supplementary? 

I therefore, humbly recommend that the Executive and the Legislature explore the possibility of having the appropriation passed before the beginning of a new financial year. This is possible. It could be done by amending the Budget Act of 2001 and Finance Act to change the budget cycle to begin from July. 

As we all know, all the countries in the East African Community read their budgets on the same day, that is, by 15th June and yet only Uganda does not pass the Appropriation Bill by 30th June as the other countries are doing. If adopted, Parliament will save a lot of time by appropriating once and for all.

b) 	Appropriation of supplementary budget vis-à-vis contingency fund 

It was established that supplementary budgets were uncommon in most of the 14 countries which attended the workshop. We learnt that in case of emergencies, these countries resort to a contingency fund. Their parliaments never appropriate for a supplementary budget and their Executive never brings a supplementary budget for parliamentary approval. This is because all ministries, departments and government agencies exercise financial discipline and spend within their ceilings.

I recommend that the Public Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2012 takes this into account and clearly gives clarity on what qualifies a circumstance or a situation to be an emergency, so that it can be handled under the contingency fund and not supplementary. 

c) 	Capital expenditure projections on facilities must be accompanied by the relevant recurrent expenditures 

Wage and Non-wage

We learnt that in Tunisia, any budget for capital expenditure on facilities must be accompanied by and include recurrent expenditure on wage and non-wage items in order to guarantee functionality of the facility and avoid white elephants. 

I recommend that Government borrows a leaf from this good practice so that new health and educational facilities are well equipped with personnel and stock. It is regrettable that a number of health centres and USE schools in Uganda are understaffed. Currently, Government has announced a ban on staff recruitment and yet a number of health facilities are under construction. This is ironical because what value for money is realised if millions are spent on construction of the facility and yet the facility ends up with no staff, equipment and drugs hence poor service delivery. Why spend on capital development which will end up being a white elephant? 

d) 	Parliamentary Budget Office

It was established that Uganda and Kenya were the only countries in Africa with fully-fledged parliamentary budget offices to enhance quality parliamentary scrutiny of the budget. A number of countries were impressed by this good practice and expressed interest in studying the Ugandan innovation further.

I recommend that the Parliamentary Budget Office be empowered and strengthened so as to enhance quality technical support to Parliament and serve as a centre of excellence and best practice in Africa. 

(e) 	The PEFA assessment and repeat assessments in Uganda

The scores for the PEFA assessment and repeat assessments done in Uganda in 2005 and 2008 respectively showed that Uganda was above the average for Sub-Saharan Africa. This was commendable and Government should aim at even better scores through implementation of the relevant public finance management reforms. Another PEFA assessment was done in Uganda early this year. I have not seen the results yet but I hope the scores will be even better than the previous one.

Conclusion

The workshop was relevant and timely. It built my capacity to comprehend issues in the budget when exercising the mandatory and constitutional roles of oversight and appropriation. Sharing of experiences and knowledge among participants was an invaluable aid and fountain for drawing strength by member countries. I pray that our Parliament and the Executive consider and implement these recommendations given so that the people who elected us can get better service delivery, can see value for money and transparency. 

I extend my gratitude to the Speaker and Clerk to Parliament for allowing me to participate in this capacity building workshop. I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member, for a very instructive report. Honourable members, that is the report on that trip which was made by the honourable member on behalf of Parliament. Certainly at this stage, the report attracts debate and this will be an appropriate time to debate. We will limit the debate to 30 minutes and each member will be taking three minutes. Is that fair? Okay, let us start. 

3.56
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  First, I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for having found it appropriate to put this particular business on the Order Paper following immediately after the Supplementary Appropriations Bill. It could not have come at a better time. 

I would also like to thank our colleague, the honourable Member of Parliament, and actually congratulate you upon producing this report. I really hope that the Minister of Finance was listening. I really hope that he continues listening. I think this is more of a classroom for you. The issues raised by the honourable member are very pertinent and are the very issues that Members of Parliament have been raising this afternoon. It is as if we had read this report.

The issue of supplementary certainly must be cleaned up. For us to continue passing supplementaries of monies which have already been expended says so much about whether we actually appreciate our role, as clearly put by our honourable colleague. We are here to perform an oversight function and role and we need to scrutinise every intended expenditure and appropriate it. Instead, we come to rubber stamp what Government has already spent. Everybody knows that the issue of Government requesting for further funds other than those provided for under the budget should only come in very rare circumstances, when facing issues which could not have been anticipated at all. We can look for money in such circumstances.

Whenever a budget is read, it is a very beautiful document. We spend almost the entire year in the budget cycle going through policy statements, MTEF ceilings, discussing with departments and Government almost throughout the year. At the end of the day, we pass the budget but this budget is rendered more or less useless by these supplementary appropriations.

I would like to recommend, like the Budget Committee had recommended, that Government brings the issue of supplementaries for further discussion. We must find a solution-(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member for Gulu District; are you the acting-(Interjections) – Oh, mugole! Congratulations upon other things. 

3.59
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you. Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I would also like to thank hon. Acayo for this report. If it were not for time, it would be important for all of us who travel on behalf of Parliament to give this kind of report, which is accountability for resources used by Parliament. It is a very good report and we are very grateful.

Hon. Acayo raised a lot of issues. I would like to also say that we must have ears to listen so that we take them up seriously. However, my concern comes from page 9. You raised some very good issues, and you also mention some countries which are doing so well. I was once a councillor, LC V, and I know the district councils and sub county councils normally pass their own budgets and that process is almost like the appropriation; it is normally passed by 30th June. That means that in Uganda, we also try to do that at lower levels; it is now in Parliament that we have a problem. 

My concern is about the assessment ranking. The assessment ranks Uganda very highly, yet you raised a lot of issues on Uganda. How is it that Uganda is actually one of the best? Is it because of the Parliamentary Budget Office that Uganda should be ranked up high there? Why do we raise up issues on Uganda and at the end of it all, exonerate it by saying that it is performing very well? That means that the issues raised here were non-issues. So, we need that assessment report to see where Uganda is doing well. It looks like we are not doing very well. (Member timed out)

4.03
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for this wonderful report. In fact before she read it, my colleagues were asking why a report of this kind should be presented to the House. But as she continued, we became convinced that this is the report and it was timely.

I also want to thank her for the observation on page 7 – “It was established that supplementary budgets were uncommon in most of the 14 countries.” What a wonderful report to come at this time when the House is considering supplementary appropriation. I would like to say that actually, we should copy what happens in other countries. Like she has mentioned, it is unheard of; their executives do not even consider ever presenting a supplementary budget and therefore, that saves Parliament a lot of time. I want to say that this practice would help us and save Parliament a lot of time. 

I want to again thank my colleague for this timely report and also thank the Government that has enabled Parliament to have a vibrant Budget Committee. I think we should give credit to this Parliament because it has a fully-fledged Parliamentary Budget Office that makes the work of Parliamentarians easy when it comes to handling the budget. Thank you very much. 

4.05
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues to register my appreciation for the honourable’s report. It is my view that actually her trip to Tunisia has registered value for money.  

Mr Speaker, I want to limit myself to two issues. One is what she has presented on page 7, that is, appropriation of supplementary budget vis-à-vis contingency fund. I am a scholar of accounting and finance and actually supplementary budgets have been perturbing me a lot. What it simply means is that ministries, departments and agencies should share what is available. In the course of the financial year, those ministries, agencies and departments utilise their budget fully, at 100 per cent, and then demand for more when actually some other departments are not yet facilitated to the tune of 100 per cent. That implies that there will be performance in some ministries and departments at the expense of others. This is indiscipline in financial management. It also implies that during the course of the financial year, more resources should be generated. If they are generated, why can’t they be appropriated proportionately?

Secondly, it implies that a government that is used to supplementary budgets has poor planning. For you to have a supplementary budget, you must identify where resources are coming from. All this should be identified at the beginning when we are in the budget process. So, I support her recommendation to that effect on page 7.

The honourable member has also raised an important issue when it comes to capital expenditure vis-à-vis recurrent expenditure. I am very impressed by your submission. It has been very common; you budget for capital expenditure and you find that you are not catering for the recurrent expenditure to run this capital development you are putting in place. At the end of it all, it does not result into service delivery. If you plan to put up hospitals or health centre structures, equally look at the health staff who will work there. (Member timed out).
 
4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, what I am going to say may shorten our debate. First of all, I want to thank our colleague very much for presenting this report. At the same time, I would also like to report to this House that most of the issues have already been captured in what we call the Public Finance Bill. The contingency fund, for example, has already been taken into account in that Bill. 

The passing of the budget before the beginning of the financial year – that too has been taken care of. We will begin to debate the following financial year, according to the proposal in the Bill, starting around April so that by the 30th of June, the supplementary Bill will have already been passed by this Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, apart from the few issues that the Member of Parliament has presented, and which we shall take to the ministry and carefully study and see how we can include them in our future legislation, many of the recommendations that she has put forward have already been captured in this proposed Bill. (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to seek clarification from the minister for finance. He makes reference to the Public Finance Bill which is before Parliament, but we have also heard - the report has not come to the House - that the Bill repeals the Budget Act. When you actually read through the Finance Bill, it attempts to weaken the role of Parliament in the budgeting process.  It seems that whoever was drafting those sections did it in bad faith, that the person was aiming at weakening Parliament in far as our role in the budgeting process is concerned. (Applause) So, could you clarify? 

The report by the honourable member is saying that the Parliamentary Budget Office and the role of Parliament must be strengthened. So, could you clarify to us what the intentions of the Finance Bill are with respect to what the member is presenting to us in her report?
 
MS NTABAZI: I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also wanted some clarification and guidance from you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clarification from the Speaker? (Laughter) 

MS NTABAZI: I meant from the minister; I am sorry. Recently, when we were discussing the report of the Committee on Health, we thought that there was a big gap in the staffing at the health centres. We discussed a lot about recruitment of doctors, nurses and so forth and this was not budgeted for in the main budget. So we thought that also such instances like disasters – we even recently talked about nodding disease and others - when they come in at a time when the budget is already passed or when the budget is somewhere, then a supplementary would be requested. 

I seek your indulgence; what is the problem with supplementaries? Why are members coming up hotly on supplementaries? What is the attitude behind supplementaries? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, seek clarifications only from the minister because we are not debating any further on this. 

MS KABAALE: I thank you. I seek clarification from the minister given the aspect that whenever they come here for supplementaries, like for that of the nodding disease, nothing is done but they continue coming for more supplementaries.

In addition to that, a budget implies a forecast and a supplementary, by definition, is an emergency and an emergency cannot come often. So we seek clarification from the minister as to why you continuously bring supplementary requests yet at the end of the day, when we go to the districts, people tell us that money is given towards the end of the budget year and it is returned to the ministry. We seek that explanation. I thank you.

MS ABABIKU: I thank you, Mr Speaker and members. I seek clarification on the difference between contingency and supplementary budgets. For me the two look similar. If you have a contingency fund and you do not have financial discipline, you will still abuse the fund and we may not get better service delivery. Now that we have performed badly with the supplementary budget, if we promote the contingency fund, how are we going to be sure that we shall perform better? I thank you very much.
   
MS KAMATEEKA: I thank you. I am seeking further clarification from the honourable minister. The issue in this paper is about discipline of expenditure so that people do not spend more than they are given. 

The honourable minister told us that the issues have been captured in the Public Finance (Amendment) Bill. The clarification I am seeking from the minister is: what action points has the ministry taken so that we can know that what has been captured in the Public Finance Bill is practicable, that the ministry is doing something about it? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please wind up now.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I thank you very much for these observations and queries. I do not think the Ministry of Finance can really weaken Parliament because our functions are clearly laid out in the Constitution of Uganda. The rationale of coming up with a supplementary is simply because we face a situation as we run the budget, where there is no choice but to provide money in emergencies. 

There are situations, which if the state has to continue running there is no short cut because we must go in for a supplementary. This contingency fund that you have talked about in the proposed Finance Bill is to take care of this. Parliament will be required to appropriate money into that contingency fund to take care of these unforeseeable circumstances that do happen as the financial year runs. That is what is really meant.  

Money being released at the end of the year; Mr Speaker, I want to inform this House categorically that money to districts is released quarterly. In the case of the last financial year, the release was made around end of April to take care of the final quarter of the year – (Interjections) - Yes, to take care of the final quarter of the last financial year. So, it is no longer possible now that we would send money to any spending unit, ministry, department or local government towards the end of the financial year. The money is released in the first month of the last quarter of the year so that they have ample time to prepare themselves and spend that money before the end of the financial year.    

How do we ensure discipline? Well, I want to assure you that in accordance with the proposed new law – if you people pass it, and we pray that you will pass it in that form, - (Interjections) - Yes in that form - we are asking for discipline. No money will be made available to any spending entity if it goes beyond its MTEF or as agreed and appropriated for unless it qualifies to draw money from the contingency fund. So, we hope that with these provisions, there should be discipline because there will be no money available to be given to anybody who spends beyond their allocated sum, unless that department can prove that what they are asking for, the extra money, is for an emergency. I think that is what I captured as queries. 

My hope and my last prayer is that let us get this law, the Finance Bill, into place as soon as possible and then all these queries you are raising will be history. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for this debate. I thank the honourable member for a very comprehensive report on the subject. The motion is for the adoption of the report on the workshop on Public Expenditure on Financial Accountability Framework reported upon by the honourable member of this House. I will put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a matter we had deferred for purposes of harmonisation of the issue of quorum of the committee. Would the chairperson want to brief us on what you have been able to do? 
 
4.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Timothy Lwanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have managed to get all the members of the committee that are present in the House to sign the report- (Interjections)- Actually, one of the best attended committees is the budget committee. We have some signatures but we could have had more. 

The unfortunate bit, and this I must explain, is that since yesterday we have been meeting for the budget and people come in and go. We have had interactions with the Ministry of Finance on more than four occasions, and when you are dealing with these figures people concentrate on the figures and forget that they have to sign the form. However, I believe this will not happen again, Mr Speaker.  Now, I think it is in order for me, Mr Speaker, to lay on the Table a well signed full report. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then we need to make copies of the signature page and circulate it to members so that they can attach to their respective – (Interjections) - The photocopies are ready; they are already here. So it is fine. So, honourable members, we had completed debate on this issue and the minister had responded on the issues raised in the debate. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Very briefly, Mr Speaker, there was an issue raised – “You came here, we approved the supplementary budget but we were not able to release.” Mr Speaker and honourable members, budgeting is a plan and releasing is the actualisation. We operate a cash budget - I want that to be borne in mind. It may at times be that we were not able to have sufficient resources to release and, therefore, although you approved the supplementary, we were unable to release that money simply because the resources were not available to cover each and every item. 

There was also a question as to why we do not increase MTEF? The MTEF is a midterm planning framework. We can only increase it if our projection for the revenues is also showing a substantive increase. If it is not, then we cannot do so. 

There was a third question, that we should stop supplementaries completely. I think I have already provided an answer to that. If this proposed law that I have talked about, the Finance Bill, is passed by this Parliament, then the issue of providing for supplementaries will be history. I thought those are the issues, Mr Speaker, that were raised and I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable member, thank you for that very intensive insight you gave into this particular issue. The motion is that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill be read the second time. I will put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we go to committee stage, honourable members, in the public gallery we have the electorate from Bugiri District. They are represented by the Government Chief Whip, the honourable Kasule Justine. They have come to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2012

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)  

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2012” and passed it without amendment.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted by this House. I will put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2012

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2012” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2012” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION ACT, 2012”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister; congratulations, Mr Chairman and members of the Budget Committee. 

Honourable members, the Parliamentary Commission is organising a Parliament Week from Monday, 24th to Friday, 28 September 2012 to commemorate 50 years of Parliament. A number of activities have been scheduled to take place during the Parliament Week as follows:

•	On 24 September 2012, an interdenominational prayer service in the Parliamentary Conference Hall. 
•	On 25 September 2012, a charity walk with the Speaker as chief walker. The Speaker will also plant a tree and launch the blood donation drive which will run throughout the week.
•	On Wednesday, 26 September 2012, launch of the Parliamentary Institute in the Parliament Conference Hall and netball and football matches between MPs and veteran Ugandan national players at Nakivubo Stadium in the afternoon. 
•	On Thursday, 27 September 2012, a public lecture on the theme “Uganda at 50 years: Prospects and Challenges.” 
•	On Friday, 28 September 2012, awarding ceremony in honour of distinguished personalities in recognition of their contributions to Uganda’s legislative history.

As a result of these, all the usual parliamentary activities in the committees and plenary will be accordingly suspended to enable all the members and staff to participate effectively in all activities of the Parliament Week. All Members of Parliament are informed and requested to participate in these activities accordingly. This announcement is from our Public Relations Manager.

Honourable members, it is now evident that the business on the Order Paper, specifically on the issue of supply, cannot be handled now due to some issues that are not yet resolved. I now will have hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi before getting to the Shadow Attorney-General.

4.32
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County, East): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance. It is to do with taxation. For a long time, drugs and other medical supplies have not been attracting a tax. These include contraceptives or family planning supplies and condoms. However, I would like to report to Parliament that from this financial year, the Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) unilaterally decided to impose a tax on family planning supplies including condoms - (Interjections) - and Mama Kits. This has created a lot of challenges and problems in the country. 

You will recall that we have been saying that maternal death is still a big challenge in this country. Recent reports also indicate that HIV/AIDS prevalence rates are going up yet we know that condoms play a significant role in reducing the infection rates. So, I do not understand why URA decided to do this.

I know a number of partners have been engaging Government to have this issue addressed. I know that at the World Population Day celebrations this year in Hoima, where the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister was the Chief Guest, many people raised this matter. He assured them that Government would address it by having that tax abolished. I also know that Ministry of Finance has been approached several times over the same. However, nothing has taken place. I know that the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance – (Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, this matter of levying a tax on reproductive health products was clearly stated in Hoima during the celebrations for the World Population Day. I want to inform the House that I and the Prime Minister undertook to contact URA. On return to Kampala, I contacted the Commissioner-General of URA over this matter. She assured me that these items are not taxable but only if one includes other items. I think the mistake in this particular case was that there were some items that were not strictly medical items. Otherwise, all medical items are duty free.

So, as far as I am concerned, I would like to assure this House that the items that were specifically mentioned at that particular function were released without paying tax. If you still want to confirm that, I can avail a formal statement ready to be laid on the Table together with the papers that URA worked on. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Okay, thank you very much for that information though it is not accurate. I am saying this because – may be Mr Speaker, if you allow I can tomorrow lay on the Table, a letter that was written by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health to URA asking them not to levy a tax on contraceptives, condoms and other reproductive health commodities. 

I happen to be the chairman of the board of Reproductive Health Uganda, formerly Family Planning Association of Uganda. I can inform you that just a few days ago, we paid Shs 14 million for a contraceptives consignment. As I talk, there is another consignment from which they are demanding Shs 36 million. Again, Mr Speaker, I request that tomorrow you allow me table a receipt to show the monies paid by Reproductive Health Uganda, which is one of the leading NGOs working in the field of reproductive health.

So while I appreciate your information, I want to state that the information we have shows the contrary, that URA still taxes these products. When they are being shipped into the country, they are clearly labeled. Condoms are labeled as condoms; family planning supplies, contraceptives – the terms of their specific names are included. So, it is different from the description of the others.

In the circumstances, I would like to implore the minister to crosscheck with URA. But as I said, Mr Speaker, I request that you allow me table the documents concerning the matter I am raising now tomorrow. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it is agreed that such items are not taxable. The minister has confirmed this, but can you please put it clearly to URA in writing or correspondence, copies of which we will need to have, so that we are informed properly. We should stop this. Maybe you talked to the Commissioner-General of URA on telephone. These are issues that should be dealt with more comprehensively so that we do not have to get into such debates again. That is a very clear matter.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I will do the needful. I will also report back to this House in writing. I will actually demand that this issue is addressed in writing because I was given this information on telephone. I will come back here with a written document on this matter, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can we have it here on Thursday?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think this is an opportunity to just say one or two words about what the honourable minister has just said. I think that constitutes a Government assurance. In that respect, I would like to advise the Committee on Government Assurances to follow it up for purposes of the record.

Mr Speaker, you read out the activities for the forthcoming Parliamentary Week to commemorate 50 years of independence. I have a problem with one of the items, and that is recognition of some people who have been engaged in legislative services, if I recall what you said correctly. If we are going to recognise some people, then that should be done by Parliament of Uganda. What does that mean, Mr Speaker? 

In my view, there should have been a formal motion in this House for us to debate concerning these gentlemen and ladies before deciding on which honourable member, say X, Y or Z, is recognised by the Parliament of Uganda. I feel a little uncomfortable that some people will sit and get to look around and say that person Y is recognised and later attribute that recognition to Parliament of Uganda. 

I do not know whether it is too late, but my view is that we revisit it. If we must recognise, then it should be Parliament and the decision to recognise should be made by us. We could even be uncomfortable with some of the people who are going to be recognised as Parliament. Alternatively, we could have some names of people who will be missing out on that list. What has been our contribution; have we nominated some people or some other person is doing it on our behalf? If that person is doing it on our behalf, he or she must consult us. That is my discomfort, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The details of how it will be done will be in my communication tomorrow, and how we shall arrive at those particular personalities. 

4.42
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, 50 years is very important to this country and I believe that on the 9th October, which is not very far, we are going to mark 50 years of independence. I think Parliament should play a very critical role. I have seen the agenda of Parliament activities but I have not seen a fully-fledged debate on this matter. I would like Parliament to have a fully-fledged debate on marking the 50 years. We shall debate the challenges, way forward and generally come out with a clear resolution. Even the names of those to be recognised can also be put on table and debated. That would give a good way forward in recognition of our independence.  

I beg to move that a fully-fledged debate on this matter should be brought on the Floor and the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda officially moves the motion on the Floor of Parliament for us to debate the 50 years of independence. I think that would be very important. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As I said, I will communicate the details on how we shall handle these processes in my communication tomorrow, so that members are aware of what form and shape it will take. 

Thank you, honourable members. It does look like we are not able to supply today but we should be able to do so tomorrow. Please come in the numbers that you usually come in so that we are able to conclude business of the budget and departments of Government start functioning normally. House adjourned to tomorrow 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 4.43 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 12 September 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
