PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - FIRST MEETINGTHURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA5950ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAThursday, 29 September 2022Procedure of this House relating to election to EALA, the Clerk to Parliament appointed 19th and 20th September as the date for nomination of candidates, which nomination took place and we got 28 candidates. In compliance with Rule 9(1) of Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure on election of Members of EALA, I invited all the political parties that are represented in this Parliament to nominate Members to be on the verification committee, and they did their work. The verification committee did its work with Members that were sent by party whips, and they reported to this House on what they verified. The verification committee on receipt of nomination forms from the Clerk to Parliament, in line with Rule 10 of the Rules of Procedure on Election of Members of EALA, executed its work and reported to this House in compliance with rule 11(1) of the same rule. In compliance with Rule 11A of Appendix B, the committee reported to the House on 22 September 2022, and presented 28 candidates who duly satisfied the nomination requirements to contest for the nine seats in EALA. This House adopted the report of the verification committee, and adopted the 28 members that were presented by the committee. The list of the nominated candidates was then published in the mass media and Parliament notice board, which is a requirement as per Rule 11B of IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 37TH SITTING - FIRST MEETINGParliament met at 10.33 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is free-sitting. I have seen a number of Members outside. Kindly, come inside because the communication we are going to make is very important. (Applause) Members who are outside, please, come inside. I welcome you to this special sitting whose purpose is in conformity with Article 50 of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community, which requires National Assemblies of each Partner State to elect from among its Members, nine Members of Parliament for the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA). This is a special sitting for the election of EALA Members. (Applause) Honourable members, as you recall, the Clerk to Parliament issued a roadmap for the election of Members of the Fifth EALA. The roadmap was published in the gazette, as per the law - in the mass media - and so, there should not be an excuse that we did not know; it was published. According to the roadmap, and in compliance with Rule 3 of Appendix B of the Rules of 5951THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022Appendix B. I am giving you these procedures to show you that there are no loopholes. At the end of the day, we are going to vote for nine people. The nominations returned nine female nominees and 19 male nominees, including one person with a disability. The National Resistance Movement (NRM) presented six candidates, Justice Forum (JEEMA) presented one candidate, Democratic Party (DP) presented one candidate, Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) presented one candidate, Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) presented one candidate, and 18 candidates were nominated as Independents. (Applause)Honourable members, in this race, I noticed we have six candidates who have represented Uganda for one term so far. Article 51(1), of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community is very clear. It states “An elected member of the Assembly shall hold office for five years and be eligible for re-election for a further term of five years.” The eligibility of the six Members is, therefore, not in question, since we have a precedence that has been set. (Applause) Since we joined the Community in 2001, we have always elected and returned members for continuity and institutional memory. In the roadmap published by the Clerk to Parliament, today, Thursday, 29 September 2022, was appointed as the date for campaigns and voting of the representatives to EALA. I remind you that once we vote the nine Members of EALA, they cease to be party members and immediately become Members of EALA coming from Uganda. (Applause)The moment campaigns start, the voting process has started. This morning, I received a call from Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, alerting me that he is going for exams. I told him to just allow the campaigns to start and then, he goes and votes. (Applause) The Clerk will record the people who will have voted.The issue of guaranteed representation of special interest groups as envisaged under Article 50 of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community was canvassed and determined in the East African Court of Justice. In the case of Anita Among v. the Attorney-General of Uganda and the Secretary-General of the East African Community (Ref. No.6 of 2012), it was held, on page 27, that to conform to the provision of Article 51, the election rules must enable the establishment of an electoral process that ensures equal opportunity to become a candidate, full participation and competition for specified groupings, and at the end of the process, their effective representation in EALA. On page 28, the court further held that it is also in our view that, contrary to the applicant’s assertion, there is no requirement to be deduced from Article 51 that the said election rule should provide for specific slots for interest groups set out in Article 50 or that they should provide for guarantees of representation, specifically for women, youth, persons with disabilities or any specified grouping – that is under Article 51 that talks about “as much as feasible”.In effect, the electoral process should enable participation of relevant interest groups, not ring-fencing. (Applause) Indeed, deducing from the report of the verification committee, interest groups’ participation has been unfettered. Similarly, in the case of Abdu Katuntu v Attorney-General of Uganda, the Secretary-General of the East African Community and nine others (Ref. No.5 of 2012), the court noted that the specific prayer in the issue was whether the six political parties represented in Parliament should be guaranteed representation in EALA by the rules of procedure. The court held – as it has also held above – that no such guarantee exists for political parties to be represented in EALA. (Applause)As observed on Page 29 of the Anita Among decision, already cited above, this is in recognition of the fact that each partner state has its peculiar circumstances to consider. You 5952ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAcannot say that we are ring-fencing a position for each political party – assuming Uganda has 50 political parties in Parliament. (Applause)As held in the East African Court of Justice in the case of Prof. Peter Anyang’ Nyong’o, on page 29, the national assembly of each Partner State is unconditionally assigned the function of electing nine Members of the Assembly; that is where we are deriving the nine Members of the Assembly. In other words, Article 59 of the Treaty constitutes the national assembly of each Partner State as an electoral college for electing a Partner State’s nine representatives to EALA. It is derived from the case of Prof. Peter Anyang’ Nyong’o that you are the voters who will vote for the nine Members of EALA. On page 34 of Prof. Peter Anyang’ Nyong’o’s decision already cited above, in view of all that is foregoing, we find it very unlikely that in adopting Article 50, the parties of the Treaty contemplated, let alone intended, that the national assembly would elect Members of the Assembly other than through a voting procedure, which voting procedure we have organised. We will allow Members to come and campaign and then, Members will go and cast their votes in the tent. In compliance with this requirement, the Parliament of Uganda has put in place Rule 13 of Appendix (B) of the Rules of Procedure. It is for the same reason that Parliament has designated and, indeed, published 29 September 2022, which is today, for election of the nine Members of EALA. Indeed, in Jacob Oulanyah v. Attorney-General (that is case No.28 of 2006), on page 15, it was held that a decision of Parliament is taken when Parliament votes on the Floor of the House. This is a constitutional requirement. Having addressed the above issues, I need to highlight that under Rule 13(1) of Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure, which provides that “a person duly verified and approved by the House shall be given at least seven minutes by the Speaker to address the House.” We will call our Members and they will address us from there. The voting of Members of EALA shall be done by the House through secret ballot – and that will be done under the tent. The Rules of Procedure define the precincts of Parliament to mean the Chamber, lobbies, galleries and grounds of Parliament Building, and such other place as the Speaker may from the time to time specify. On that note, therefore, as the Speaker of this House, I guide that the compound is Parliament today. (Applause)The Clerk shall ensure that the relevant materials for voting and the ballot papers to be used are in place. These shall be as prescribed in Schedule 4 of Appendix B, which describes how this ballot paper should be. Whatever we are doing is within the Rules of Procedure. Honourable members, some colleagues who have urgent issues to attend to – like I said before that Hon. Tinkasiimire, has an exam - will be allowed to go and vote as the House goes on.The Clerk will verify those Members, who have urgent issues. As I said before, the moment the campaigns start, it means the election process has started. Let us vote for the nine members. I want to tell you that if you vote for less than nine or more than nine members, your ballot paper becomes invalid. Strictly vote for nine members. I want to re-echo this: honourable members, we belong to the East African Community; we need continuity; we have pending Bills; we have the six members; please, return them. (Applause)Honourable members, I have said today is for campaigns and voting. (Applause) I do not expect any reaction. I sincerely thank you for coming. (Applause) Let us exercise our noble obligation very well. We need to have representatives for this country because this is [Mr Kiwanuka] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5953THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022[The Speaker]about our country Uganda, not about political parties. (Applause)Honourable members, we are going to go for the campaign. Once we begin the campaigns, I have Members who have asked for permission to vote early. I have the list here, which I will forward to the Clerk. Attorney-General, do you have anything to say? Have I said anything contrary to the rules? (Laughter)10.56THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, I have listened carefully to what you have to say, and I wish to state that I have nothing useful to add. (Laughter) But in obiter dictum, I would say, vote wisely; vote for six and add the best three. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I ask the Clerk to organise for candidates to come and the order of the candidates is according to how they were nominated. (Applause) I am suspending the House for three minutes for the Clerk to organise.10.57MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (Jeema, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join the Attorney-General in appreciating the guidance you have given, which, by the way, is backed by judicial decisions. We do not have much to comment.One of the leading decisions that I mentioned earlier was actually the case you took to the East African Court of Justice. There are just two issues that need clarification: one - (Interruption) – do not mention Kateregga now; he is going to be voted. (Laughter) The issue -(Interruption)– somebody is whispering “Kateregga” here. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us mean business. Can you conclude? We do not have much time. Let us allow these people to come and talk to us, and we make a decision. MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, I was asking you to protect me from Panadol who is mentioning Kateregga’s name. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, just to seek clarification, as you go through the documents before you, there has also been a precedent set in this House in terms of-THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope you are not campaigning for your candidates. MR BASALIRWA: I have not mentioned Kateregga anywhere. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am suspending the House for three minutes and we go to the next item. (The House was suspended at 10.59 a.m.)(On resumption at 11.03 a.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding.)ADDRESS TO PARLIAMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 12 OF APPENDIX B OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA BY THE CANDIDATES NOMINATED TO REPRESENT UGANDA IN THE EAST AFRICAN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLYTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, allow her in. (Applause) Thank you. Excuse me, colleagues. Order. We have 28 candidates and each candidate has strictly seven minutes. If we go into wasting a lot of time, it means you will finish voting at midnight. Thank you for welcoming your candidate. Hon. Amongin, you have seven minutes. Let us listen to her manifesto.11.04MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (Indepen-dent): The Rt Hon. Speaker of the 11th Parlia -ment of Uganda, the honourable members of the 11th Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, I salute you. My name is Jacqueline Amongin. 5954ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAHonourable members, a journey of 1000 miles starts with a step. I would like to take this singular honour and opportunity to applaud you and thank you for having journeyed with none other than Jacqueline Amongin.     I have been in this House before. I served in the Ninth and Tenth Parliaments of Uganda. I have represented Uganda in the Continental Parliament, during Ninth and Tenth Parliaments. While I was at the Continental Parliament, I kept the Ugandan flag high because Uganda is my agenda. At the African Union, I worked with the Regional Economic Communities of Western Africa, Southern Africa, Northern Africa -(Applause)- and the one for Eastern Africa. In the one we are talking about today, I have chaired the Committee of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment at the continental level. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is my witness. Indeed, I have kept the Ugandan flag high. Our forefathers, who founded the East African Community, premised the Community on four pillars - the East African Customs Union, the East African Common Market, the East African Monetary Union and the ultimate Political Federation.Therefore, my friends, honourable members, as I look at your faces right now, I am not going to promise Heaven on earth but I go, as a legislator, to address the policy gaps at EALA. Top on my agenda will be the policy gaps relating to climate change, trading and bringing the Community to the people, legislation on the free movement of goods and services but above all, honourable members, we have moved in buses together for one year. (Applause)Honourable members, I leave a quote for you - (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Amongin.  Honourable colleague, we wish you all the best. Let us have another candidate coming in now. (Applause) Colleagues, Order. The Rules of Procedure still apply to us. Let us be excited, but be good listeners. This is Parliament and the whole country is watching. They want to know, which kind of people we are voting.This is the only day these candidates have to give us their manifestos, which manifestos, we can also share with the public. So, let us listen. Our rules are very clear in this Parliament; we do not clap; we do not jump; we instead stamp. We do not shout. That is how Parliamentarians do it and that is why we are different.Yes, Mr Dennis Kapyata. Colleagues, let us listen to Mr Kapyata. And, I want to warn you colleagues, Parliament is the only platform where everyone has a voice. Whether we believe in that person or not, whether we support that person or not. Whatever they are saying is going on our Hansard record. Let us listen to the great points by Mr Kapyata.11.11DR DENNIS  KAPYATA (Independent): Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Cabinet ministers and state ministers present, the honourable members of Parliament; my name is Dr Dennis Kapyata. Kapyata is not a nickname, it is my real name. It just means brand new and very fast - Land cruiser V8, those Mercedes Benzes, qualify to be a Kapyata. (Applause)Mr Speaker, one thing I am sure of is that every person here owns a Kapyata. So, basically, you own me. Ladies and gentlemen, I am the Director for Academic Affairs at UNICAF University, and the Executive Director of Think-Field Research and Regional Integration International. I hold a Bachelor of Laws degree, a Masters of laws in intellectual property, a Masters of Arts in Peace and Conflict Studies and a Doctorate in Governance and International Relations. Ladies and gentlemen, as far as I know, you cannot determine the potential of someone just by promises. Rather, that someone should demonstrate what they have done for the integration before you can pass them. I am here to tell you what I have done for the East African Community Integration as an expert on regional integration. [Ms Amongin]5955THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022When I came back to Uganda after my PhD, I established an international organisation called Think-Field Research and Regional Integration International with a mandate to work in the East African countries. The main purpose of this organisation has been, for the one year in operation, to enhance and accelerate, as well as modify and consolidate the vision of the East African Community integration to the common people so that East African countries can achieve an all-encompassing and all-inclusive integration instead of fragmentation. I have visited 150 towns in the East African countries, 290 villages in East African countries, sensitised 25,000 men, 41,000 women and over 45,000 children about integration in the East African Community. One common denominator I found is that 68 per cent of the East Africans still suffer from stereotyping. Therefore, they are not very comfortable working with each other. Only 32 per cent are ready for integration. Mr Speaker, this is a demonstration of capability and ability, exhibiting educational expertise and contextualisation, implementation and operationalisation of integration processes to the common people. I am not here for jokes; these are the permits of operation in the East African Community. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Kapyata, please, continue.MR KAPYATA: When you elect me as a delegate, I am going to continue to use multi-faceted, multi-dimensional and multi-layered approach when handling the East African Community integration to the common people. (Applause)In the interest of time, I will continue pursuing the interests of the East African Community integration with the persistence of a mosquito and committed like new lovers. (Laughter)The second issue I am going to look at as a bipolar global problem. Right now, we have a bipolar world, whereby China and USA are competing for the East African countries, which jeopardises integration. You need an expert like Dennis Kapyata to formulate policies that will act like a political vaccine to protect the East Africans against the interests of these colonial masters. Lastly, in my former role as an international consultant for the African Union, I was in charge of handling matters of 55 countries on the continent. If I was handling matters of 55 countries, how can I fail to handle matters of seven East African countries? Remember, East Africa is a subset of the African Union. Therefore, you need an expert. If you swim in a lake, can you fail to swim in a swimming pool? Impossible. As I summarise, the Bible says “He who is faithful on a small thing will be faithful on a big thing”. I have demonstrated faithfulness with the little I have to establish an international organisation that helps regional integration. Therefore, I am reliable and trusted to work for the benefit of East Africa. We need Kapyata - remember I told you Kapyata means “fast means of transport”. We need integration processes to become Kapyatalised  so that we can achieve regional integration.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Kapyata, your time is up. We wish you all the best. Mr Muwonge, you have seven minutes starting now.11.18MR DANIEL MUWONGE MUGWANYA (Independent):  Thank you. Members of Parliament present, ladies and gentlemen; I am contesting as an Independent Candidate for EALA.Among the ideas I hope to take to the Community, in case I am given the support, is that the East African Community needs a central leadership. The current leaders we have in the various countries are thinking about their 5956ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAown countries. We need a leadership centred in a given place. The challenges we are facing -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, Mr Muwonge is sharing his ideas with us. Let us listen to him. MR MUWONGE: Today, Congo has problems of security between M23 and Congo; Uganda also has a challenge of ADF. All these can be only solved, if we have a central system -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order. Honourable colleagues, whatever a candidate is saying is captured in the Hansard. You are making it difficult for us to capture the record of Parliament. If you do not want to listen to a colleague, you can remain outside. We want to capture the record of Parliament on the Hansard and so, make it easy for us.MR MUWONGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. East African countries must have a central nervous system to manoeuvre. Today, you have Air Uganda, Air Tanzania; all these airlines can be combined into a central system so that air tickets are reduced. (Applause)Today, East African countries import food. The cheapest rice we import is from Pakistan but the rice, which is produced in Tanzania is more expensive. The East African Community must establish a food production commission to provide food for the region. (Applause)Today, people are crying for wheat because there is war between Russia and Ukraine, yet we have our brand here in the East African Community. We also need to establish a borderless system. East African citizens spend a lot of time on borders for identification and paying for travel documents. As long as a person is identified as a citizen of the East African Community, we should be able to move freely within the region. Another issue is that the East African Community is in very many organisations. We are in the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), Southern African Development Community (SADC). For example, Tanzania and Burundi are members of SADC, which has its own protocols. Today, we tag our products “made in Uganda” or “made in Burundi” We need all products made in the East African Community to be labelled products of East African Community. (Applause) We also need to review all the protocols we signed with these organisations so that we fit within the Community.Another point I have, is about the equal opportunities within the Member States. Today, employment at the centre - the headquarters of the East African Community must be shared equally among Member States. Offices of various organisations within the East African Community must be located within Partner States and equally distributed, unlike today where you have to travel to Arusha to file a case and to go to the Assembly. I am also interested in the amendment of Article 50 of the East African Community Protocols to enable all citizens of Uganda and other citizens within Partner States take part in the voting of Members of EALA. Just imagine today, if in the whole country of Uganda people were at polling stations in the villages voting for the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly, this would have taken the East African Community to the people in the villages to popularise it. Those people we call peasants must know and benefit from the East African Community. Another issue is - especially for Uganda, we have a challenge. We do not have –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Mr Muwonge said we should develop a central nervous system. Can we have a central nervous system of listening? (Laughter) Can we develop one? MR MUWONGE: Today, if I take maize to South Sudan, I have to walk back with my [Mr Muwonge]5957THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022money to Uganda. Uganda must have a bank so that traders can always deposit their money; if I travel to Mombasa to clear a car, I withdraw that money.Today, Uganda has spent a lot of time and energy in South Sudan, but the only investments we have there are “rolex” and selling in markets. Other Partner States have put up banks and they are earning a lot of money in South Sudan. We are spending a lot of money in the Democratic Republic of Congo but what are we going to gain from there? Selling “rolex”? Mr Speaker, the issue is that Uganda must establish a bank to enable us move within the region. Lastly, on regional trade order, today, we have products from Uganda cleared by UNBS when you –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Muwonge. Your time is up. You can exit. We wish you all the best. Honourable colleagues, in the Public Gallery, this afternoon, we have members from the NRM Electoral Commission led by Dr Tanga Odoi, who is the chairperson. We have our former colleague here, Hon. Jane Babiiha Alisemera – Commissioner. They have come to observe proceedings of this House. The rest, you know yourselves. (Applause)Next is Kiryowa Stella. Madam, you have a maximum of seven minutes from now.11.26MS STELLA KIRYOWA (Independent ): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this honour to address this august House. Honourable members, it is exactly 55 years since the East African Community was formed by our forefathers - the likes of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, Jomo Kenyatta and our president at that time. It was formed to strengthen nationalism and foster Pan-Africanism within the African continent with an intent of forming a strong African Union within all the African countries – (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us listen. We are eating into our time.MS KIRYOWA: Thank you - in all African countries. That is the synopsis of our history of the integration. If we do not have this history, we cannot appreciate where we are, today. As Africa, if we are to move, we must move in unity because that is what we are, and that is our strength. (Applause)Honourable members, I come to you today in the same spirit, without fear of contradiction, that the time is now for us to write our own history and realise our potential. Therefore, we must pull up our sleeves into the arena of action. That is precisely why I, Kiryowa Stella, come to present myself to you as a candidate to be part of the redirection of the East African Community as championed by this Government. (Applause)Honourable members, I am not in this race for the sake of doing what has always been done, but rather to offer a sound contribution towards the Ugandan dream. (Applause) I pick interest in Article 5(2) of the East African Community Treaty in which Partner States undertake to establish amongst themselves, in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty, the customs union, the common market, subsequently the monetary union and ultimately the political federation. Those are the pillars of the East African Community. (Applause)As we sit here and watch the European Union today, still agonising over the Brexit decision, I can confirm that we still have symptomatic challenges in the integration of East Africa. However, it is only prudent that as East Africans, we sit here firmly and celebrate the East African Community while we integrate, because for sure, we honestly ought to celebrate unanimously. (Applause) This comes with a lot. Talk about the population of about 270 million East Africans within the community. Imagine the massive markets - the 5958ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALApotential that we have. Today, we boast of the expansion of the East African Community - the DRC being the latest entrant; it comes with a lot of advantages. Look at the IGAD giant projects, which are part of the Agenda 2063. Do you know what is there for us? Honourable members, we cannot take for granted the collaborative efforts of the countries in East Africa to ensure that we have security amongst the Partner States. (Applause) We cannot ignore the efforts of the continuous reform agenda being pushed by Member States to ensure that we have an attractive investment environment. (Applause)Honourable members, the East African Community is here for us. I am the deal. We need a person who will be switched on. (Applause) I am convinced, that going forward, the issues, problems and solutions of East Africa are going to be super-national rather than local. (Applause)The wisdom of the integration of East Africa is not apparent to everyone, although it appears apparent to us here. However, I have hope. I have hope, honourable members. (Applause) If we invest in market intelligence, the data available will be able to guide us in investment opportunities and businesses in Africa. I have hope that if we invest in equity markets – I am a banker - equity markets. I can tell you, then we shall look at the infrastructure; the sky is the limit for us. I have hope that we are going to look at a single currency as Africans, common tariffs, which are the advantages that I come with. But you know what? We shall live to witness the actualisation of the political federation of East Africa where we shall have one leader within the Community. Honourable members, those are very good thoughts together with others, but these are thoughts that need to be cropped, and fertilised by your own conversations as Ugandans.As you know, the East Africa Community and EALA in particular, was formed for the sake of an idea, an idea that each and every one of us deserves a chance to shape her own destiny. Honourable members, that is precisely why I, Kiryowa Stella, come before you, because I know honestly, that this is not a House that memorises equations - (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Stella. Rwandarugali Phionah, you have up to seven minutes starting from now.  11.34MS PHIONA RWANDARUGALI (Independent):  The Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, honourable members present today, distinguished guests, habari zenu, waheshimiwa wazuri. (Applause) Jina langu ni Phiona Rwandarugali.  I am a daughter from the borders of this country. I come from Kisoro and I have roots in Mbale and Karamoja. It is a pleasure for me to stand before you -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, can we listen. MS PHIONA RWANDARUGALI:  It is a pleasure for me to stand before you seeking  a political office at regional level.  (An honourable member fainted.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sergeant-at-Arms, please, help us, and if there is a doctor within - sorry for this incident, colleagues; we hope our colleague is going to get fine. Let us allow the doctors and technical people to do their work.Clerk, please, reset the time for Madam Rwandarugali. MS PHIONA RWANDARUGALI: It is a pleasure for me to stand before you to seek for a political office at regional level. Honourable members, this is a very important election in the life of EALA because this is the term where we have to deliver the monetary union to our people. Our people are waiting for us to deliver the dream of the monetary union to them. [Ms Kiryowa]5959THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022Therefore, honourable members, it is very important that you elect the best candidate for this job in order for us to realise this dream for our people; and I want to say that I am the best candidate, qualified for this job. I am experienced; I have had the opportunity to represent our people at the regional level. I have handled clients in both trade and business, which has given me an opportunity to understand the challenges of our people. It is this experience that I am taking with me to EALA. I speak the language of the Community; I speak Swahili. Therefore, I will be able to lobby and advocate with our neighbours on the issues that affect our country and our agenda. A few weeks ago, His Excellency made a call to us the young people to get interested in the issues of East Africa. If we want him to retire, and not just be able to watch Arsenal - no offence to Hon. Nsereko and the Arsenal fans in this House; I still want your vote. I want to tell you honourable members that I am a woman, a young leader, and I am here to take on the mantle of His Excellency to move our region forward. Honourable members choose me; choose Phiona Rwandarugali, mupige kura kwangu. We are a population of almost 300 million people, and we need to help our people access the market so that they can be able to produce and sell goods and services to the wider Community. Honourable members, we can only do this by relating well with our neighbours in order to take off the non-tariff barriers. In addition to this, we need good infrastructure. We can only do this - and I promise to advocate for a joint infrastructure fund for our people, so that they can access these roads and services. . We live in the post-COVID time. Therefore, it is important for us to strategically position our Community as a tourist destination of this region. I am, therefore, going to promote a synchronised approach to marketing tourism at regional level so that this can improve the lives of our people and also increase the revenues of our Government. It is important for us to invest in ICT and this will mobilise revenue for Government. Honourable members, you all know that dialogue is important. Very recently, you saw how our neighbours would take unilateral action against us; I will advocate for dialogue. We as a people are going to work together in the spirit of brotherhood so that we can move this Community forward. As Martin Luther King Jr said, “We can either choose to work together as brothers or perish together as fools.” Choose Hon. Phiona Rwandarugali  to move the agenda of this Community forward. In line with that, honourable Members, I will tell you one Swahili saying; kukua pamoja ni nguvu, kukaa pamoja ni maendeleo, kufanya kazi pamoja nimafanikio. Mupige kura kwangu twendeleshe maneno yetu ya East Africa - jumiya ya Afrika Mashariki - mbele. Asanteni sana. Asanteni; nawapenda sana. Thank you very much. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Thank you, colleagues. Sergeant-At-Arms, please, sanitise the microphone. Colleagues, just a moment, you are reminded that when you are voting, you have to vote for nine people. If you vote below nine, it is invalid. If you vote beyond nine people, it is also invalid. So, strictly nine and that is the requirement of the Treaty. Secondly, since I have seen our colleague here - recently, for some of us who went to bury his mother, when he was introducing himself, he told the Bishop that he does not take the Eucharist because he has an impingement: that he has two wives who love him so much to the extent that he cannot marry a third one. That is Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo. (Laughter) 5960ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALA11.40MS PATIENCE NAAMARA (Independent) : Thank you, Mr Speaker.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us listen to our colleague in silence.MS NAAMARA : Mr Speaker – (A Member rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, in this session, we are following rules that govern the EALA elections. Under those rules, we do not have procedural matters. But you can reach out to me and I will handle. Honourable member, go on.MS NAAMARA: Mr Speaker, I request that I am given the extra minutes that have been taken away from me. Ladies and gentlemen, my name is Patience Naamara Tumwesigye –(Interjections)-  yes, a wife to Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo.  However, I am here in my capacity as a woman, not as Odoi-Oywelowo’s wife. Thank you. I am a Ugandan, aged 46 years as of last week. For the last 26 years, I have been married to that gentleman and together, we have four children. Otherwise, I was born in Rukungiri and went to school in Bushenyi. I am a rural girl as any one of you. I hold a Bachelor’s degree in Environmental Management from Makerere University. I also hold a Master’s Degree in Tropical Forestry and a Post-Graduate Diploma in Environmental Management, as well as several other qualifications in my field. I am a natural resource expert and since 2015, I have represented the country as part of the mitigation, thematic group to the United Nations Conference on Climate Change; as a member and also an alternate chair for this group. I am a board member of Uganda Timber Growers’ Association, to which some of you belong. I am the founder of an advocacy group called the Green Divas Association Initiative, which encourages women like you, Members of Parliament, to influence policy action in your areas of influence. To the Rotarians in the House, I am a guest Rotarian of the Rotary Club of Ssese Islands. I first stood in this House when I was 17 years old in 1994, and that time, I represented Rukungiri District in the mock CA debates. I do not know how many of you were here then, but I remember the people who inspired me - I do not know whether the Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is here. Those were the women that opened the way for people like me to stand here, as a woman, and ask for votes.I have not looked back and I am very thankful to all of you, who nominated me to come here and further my bid to represent my country at the highest level possible. I thank all of you, who nominated and have supported me this far. Honourable members, often times, we have heard people refer to Africa as the last frontier of the world. The honest truth is that East Africa is the last frontier of the world, given its positioning on the African Continent but that is not even enough; our location in the Great Lakes Region with our natural resources makes us a very enviable region. (Interjections)Mr Speaker, I request that you intervene so that I can be heard. I beg your indulgence.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable members, order. Please Hon. Alioni, I need order in the House. MR ALIONI ODRIA: Mr Speaker, I have arrested a full box of pre-ticked ballot papers in the tally centre and the – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alioni, please – honourable colleagues, order. This is an orderly House and not a market. Now, any Member who continues disturbing this House will be taken out. I cannot allow you to cause confusion here. Whatever you have raised as an issue, I have heard it. 5961THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022The Rt Hon. Speaker, in her communication, which I watched and you were here - told you that we have Members of Parliament who have exams, who are leaving and it was a short list. She only allowed those people – please, listen to me. Hon. Alioni, I am going to push you out and I will not allow you inside, if you continue this way.Clerk, communicate so that the Rt Hon. Speaker can share with me the list of the people who were supposed to vote and go. I hereby direct the Clerk that all agents of candidates should be allowed to witness this voting going on. I do not want anyone to claim that they voted without agents because they are entitled to agents. However, why the allegations of boxes - please colleagues - I need that list and this matter shall be investigated. In case I find it was done, we will stop it. Hon. Patience, please go on. Let us listen to the candidate. MS NAAMARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I already introduced myself and now, I can talk about what I have to offer once I am elected for this position. Honourable members, we know that the East African Community has had its ups -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, please, set four minutes for Patience, starting from now, because we interrupted her submission; I want us to be fair. MS NAAMARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I already introduced myself and my competencies. Now, I want to tell you what my agenda for the East African Community integration is. We know that the East African Community had its ups and downs, but since its revival in 2000, it has experienced a lot of successes. (Interjections)  It is on these that I intend to build and amplify, and aid the scaling-up of this -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, one day you will be candidates here and you will never be listened to; let us listen to her. MS NAAMARA : Honourable members, you know that the integration process is not a one-day journey or a one-year thing; it is a process that takes years and several stages. We also know that there are different things we can do in the immediate term that can help further this integration. (Interjections)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have order? You know Hon. Fox Odoi is the chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights; you are violating the rights of his wife to talk to us. (Laughter)MS NAAMARA:  Honourable Members of Parliament, the first item on my agenda for the East African Community is the elimination of information barriers. It is evident that the agenda for the East African Community integration has not been absorbed by the public. It is also evident that the dissemination has not been done to the best of our expectations. If I am elected to this position, I shall advocate for active dissemination of this agenda across all the social spectrum: be it Government, schools and the general public. I shall also advocate for the involvement of the national assemblies to work together with the members of EALA, and together with the East African Community Secretariat, to be able to smoothen this process of information dissemination and bridging of the information gap. (Applause)Honourable members, I shall also advocate for the strengthening and harmonisation of policy and institutional frameworks because as it is now, we have fragmented frameworks where every country is looking out for their own. While I promote the policies and institutional frameworks for Uganda, I shall also call for the harmonisation of these policies across the Community. My third point on the agenda is energy and natural resource management where I am an 5962ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAexpert. I shall provide expert and technical knowledge in the legislation that can help us exploit our natural resources equitably and sustainably. I will also call for a concerted voice of East Africa when we lobby on the global fora so that we can get solutions or interventions that are appropriate for our unique situation as a region.Members, on trade, I shall ensure that Uganda gets her fair share of trade –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Patience, time is up. We wish you all the best. (Applause) Next is Kateregga Mohammed (Applause) Mr Kateregga, you have a maximum of seven minutes.11.57MR MOHAMMED KATEREGGA (JEEMA): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members of Parliament, allow me to greet you in the name of God. My name is Mohammed Kateregga the Secretary-General of JEEMA and the immediate former Chairman LCV , Bukomansimbi District Local Government. Honourable members, my candidature is guided by two religious scriptures: that is the Quran and the Bible. In the Quran, God tells us to cooperate in doing righteous actions and never cooperate in doing wrong things. The Bible goes further and tells us that there is time for everything - time for differences, time for war, time for unity and today’s time is for elections. (Applause)I am here, honourable Members of Parliament, to beseech you to give me your votes to represent Uganda in the East African Parliament. (Applause)Honourable members, the revival of the East African Community ushered in a new era in our region. New treaties emerged in terms of a regional market, employment and transport, among others. We must note that the East African Community can only be effective with a robust legislative assembly, and a robust assembly is possible if we get honest, trustworthy people to sit in the East African Parliament. Honourable members, as I told you earlier, I was Chairman LC V , Bukomansimbi District Local Government for two terms and during my tenure of service, I opened up channels to Bukomansimbi District Local Government, which ended with making a Memorandum of Understanding with Korean International  –(Interjections)   (Applause) This is, therefore, to request you that the East African Parliament requires a hardworking person like me, who has tested leadership for the last 10 years. (Applause)My agenda will focus on enactment of laws that will enhance the oneness of the East African Community; laws that will promote good governance and the rule of law; laws that will harmonise business and economic policies; harmonise academic curricular, especially for higher education and constructive engagement with the rest of the world. Honourable members, as I wind up my speech, I once again request you to consider JEEMA, as one of the nine members going to represent Uganda in East Africa. (Applause) There is a practice in this House, which you must uphold; we have been electing six members of the NRM, two members from the Opposition and one Independent. I am requesting you to maintain that, because the East African Protocol tells us that the representatives in EALA must reflect what is in the national assembly. By voting one category of people, you would be going against the East African Protocol. For God and my Country. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, the Rt Hon. Speaker has sent me this message; that, “Some Members of Parliament have formally requested me to authorise them to vote early, in order to proceed for other official engagements earlier sanctioned by Parliament, while some have exams. Consequently, I have authorised the following Members to proceed to the polling station in the main tent, cast their vote and leave. The [Ms Naamara]5963THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022polling officials are already in the tent to enable them cast their vote. Agents are allowed but must be recommended by the candidates. You cannot just go and say, “I am an agent.” - Yes, candidates should take there their agents. The honourable members authorised to go and vote are; Hon. Peter Ogwang, Hon. Solomon Silwany, Hon. Esther Afoyochan, Hon. Moses Magogo Hashim, Hon. Asuman Basalirwa, Hon. Bwire Sanon - listen, I am giving you the list, colleagues. Let us be transparent because it is bad for us to go out and we say that there is rigging, yet we know our numbers as Members of Parliament; and a Member of Parliament is known and the voting is in broad daylight. We impute bad image; we impute bad motive on the image of Parliament. That is why I wanted this clarity. Others are Hon. Bwire Sanon, Hon. Iddi Isabirye, Hon. Atwijukye Dan Kimosho, Hon. Acayo Juliet, Hon. Ojok Andrew Oulanyah, Hon. Asiimwe Enosi, Hon. Bonababo Charity, Hon. Kanushi Laura, Hon. Tumwebaze Frank, Hon. Ocen Peter, Hon. Mwesigwa Frank Rukaari, Hon. Mamawi James, Hon. Kitutu Mary Goretti, Hon. Suubi Kyinyamatama - this one even had a sick child, she was rushing and we said, “Honourable member, you have only this chance in five years; vote and go.” Hon. Byarugaba Alex, Hon. Kamusiime Caroline, Hon. Akumu Catherine Mavenjina and Hon. Ssekindi Aisha. These are the only people who have voted. They are 24 people. We need their agents to be there. There is no problem. Let us not put the stakes high. We do not have very high stakes in this, as if it is - We are colleagues and we know each other. Let us protect the image of Parliament.You can see, I have the Hon. Nsibambi; he lost his in-law and he is going for burial, but I do not have it formally here. Honourable member, if you can bring me a copy of your letter, which you wrote to the Speaker and it is received - Then I can find a way of handling it.Colleagues we do not have much time. Mr Bwengye, you have up to seven minutes.12.06MR LAUBEN BWENGYE MUHANGI (Independent):  Members and staff of Parliament, Ugandans out there and those in the gallery -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to tell you that if you know you asked for permission to vote because you had an urgent matter, do not cause confusion by voting and coming back to sit here; you are sending a wrong message. That means you are not honest. If you know you requested and you voted, please, go away.To access the Chair of the Speaker, come with a mask. You people are going to bring me Ebola. First, put on masks, then you can come and conduct whatever brings you. Please, all of you without a mask, do not come here.MR BWENGYE: Mr Speaker, can I proceed?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, Mr Bwengye, go on.MR BWENGYE: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the ministers present, Members of the 11th Parliament present, those out there watching and those in the gallery - a very good afternoon.I am a Ugandan citizen, with numerous qualifications. Permit me to highlight only two. I have a Masters degree in Law and International Business Law. During my studies, my case study was on East African Integration. Honourable members, guess what I found out? Quite new challenges - Ugandans out there, who are in business cannot cross the border freely with their goods. Another point is that Ugandans out there, who are in business, cannot sell their commodities across the border. You will agree with me that several times, neighbouring countries have rejected our sugar and milk. You know it took 10 years for the first East African Community to realise its benefits. The question I am placing before you, honourable members is: Why has it taken us very long to get to where we intend to go? If one could carry a study back home in his constituency, how many Ugandans know the benefits of the East African Community? 5964ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAThose are some of the challenges that I came to realise when I was doing my Masters in Law that compelled me to come and present myself before you that if I am voted into that office, I believe without doubt that I will add value. You know very well that it is not by design that we have got more Kenyans in this country working in different services; hotels, banking and many other areas. The logic is simple, they have trained and skilled their people based on job demand, which is not in our country. Two years ago, I was traveling to Rwanda, and I found a billboard written on, “Rwandese, wake up and utilise the benefits of East Africa.” You will agree with me, if you can find a billboard of that nature in this country, I dare to resign from this candidature. The reason we have not marketed East Africa and the reason it was not marketed - we keep on sending wrong people for the right job. Let me state this clearly, in the 10th Parliament I was here campaigning for the same post and I told Members present then, that let us send people who have mandate, who have the capacity, who have the will to fight for a cause or to fight for Uganda, or to take Uganda’s agenda to the East African Community. Among those who went, I do not say they were not competent, but if they were, we would not be asking the questions we are asking ourselves today. Why are Ugandans not aware of the benefits of the East African Community? Like I mentioned, the benefits of the first East African Community, the golden days where you could have a Ugandan go and work in Tabora, where a Kenyan could come and work in Kasese, we have forgotten. Let me remind you about the words of one philosopher. George Santayana said, “Those who fail to learn from history will be condemned by it.” Friends, we have failed to learn from history and that is why we are still behind other integrations.Do you know that the East African Community was ahead of the European Union? I beg your pardon - I am informing you that at one time, the East African Community was ahead of the European Union. If you doubt, ask Google. I am trying to challenge you that if you want to realise the East Africa we want, send the right people to the right offices. As I conclude, this EALA election is the only election in Uganda or in the world, where a candidate cannot vote for him or herself, where a voter cannot ask a question. (Interjections)  It is an election where we are only given two minutes -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Go on. You are protected.MR BWENGYE: Thank you. It is an election where we are given only two hours. Yet, this is a matter of national importance. Why don’t you give EALA a week or four days so that candidates are given ample time to explain their - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Bwengye. Your time is up and we wish you all the best. Please, do not use the microphone before it is sanitised and let us listen because we are running out of time.12.14MR RONNEX TENDO KISEMBO (Independent) : Mr Speaker, I am an Independent aspirant to represent Uganda in the Fifth Assembly in Arusha. I am a teacher by profession, a member of the global Pan African movement and the Chief Executive Officer of Afrika Mashariki Fest; a regional youth organisation that has been promoting the East African Community integration through sports. This honourable House is gathered here today to elect members to the Fifth Assembly. It is my humble prayer that we take note of the programme that has happened before.The first and second assemblies networked; both at national Parliaments and at the global level to try and put together the Acts of the Assembly and at the same time –(Interjections )- Mweshimiwa Speaker -[Mr Bwengye]5965THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us listen to Mr Tendo. Go on, Mr Tendo.MR TENDO KISEMBO: I am saying that the First and Second Assemblies established the Rules of Procedure of the Assembly. The Third and the Fourth Assemblies have ably handled the enactment of laws that focus on implementing the treaty for the establishment of the Community. I would be wasting your time if I stood here to promise that I am going to do things that have already been handled by the First, Second, Third and Fourth Assemblies. Things like the Customs Union, the Common Market Protocol, the monetary union, the political federation or even joint security operations that have already been agreed upon by partner states. As we speak, they are at the implementation stage within the partner states. Tendo in Kiswahili, means “action”, if I am given the opportunity to go to Arusha, I intend to focus on three points. The first point is, we need to send one team from East Africa to the Olympics, World Championships and other international sporting games. We need to see the flag of East Africa flying at the Olympics, World Championships and other global sporting events. The second is, if I am given the opportunity to go to Arusha, I want to focus on the East African Health Insurance Policy. Our neighbours, Rwanda and Kenya have made great progress on their national health insurance schemes. It is only Ugandan Members of Parliament, who are continuing to suffer due to lack of a National Health Insurance Scheme. When you give me the mandate to go to Arusha, I promise to work with fellow Members to ensure that we have an East African Community health insurance policy so that, once you are elected to this House - your voters, even those that never voted for you, turn you into their health insurance schemes. By voting for me to go to Arusha, I promise to ensure that we have a policy on health. We need to have the East African Community airspace opened. Flying right now from Entebbe to Nairobi costs more than $200, whereas flying from Nairobi to Mombasa, which is equally the same distance costs only $50. The difference is because of the difference in the airspace. If we are to walk the talk, can we have a unified East African Community airspace so that we can allow people to traverse the region?I pledge to work with colleagues in the Fifth Assembly to ensure that we have a unified policy when it comes to sending our teams to international games. I also pledge to focus on the health insurance scheme and a unified airspace for East Africa. Tunapo zungumzia kuhusu faida za matagamano ya jumuia ya Afrika Mashariki ina maana kwamba kuna mambo muhimu matatu. Swala la kwanza, tunaangalia swala la ulizi na usalama nchini wanachama.Swala la pili, tunaangalia swala soko pana. Tunaweza kufanya biashara nchini wanachama.Swala la tatu, ni swala la miwundo mbinu.Tunapo ungana tunapaswa kuwa na barabara tunapaswa kuwa na reli, miundo mbinu mbalimbali, ambayo itasaidia wanainchi wa Afrika Mashariki kuweza kuendelea na mambo yao.I stand before you with the utmost humility that for the past fifteen years, I have committed my time, energy, and resources to promoting the East African Community. Once I am given the opportunity, it will be giving me a raised platform to further what I have been doing for fifteen years on record.   (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Tendo, your time is up. Thank you, and we wish you all the best. Mr Buchana, you have up to seven minutes.5966ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALA12.22MR JULIUS BUCHANA  (Independent):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Members of Parliament and the citizens in the Gallery, I greet you all in the name of our Lord, Jesus Christ. (Applause) To our Muslim brothers and sisters, allow me to greet you in the greatest salutation of all; Assalamu alaikum. (Applause)Mr Speaker, I hail from the Netherlands of this country – Kisoro. (Interjections ) When I came to Buganda, most people call me, Enume eyo lulyo  – (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, colleagues. I had warned you earlier on how we cheer in this Parliament. You can stamp. You do not clap, shout or jump because we want to keep this record on the Hansard. Let us listen to our friend here. MR BUCHANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that defence. As a candidate for EALA, I believe that this is a race where Uganda needs to send a candidate or an MP who is supposed to represent us in all and in one accord. I believe that the common markets of the EAC still have a lot of gaps to fill. As a person, I believe in the East African markets. However, most of our farmers - Members of Parliament will agree with me that in your various districts, there are farmers who have lost market for their goods. How I wish the East African Community and the Summit, which engages all the partner states presidents come up with an East African market so that we can negotiate on a single market for all our products. I want to believe that the EU gave us a chance to export our goods to their countries and it is of no charge. I believe that when East Africa starts up the East African market, we shall get market as a bloc, negotiate as a bloc and our farmers will not operate in losses. (Applause)Recently, our goods were blocked and most of our farmers were crying foul. I believe most of the farmers who are attached to Members of Parliament here - even Members of Parliament who are farmers - the maize, eggs, meat and everything were stopped at the border from crossing over to Kenya. However, when you go to the supermarkets in Uganda, the milk is coming from Kenya; for instance, Brookside comes from Kenya, and we allow it here. Honourable members, we need to understand that we need an East African bureau of standards, where all goods from member states will be subjected to a quality test, and no member state will block any of the goods crossing over to the other member states. (Applause)Allow me also talk about something. We understand that members states, inclusive of the Presidents, the Summit and the Council of Ministers for the EAC, met and agreed to start up the East African standby force. This was to make sure that the region is stabilised. I want to let you know that this standby force has not been operationalised. We understand that DR Congo is now suffering with M23, but its immediate neighbour, which is Rwanda, is facilitating the M23. The standby force, which was put aside by the Summit, was taken to Kenya, but we do not see it in operation. I believe that when I go to EALA, my first kick-off segment of legislation will be to ask why the standby force is not in operation. (Applause) Otherwise, a de-stabilised EAC is the weakened and sick economy of EAC.I want to end by saying that the right way to do business in East Africa is to make sure that we put business into the politics of East Africa and not politics in the business of East Africa. I want to repeat this.  Let us make business the politics of East Africa and not put politics in the business. We need to have our GDPs raised. We need to find our goods markets. We need to make sure our people are living in good conditions. (Applause)As I conclude, I would like to let you know that the fourth estate - the media - has done great work in amplifying the views from this House. It should be incumbent on you Members of Parliament to select your own. I am a journalist 5967THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022who has been working with NBS Television. I have interviewed most of you. It could be incumbent on you to send a journalist to represent the views of Ugandans in EALA. Live wire oyee. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. As Mr Muyinda comes, in the Public Gallery, we have our very own EALA colleague, Hon. Mukasa Mbidde. (Applause) He has come to follow the proceedings of this House. Mr Allan Muyinda, you have a maximum of seven minutes to present your manifesto.12.28MR STANLEY ALLAN MUYINDA (Independent):  Mr Speaker, I am a Ugandan from East Africa. In 1980, we had a very interesting story; that one General asked our grandparents for a vote and they said, “No.” He got only one vote. Forty years later, he has been regarded as one of the greatest leaders of this nation; and that is the President. ( Applause)I come to this House because I want to go and represent you as a common man. I come here as one of the people to fight for the common man; that common man - the businessman – who wants to know how to penetrate the Kenyan market; the businessman who wants to know how to get a business in Arusha, Tanzania. We have very many of our brothers and sisters from across the countries, and all of them are here doing business freely and nobody touches them. I happen to run several businesses across the country. However, I want to ask any of you just to try and open up a kiosk to sell milk in Nairobi. You will see how hard it is. This is what we are saying. Uganda needs to be respected. Uganda being landlocked, its citizens should not be bullied. I want to go to Arusha and tell our brothers and sisters that we also belong to this market. Uganda is not a dumping place. I have grown up seeing products from Kenya entering our market. I can assure you that if you go to Nairobi, you will find your Mukwano products as the last in the supermarket. It is shielded behind there. Why are we disrespected, yet we are the Pearl of Africa? I ask you, on behalf of the people who are struggling in your constituencies, to find markets and jobs for them, so that they are able to feed their families and also prosper to vote for me. I know I am not the best. I am not the superstar, but I ask for the sake of our common man. For the sake of our people, please, vote for me. I am the neutral candidate. I do not have anybody. I am not favoured by anybody. I come here by the grace of God. I want to assure you that I will not embarrass this House and our country, Uganda. Members, as we sit here - I come from a place where sugarcane is suffocated, yet, we are neighbours to Kenya. Kenyan trucks are all over Busoga region and Mbale taking our bananas. How many of our traders are in Kenya taking there anything or anything out of there? I want to go and market East Africa. Honourable members, I ask for your vote not to go and speak too much English. I want to go to Tanzania to represent my country, to speak Basic English that a Muyinda somewhere can understand. When you talk of the Custom Union, do I understand it? When you talk of all this good English and documents the lawyers have drafted, how does it benefit me as a farmer? I am one of the people who are trying to implement the East African Youth Development Fund. This is what we are saying; we need to go to all universities across the seven countries and ask them to contribute so that we help our youth. This is the only way to market the Community. If you asked anybody from your constituency, what does an EALA MP do? Who does the EALA MP represent? They will tell you “mugenda kulya sente” because they do not understand what we do. Therefore, we will need to push this East African business down to the people. 5968ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAHonourable members, please, give me your vote. I have been contesting to be a Member of Parliament; I am supposed to be here waiting for somebody to ask for my vote; unfortunately, I did not make it. God blessed you as you give me a vote.  I am kindly requesting you to give me a vote. You know very well, when we come from our village constituencies, we come with many ideas such as I am going to do roads, water, blah, blah. However, when we get here and things change. It is the same issue. When we go to Arusha, things change because it is already set. The other very important issue is our democracy. Honourable members, we need to work on our democracy so that we are respected across the region. As we stand, in Uganda, we do not have term limits but other countries have. That is one of the things we need to restore. We need to restore term limits for the next generational leaders. (Interjections)Honourable members, I ask for your vote. I come from Wakiso District; a district –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Muyinda, your time is up. Thank you; we wish you all the best. (Applause) Colleagues, this is to inform you that Mr Ambrose Murangira will be speaking to us through an interpreter, and will, therefore, be given 15 minutes as earlier mentioned by the Rt Hon. Speaker. (Applause)12.35MR AMBROSE MURANGIRA (Independent):  Rt Hon. Speaker, honourable ministers, honourable Members of Parliament and the people of Uganda watching us -(Applause)When I stand before you all, as an inclusion specialist, three questions come to my mind. They are: Will my audience understand me? Secondly, will my audience respond to me? Thirdly, how do I become inclusive in my communication? Those are the three questions that come to my mind as I stand before you. I have a simple solution to the three questions. I will teach you just three signs. The first is that when we are clapping, this is how we clap – (Member demonstrated how to clap using sign language.) Secondly, this is how we say “yes” (Member demonstrated how to say “yes”, in sign language.) And third is: “no” (Member demonstrated how to say “no” in sign language.) Therefore, honourable members, we can use the three signs to be inclusive in communication so that you can respond to me.My speech is in four parts. One, to understand who Ambrose is. Two, to understand my experience. Three, I want you to understand why I am standing to go to EALA; and four, I want to let you know why I am the best. (Applause)Honourable members, I will go back to the first part - who am I, as I stand here before you? I am Ambrose Murangira. I became deaf at the age of 10 due to mumps. Since my mother was very active, she encouraged me to continue with school. If it were not for my mother, I would not be standing before you, honourable members in the Parliament of Uganda today. I highly respect the ladies here. When I see a woman, I see my mother. (Applause) Therefore, let me use this opportunity to stand in the Parliament of Uganda to appreciate all the women in this country a million times.Honourable members, I have gone through a lot of challenges, but I am happy to let you know that I already have a Master of Arts in Social Sector Planning and Management. I have written my PhD dissertation, and that has been possible because of my mother. It is possible because of people like you, who are friendly to us. For over 20 years, my focus has been on inclusion. I have experienced inclusion as I stand here. I feel I am qualified to represent my country in EALA; why not? Yes. The other question is: Why am I going and what am I going to do? I have five reasons I am going. Some of you have already read my book entitled, The Promise, which has 17 points. I [Mr Muyinda]5969THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022cannot say everything here because of time, but I have picked only five. First is diversity and inclusion. Honourable members, the East Africa African Community debate focuses on economic integration, but they forget social inclusion. Without social inclusion, we cannot achieve economic integration. This is why I want to go there and build trust between partner states so that we have no more border closures. Inclusion is possible. Trust in me as an expert in this area.The second reason is the issue of security. Honourable members, I salute our army in this Parliament one million times. (Applause) We are safe; we relax, sleep and travel anywhere in Uganda without any problem. The big question is: Is it safe for me to go to Kenya, Tanzania and Congo? We are not safe. I will work with the Parliament of Uganda and engage the 10 Members of Parliament to have strong policies on security between the borders. This is what I can promise. It is possible, through you, honourable members of Parliament. (Applause)As we talk about security, we have issues in Karamoja subregion. You have heard about cattle raiding. Members of Parliament from Karamoja, where are you? (Applause) I am here for you. I will make sure that there is no more cattle raiding from Kenya; we will strengthen the laws.Thirdly, honourable members, I have been visiting your constituencies and talking to your people. Nobody knew about the East African Community. I am standing here to link up with you to continue going to your constituencies. I promise that in the first five years, I will be going with you to your constituencies. (Applause) I cannot just wait for the time of voting to come and visit your constituencies. If you vote me today, I will go with you even tomorrow and start the work. (Applause) Furthermore, we have multiple memberships between partner states. One country could belong to the SADC or COMESA and the East African Community. However, they should harmonise trade protocols to see how we can benefit better. Yes, this is what I can promise.We have issues of weaker States, for example, Burundi, South Sudan and Congo. We cannot leave them out, but support them. I am in Uganda, but I will be the voice for the weaker States. (Applause)Lastly, I stand here because of Article 50(1) of the East African Treaty, which states that when you are voting the nine Members of Parliament, you should have a representation of special interest groups. (Applause) I am standing here to represent this category of people so that they are not left behind. We have to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. The theme is, “leave no one behind”. Therefore, I am going to represent millions of people, who are watching us now. I will be the voice of the voiceless, and I am a voice for inclusion. Finally, honourable members, vote for me. Look at my capacity, not my disability. As you have read my book, How to become a star Member of Parliament - many of you have got copies and it is a very good book. It shows my capacity.    I am really happy I have Members of Parliament. One time, when I was starting campaigns, I met a new Member of Parliament and I was engaging him to vote me. He asked me: “You are deaf and dumb, how will you talk when you get there?” I got annoyed but I did not lose hope. We had an engagement with him and he was enlightened. As I speak now, he is one of my agents. I thank you very much, Members of Parliament. (Applause)A vote for me, is a vote for inclusion, and a vote for millions of Uganda who have been left behind for a long time. Thank you very much. (Applause) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Ambrose. We wish you all the best. 5970ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAHon. Veronica Kadogo, you have seven minutes. (Applause) Colleagues, order. (Applause) You are taking her time because we are already counting. (Applause) She has a maximum of seven minutes.12.48MS VERONICA KADOGO (Independent):  Mr Speaker, honourable ministers, Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, allow me to introduce myself. ( Applause)I am a graduate of Kyambogo University and also a double graduate of Makerere University. (Applause) Allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate Makerere University upon marking 100 years. (Applause)My working experienceI worked in Makerere University for four years. I served in the Ninth and Tenth Parliaments of Uganda. I served on the Committee on East African Community Affairs, and I also served as a Vice- Chairperson, Committee on East Africa Community Affairs. (Applause)I was the first Chairperson of Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Immunisation, and I am also a sportswoman – I am a medallist and basketballer. (Applause)Honourable members, once you send me to EALA, I am going to work on the protocols. I will make sure the Customs Union, Common Market, Monetary Union and Political Federation are implemented. (Applause)  I also pledge to work on the challenges of integration. I will work on the road network as well as the railway network. (Applause)  Honourable members, I want to assure you that once you elect me to represent you in the EALA, I will continue working with you and ensure that every Member of Parliament makes it back to the 12th Parliament. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!MS KADOGO: Honourable members, thank you for your votes. A vote for Kadogo is a vote for peace. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Veronica. We wish you all the best. Next?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Nakitende, you are welcome. - Order! Do not make me call names. Please, let us listen to another candidate. Hon. Martin Muzaale, please, take your seat. Colleagues, I told you earlier on that Parliament is a place where everyone has a voice; whether you support them or not; everyone has a voice. We have a beautiful lady in front of us. (Laughter) Ms Nakitende, let us listen to her. Madam Nakitende, you have a maximum of seven minutes. 12.54MS SALAAMA NAKITENDE (Independent):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Speaker, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, all protocol observed. Honourable members, how are you today?  Nakitende oyee . (Applause) Thank you very much, honourable members. Asalaam waleikhum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh - a greeting to say, “Peace be with you.”I am a Ugandan, a patriot and a natural student of Pan-Africanism. Today, is no ordinary day, because of the opportunity to stand before the crème de crème of this country. It is not merely a chance, but an opportunity to forge a way forward for Pan-Africanism and the East African Community we believe in. (Applause) Today, I want to use this opportunity to ask each of you, Members, to look at your neighbour; look closely at your neighbour and tell them you appreciate the black colour they have; we believe in the black colour; in the melanin we hold, and this is what binds us together. Honourable members, today is no ordinary day. It is not a mere day to cast a vote, but a [The Deputy Speaker]5971THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022day for us to appreciate that we need to unite. It is a day for us to appreciate that it is time for us to unite for a common cause. It is a day for us to unite and go beyond the donor syndrome; to know that we can do this by ourselves. It is a day to be kept on record for us to understand that black is not the devil; that black is African, and that we are African; and that we must unite; our unity is what propels us forward.It is a day to point out the challenges we have gone through as a Community. It is a day for us to point out our challenges that betrayed us, and our failures when we first started the East African Community in 1967. It is a time to point where we have gone wrong. It is not a mere day to cast a vote just like that. It is a day to vote for leaders, who will propel the East African Community forward. Honourable members, what are our challenges since 1977 after the first collapse of the East African Community? One, the fragility of democracy in the region. We can sit here in our different colours, but what unites us is the Africans we are; the black melanin we have; the black melanin we hold; the pride that we have and that is our skin colour. We are no less - we are not supposed to be told we are less than anyone else. We are not supposed to be held down, as if we are less and have someone superior to us. It is a time to rediscover; to retrace our direction in the East African Community. Honourable members, what are our challenges? The weak policies. We have weak policies; we are slow to implement our plans. We need to look back and reconsider and retrace our roots. Reconsider and re-embrace Ubuntu. Mr Speaker, it is in order that we look back; that we use this day to look back and reconsider our challenges. We also need to consider youth participation, because more than 73 per cent of the region has youthful individuals whose energy can be tapped into. We cannot overlook the fact that our population is a young population. For us to sit back and think that we can progress minus the youth, is really a setback for all of us. Honourable members, today is the day that we need to rethink the purpose and the role of civil society. It is a day to reconsider the health of our people. Having HIV as –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I wish you all the best, Madam Nakitende. Mr Agaba, you are welcome. (Applause) Order, honourable colleagues. Mr Agaba, please, stop that. This is Parliament; it is not a rally. We should behave as Members of Parliament. You have a maximum of seven minutes to present your manifesto.1.01MR GILBERT AGABA (Independent):   Mr Speaker and Members of the 11th Parliament, it is a great honour to address you on a matter of my candidature for EALA. (Applause)I am a Ugandan aged 40. I hold a Masters Degree in Customs Management. I am here before you, honourable members, to seek your mandate; for you to elect and send me to represent Uganda at EALA. (Applause)I thank you, honourable members. Some of you have already said that I am going. Indeed, I am going. Agaba oyee . (Applause) When you send me to Arusha, honourable members, I will create cohesion between the national Assembly and the regional Assembly. I am the missing link. (Applause) In that cohesion, we shall be interacting with your constituents all the time. (Applause) I have visited 80 per cent of your constituencies and I will keep doing so. (Applause) Even next weekend, I will be in someone’s constituency.Honourable members, when mandated to go to Arusha, I will promote the integration agenda with its benefits such as trade facilitation by eliminating non-tariff barriers and promoting the single customs territory so that East Africa is interconnected.  (Applause)5972ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAHonourable members, there is also an issue of strategic security – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Agaba, get closer to the microphone so that you can be audible enough .MR AGABA: There is the issue of strategic security. We should collectively handle the security of East Africa. (Applause) This can be given reference to Karamoja, where Government has tried the disarmament policy, but it is not working well because our neighbours, the Toposa in South Sudan and Turkana in Kenya, remain armed, and they come and cause insecurity in our region. (Applause) Given the mandate, honourable members, we shall collectively address all these issues.Honourable members –(Interjections)- V ote Agaba: Agaba oyee. Agaba oyee. (Applause)Given the mandate, we shall look at issues of trade. Uganda produces excess maize, poultry products and milk. We have to find markets for our products. (Applause)I thank you, honourable members. I am banking on you. My future is in your hands. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Agaba. (Applause) We wish you the best. Mr Fred Luyinda, you are welcome. Colleagues, let us listen to the smartly-dressed Mr Fred Luyinda. (Applause) You have a maximum of seven minutes to present your manifesto.1.06MR FRED LUYINDA (Independent): Mr Speaker and all protocol observed, I am an EALA contender on the youth slot. I am a businessman and I hold a Bachelors Degree in Business Administration.Today, is the day that the Lord has made. That is why I come with a smile. (Applause)(Mr Luyinda sang a campaign song.)Mr Speaker, that was my introduction. I would like to start by quoting an American Director, Hans Bernard, who once said: “We all benefit by having young people exposed to the way things are done in a democratic society.” Isn’t it time to tap into the power of the youth?Today, honourable members, I am honoured to present my manifesto. As an independent EALA youth candidate, this manifesto does not present promises, but offers commitments that I will table as motions to be implemented into laws and policies when I am given the mandate. Essential to my agenda is the prioritisation of the actual integration from the top leadership to the actual beneficiaries; the typical Ugandans out there, who are watching us. When given the mandate, below is how I intend to address certain challenges. Instability is a serious hindrance to socio-economic development. Partner States such as Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC, a new Member State, is faced with political instabilities, which are a great threat to us, as member states. These instabilities have effects. They lead to refugee influx where, as per now, Uganda hosts over 1,700 refugees in Nyakabande, Kisoro District. They crossed due to the M23 rebels takeover of Bunagana. There is human trafficking as a result of instability. People are trafficked for military services. People are trafficked for ritual purposes. This comes due to the promises of a better life. When given the mandate, I shall ensure that stability is a priority by putting the East African Standby Taskforce, task and quicken the East African Anti-Trafficking Bill, 2016, through ensuring that the Heads of State assent to the Bill; and, furthermore, quicken the process of extradition so that people who engage in human trafficking are brought to book. Mr Speaker, next on my agenda is to address the inadequate development youth programmes. [Mr Agaba]5973THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022The fact that the youth constitute the largest segment of the population in all partner states, makes them a crucial section of society in forging the East African integration agenda. About 20 per cent of the 127 million people in the EAC member states such as Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda are between the ages of 15 and 30. However, there are still limited opportunities for the youth in technology and business. When voted as an EALA youth representative, I shall ensure that there are youth exchange programmes for sharing new opportunities; moreso, in business and technology, and for the youth to directly participate in the East African Community activities. Since time is not my good ally – my manifesto contains other challenges such as poor tourism policies, environmental issues, education and sports.As I conclude, I would like to compare the East African challenges to the familiar story of David and Goliath. Fred Luyinda is the David and East African challenges are the Goliath. When everyone had failed to defeat Goliath, it was this tiny man who, with a mere stone, defeated Goliath. Honourable members, vote Fred Luyinda to defeat those challenges. (Mr Fred Luyinda sang campaign song.)(Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Luyinda. Your time is up.  Sergeant-At-Arms, please, only allow in candidates when I call.  Colleagues, we have been here since 8.30 a.m. when we started with a Bill. Some of us have since not got a break. So, I am suspending the House for three minutes and then we shall start with the NRM group. Thank you.(House was suspended at 1.14 p.m.)(On resumption at 1.20 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, our three minutes are done. We have to finish this and vote. Whips, tell Members to come in. Most of them are in the corridors. Sergeant-At-Arms, please, ring the bell so that Members can come in. Hon. Akol, I am sorry. We needed a break. I am also a human being. I had communicated to the Clerk but the Sergeant-At-Arms just ushered you in. However, Members are listening and cheering you. You have a maximum of seven minutes. 1.23MS ROSE AKOL OKULLU (NRM): Thank you. Mr Speaker, ministers and distinguished Members of Parliament, good afternoon. (Applause) I come before you to seek your support and vote in order for me to join the Fifth EALA to accomplish the work that you sent me to do there. (Applause)I served in this Parliament for 10 years: briefly, as the Minister of Internal Affairs; Chairperson Budget Committee; member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Chairperson Parliamentary Pension Scheme, and a Parliamentary Commissioner. (Applause) I am an Administrator by profession; a graduate of the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators, based in the UK. Colleagues, the East African Community integration agenda is a process guided by four pillars; the Customs Union, the Common Market, the Monetary Union and the Political Federation. (Applause)So far, we have achieved two pillars and are now in the process of accomplishing the requirements – the legal framework – for the Monetary Union. Colleagues, immediately we report to Arusha from here, we already have legal frameworks that have been submitted by the Council of Ministers, which we have to pass as Bills that 5974ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAwill accomplish the legal requirements for our Monetary Union. (Applause)Honourable members, we have a lot of opportunities for our communities. There are opportunities that are available for us. However, the challenge we have is that there has been low financing for the sensitisation process. Together with you, we will work in your constituencies to sensitise them on the benefits of the East African Community. (Applause)Together with sensitisation, we are going to push for sustainable funding mechanisms that will help by availing resources to be utilised to carry out the sensitisation process. (Applause)Colleagues, I am seeking your support and vote. I will work with you in your constituencies to make sure that the East African Community is grounded. (Applause) We shall also work together to make sure we ground you as well. We shall continue working with you even after we are elected to go back to the Fifth Assembly because our cause is one. (Applause)  My cause is your cause. Today, you are for me but we shall be there for you as well.  (Applause) Asanteni sana waheshimiwa. Mungu awabariki. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Rose, we wish you all the best. This is what happens when someone has been part of the family. (Applause) Hon. Musamali, you are welcome. You have a maximum of seven minutes to present your manifesto to your colleagues.1.28MR PAUL MUSAMALI MWASA  (NRM): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Members and Ugandans at large, good afternoon. I am here to seek your vote such that I continue serving Uganda at EALA. (Applause)Honourable members, you and I are all aware that the development, growth and prosperity of Africa has been disrupted by activities of slavery, colonialism and neo-colonialism. It is, therefore, our responsibility to ensure that we insulate Africa against these disruptive forces. (Applause)It is upon that background, honourable members, that we should support the integration, not only of East Africa, but Africa. (Applause) When it comes to this matter, honourable members, the mission to integrate East Africa and Africa is a mission Musamali is ready to live or die for. (Applause)Honourable members, I am mentally prepared, ideologically developed and technically groomed by this Parliament and, therefore, I am organically ready to work for Uganda and defend the interests of Uganda. (Applause) V ote Musamali so that I continue serving you and Uganda, to protect the destiny and prosperity of Africa. Honourable members, as a serving Member of EALA, we have enacted enough laws to facilitate the integration of East Africa. However, there are some problems with implementation. When you give me this opportunity, again, we have identified those weak laws. My colleagues and I are going to sponsor amendments to those laws to ensure that we facilitate free trade in East Africa; investment in East Africa; and movement of people in East Africa.Honourable members, there is this big thing you and I have been asking: deepening integration and widening cooperation. (Applause)There has been a challenge in terms of taking this message – the integration agenda – to the people of Uganda.The Argentines say: “It takes two to tangle.”  Together with my colleagues and the Parliament of Uganda, we are going to work and ensure that we take the integration agenda to the people of Uganda. Through you, Members of Parliament, we shall go to your constituencies. (Applause)Lastly, I am happy that you, Members of Parliament and the leadership of Parliament, [Ms Okullu]5975THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022are ready to amend the Rules of Procedure such that we, Members of EALA, are able to bring feedback directly to you and Ugandans. (Applause)A vote for Musamali Paul Mwasa is a vote for prosperity and integration of East Africa. Thank you very much. V ote for Musamali Paul Mwasa. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Musamali. We wish you all the best. Thank you.  - Colleagues, order. - Colleagues, on top of you cheering, the world outside also wants to listen to Hon. Odongo; Let us listen to him for the next seven minutes. 1.34MR GEORGE STEPHEN ODONGO (NRM): Thank you, Mr Speaker and Members. I am here for deployment. I have been in the trenches for the last five years. I have been your foot soldier in our struggle for regional integration. (Applause) I have been in the frontlines to widen and deepen our regional integration. (Applause) I am here to seek your approval to go for the next term.Mr Speaker, as a country, our credentials have been tested for the last five years. Our posture has been tested in the last five years. Our Pan-African credentials have been tested in the last five years. However, I have good news for you. (Applause) We have shown that we have stood the test of time. (Applause)Mr Speaker, in the last five years, our posture and credentials were tested by different trade barriers. Our goods were stopped but we showed who we are. We showed our temperament as a country that has promoted Pan-Africanism; we went for the soft power. It is not because we are weak but because we were not able to retaliate - because of our fidelity to our Treaty and our credentials as the promoters of Pan-Africanism. (Applause)In the next five years – I want to talk about the fundamentals. Seven minutes are insufficient for us to talk about the nuts and bolts of regional integration. (Applause) However, the seven minutes are going to be sufficient for us to deal with the fundamentals of our integration. Mr Speaker, in the next five years, our attention should be on our strategic security. (Applause) Five years have been enough for me to determine that we need to upscale our strategic security preparedness as a region. Mr Speaker, we are the biggest exporters of peace in Africa. When the Republic of Somalia was in danger, we chose to put our best foot forward and we put our boots on the ground. (Applause) When the Republic of South Sudan had instability, we put our boots on the ground. As we speak, the Democratic Republic of Congo -(Applause) Thank you.We are in this for the long –(Applause) This is not kids play. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us listen to Mr George. MR ODONGO: Mr Speaker, we need to have a security architecture with strong institutions to guarantee our strategic security as a country. We have watered the fruits of our peace and security, including that of the region using our blood. We do this not because we enjoy to defeat our adversaries. We do this because we know our security is as good as the security of our neighbours. (Applause) That is what regional integration means. We must project soft power. We must continue to negotiate. We must continue to show that we can facilitate regional integration. I thank you so much. I am here to seek your support and to demonstrate that we are one and that, as Parliament, we are for regional integration. We need depth. We need people who are tested. We need those who will speak to the very heart of regional integration. Thank you so much. (Applause)5976ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALATHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. George. We wish you all the best. Next candidate. Hon. Namara, you have a maximum of seven minutes to present your manifesto.1.40MR DENNIS NAMARA (NRM): Mr Speaker and gallant Members of the 11th Parliament, one of the greatest philosophers, Frantz Fanon, wrote in his book, The Wretched of the Earth, that every generation must, out of relative obscurity, define its own destiny and either make it or betray it. (Applause)As they always say: “Some men and women are born great, others achieve greatness, but some collide with greatness.” You, the gallant Members of this assembly, not only were you born great, but, indeed, you have achieved greatness. (Applause)I am, therefore, humbled to be before you and, once again, make a case for the East African integration. I am a 38-year-old lawyer and an advocate of the High Court and other courts subordinate thereto. I am a holder of Master of Laws from the University of Dundee and, currently, pursuing my second Masters Degree in International Trade Policy from ESAMI University in Arusha, Tanzania. (Applause)I was born and raised in Bunyoro subregion, but bred in Kampala. (Applause) I started as the Guild Speaker of Makerere University and rose through the ranks to become the President of the Uganda National Students Association – galvanising synergies to be elected the National Youth Chairperson of the NRM and, thereby, qualifying to be a member of the NRM Central Executive Committee.Honourable members, I was appointed by His Excellency the President, at the age of 27, to be a Senior Presidential Advisor, a role I performed impeccably very well. (Applause)In 2012, I stood for Member of EALA, but as fate would have it, I lost by only one vote. Once again, I present my candidature to you, to be the vanguard of transformation, a ray of hope, epitome of tranquility and an embodiment of integrity to represent Uganda at the regional assembly.Honourable members, we must integrate for two reasons and one of them is about economic prosperity of the people of East Africa. We must implement the three pillars of economic integration; the Customs Union, the Common Market and the Monetary Union. As they always say, honourable members, we must come together because we cannot be islands of prosperity surrounded by a sea of -(Applause)The second reason is about the strategic security of the people of East Africa. We must harness our synergies to ensure that we build the military hegemony and infrastructure to protect the black race against extinction. As you are aware, the Red Indians of America are extinct because of colonialists. Honourable members, as you are here today, the Europeans are in space. We must build capacity, go to space and  (Interjections)  (Applause) I know the challenges ahead of us are quite immense. As the one great man once said –(Interjections)– -(Applause)- I shall not rest until the whole of East Africa is - (Applause)- May God bless the Members of Parliament. (Applause) May God bless the people of Uganda. For God and my Country. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Namara. We wish you all the best. - Colleagues, let us listen to one another. Hon. Mary Mugyenyi, you have a maximum of seven minutes to present your manifesto. ( Applause)1.43MS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM): Mr Speaker, honourable ministers and colleague Members of Parliament, I represent Uganda at EALA. (Applause)5977THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022I hold a Masters Degree, a Post-Graduate Diploma and a first degree in Political Science and Public Administration. I have served in Uganda as a Member of Parliament. I have served at the continental level as a legislator at the Pan-African Parliament, where I rose to be the Vice-President of the Pan-African Parliament. (Applause) Of course, I have represented you at EALA, where I still am. (Applause)It is an honour for me, indeed, to stand before you, once again, to ask for your vote to represent our country at the regional Parliament. Having served at the continental, regional and national parliaments, I believe I have accumulated enough knowledge and experience to ably represent Uganda, once again, at EALA. (Applause)Mr Speaker, when I asked for your mandate for the first time, five years ago, I promised to strengthen our integration by deepening cooperation and ensuring robust trade. (Applause)Colleagues, I have had the opportunity to serve in the following positions, which have enabled me to be able to meet my promises. I have served on the agriculture and tourism committee. I served as Commissioner of EALA. I have served on the trade committee and I am ready to serve, once again. (Applause)I have been consistent in advocating for the equality of women and girls at the regional level.  As a Pan-Africanist, I believe in the integration of the East African region as well as the union of the African continent because I believe that we can consolidate our gains and have a robust continent that is free of begging for donor funding – where we are able to finance our own budget. (Applause)A lot has been achieved so far. As you realise, we have already implemented two pillars of our integration: the Customs Union and the Common Market. The process is ongoing and legislation has been done to implement the Monetary Union, where East Africa will enjoy one currency – the East African currency. (Applause)The East African Community has been very attractive to the extent that more countries have joined and others are asking to join. I, therefore, see a bright future for the East Africans. With the Democratic Republic of Congo joining us, now, we can boast of a population of more than 300 million people and an area that is 4.8 million square kilometres – spanning from ocean to ocean. If I am re-elected, I promise that our GDP will continue to grow. Right now, we are at $305 billion. (Applause) I am ready to be sent, again, to consolidate the gains that have so far been achieved because I have what it takes to do exactly that.I will work towards a region where our children will feel safe to invest and trade without any tariff barriers and where our population will be free to work and settle and have opportunities across our region. (Applause)I dream of a continent and a region where there are opportunities that allow our children to be job-creators rather than seeking jobs abroad. I will push for total integration where we are proud. (Applause)I will push for gender equity. I know we have strength in our God-given natural resources which we must take advantage of and excel. So, tourism is one of the areas that I will focus my energy on. (Applause) Mr Speaker –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Mary. Your time is up and we wish you all the best. Thank you. Hon. James Kakooza, please enter. Hon. Kakooza, you have a maximum of seven minutes to present your manifesto. Sergeant-at-Arms, please, help him with a microphone. Thank you. Colleagues, let us listen.1.52MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to praise God that I am here in front of you. (Applause) 5978ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAHonourable members, I was here on 26 July 2021; I am one-year-old in EALA. Mr Speaker, I want to say that this election, which is taking place today, on 29 September 2022, is a manifestation of the Republic of Uganda as a state actor in the integration. (Applause)Mr Speaker, I stand before you, again to seek the renewal of my mandate and when the mandate is given to me, I pray to best serve the interests of the citizens of Uganda. I have been in this House as a member of the East African Customs Union, which drafted the law that is governing the East African Community. One of the best fruits is that it was endorsed in 2005 by the Heads of State. By 2013, we went into the single customs territory. It reduced the turnaround of doing business. For instance, a container could take 14 days to come from Mombasa to Kampala; now, it takes only four days. (Applause)In addition, Mr Speaker, I promise, as a core mandate of legislation as Members of Parliament of the East African Community, I too pledge that the legal regime standardising the East African commodities must be harmonised within the Partner States. (Applause)Honourable members, I want to allude to you that what I found out when you sent me there – it means the finances remitted from this Parliament and Partner States are inadequate but we have to assert ourselves because Partner States are constrained to look for alternative financing and mechanisms of financing its continuity. I do believe that the projection of common external tariffs, if we introduce 0.5 per cent, within the imported goods from abroad, the projection is predictable and the finances can support the region.With regards to representation as a core mandate of Members of Parliament, I do believe that I will work and coordinate with the Judiciary; I will work with ministers and Heads of State to assert ourselves to make sure that the regional integration is widened, deepened and tightened. (Applause)With these few remarks, I beg for your support and believe me I will not disappoint you. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Kakooza. We wish you all the best. Mr Siranda, you are welcome. You have a maximum of seven minutes for presenting your manifesto. (Applause) Now, I can see Hon. Mao making different signs. (Laughter) (Applause) Mr Siranda, please, present your manifesto. (Applause)1.56MR GERALD SIRANDA BLACKS (DP): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Your Excellency the Vice-President, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Cabinet ministers, my party leader, Hon. Nobert Mao. (Applause)I come from Bukedi subregion. I am a member of DP and I am the party candidate. And by the grace of God, I am the Secretary-General of the Democratic Party; a party that is in cooperation with you – the mighty NRM. (Applause)In Uganda, we need to work together because this great region is for all of us. Siranda presents himself before you because I believe that East Africa requires a person of my calibre to work together. I have worked with the Inter-party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD) processes; I have been a council member; I have chaired the IPOD processes under tough credentials where people have rejected these meetings. But because of Uganda, I have been there; I have walked the journey. East Africa requires a person of my calibre. (Applause) I will be a great team player because we know that with East African processes, you require a leader that holds station.  (Applause) You require a leader that is groomed; a leader that is nurtured. I want to request you honourable members of Parliament, the ones [Mr Kakooza]5979THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022from the biggest party the NRM, the mighty Independents, and the Opposition, let us work as a team; I can work with East Africa. I know when I am in Arusha, I will be an ingredient to team Uganda, I will be an embodiment of national unity; an embodiment of dialogue. Uganda requires a team that will dialogue. The East African Community is about dialogue. When I am in Arusha, I will be the engine for dialogue. We will work as a team because in Arusha, our party is Uganda; we want to take Uganda; at this level, we have to walk together. I know that when the bus gets stuck on the way, you need a hoe to clear the way so that the bus can move. (Applause) Get the hoe, put it in the bus and work as a team. (Laughter) Uganda is saying ninawashukuru waheshimiwa; ninawakaribisha sana tutembe pamoja Afrika mashariki; tutayitembeza, tutatumikiya Uganda; tutakuwa sisi sote tutembe kwamakini. I want to request you, Members, that with our cooperation agreement, do not let me down. (Applause) Let us work together and we make the team: Team Uganda. Let us spice the team. (Applause)I have worked with refugees for eight years. (Applause) I have gone to Congo. I have been to Rwanda. I have been to Burundi. Ninawakaribisha sana. Ninawahitaji . (Candidate sang a campaign song.)Finally, Uganda requires a sober team. (Applause) Uganda requires a solid team. (Applause) I will be a soul to the nine Members of Parliament. I will be an engine to the nine Members of Parliament. (Applause) We will walk this journey together. (Applause) We will defend Uganda. (Applause) We will create what we call the East African Standby Force. We need a force to protect our nation, our farmers and our traders.With the Customs Union and a common currency, you need a team that can work together. (Applause) Siranda presented that idea.  Thank you so much. I know that from today, we will walk together. (Applause) We will move together. Like this. (Applause) Like this. (Applause) Like this. (Applause) Like this. (Applause) We will walk this journey together. (Applause)V ote for Siranda Gerald. Asanteni. Ninawashukuru. Karibuni tena. Asanteni tena. Twende pamoja. Africa Mashariki pamoja. Uganda njema, kazi njema, pamoja tutashida. Asanteni. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Siranda. We wish you the best, Mr Siranda. You can go out so that another candidate comes in.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Welcome Ms Josephine Lolem. Colleagues, let us listen to this beautiful lady. (Applause) This Parliament is known for respecting ladies. So, let us listen to the lady. Madam Lolem, you have a maximum of seven minutes to present your manifesto.2.02MS JOSEPHINE LOLEM (Independent):  Mr Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, protocol observed, I am Josephine Lolem. I studied at St Mary’s College Aboke for my ‘O’ and ‘A’ levels. (Applause) I also went to Makerere University and I attained a Bachelors Degree in Development Studies. I also attained a Masters Degree at ESAMI Business School and graduated at Arusha, Tanzania. ( Applause)I worked with the State House for 10 years. Right now, I am carrying out assignments for Operation Wealth Creation in the Karamoja subregion. I am here to contest for Member of Parliament at the East African level for the following reasons.I realised that there are a number of gaps in the East African Community and that is why I decided to come and stand as a Member of EALA. For example, look at the issues of free trade and the Customs Union. We are not yet at par. We need to harmonise free trade and the customs union in order to achieve integration. 5980ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAWe need to utilise the blue economy of Uganda because we share the blue economy – Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania share the waters. We have to look at the infrastructure of Uganda, which is not well developed. We must develop infrastructure, for example, running right from Mombasa to Kinshasa and back home so that we can be able to transport our goods and services amicably. Look at insecurity – we are really suffering because of insecurity; in Karamoja, there is a lot of insecurity. Uganda, Kenya and South Sudan should disarm so that we can attain peace and development. (Applause)We have cross-border crimes. This is because the colonialists initially demarcated Africa. We were a block but they came and disintegrated Africa. We were moving freely and they decided to disintegrate us. We are now looking at having one identity so that we can track these criminals.I am here to stand for the interests of the cattle keepers. The cattle keepers have never been given a vote. I am here to say that the cattle keepers should be given a vote at the East African level. (Applause) Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania have pastoralists. We need to give them a vote. They need protection because they move from one end to the other. They need protection in terms of veterinary services as they move from one end to the other with their cattle.We have to promote industrialisation so that our countries’ GDPs can grow.We have to promote agriculture because agriculture is the backbone of Uganda’s economy. We have to promote value addition in order to compete amicably with other countries. We have a niche in our traditional crops such as coffee and tea. Therefore, we need to nurture that because it is where we have a comparative advantage. (Applause)We have to promote good agricultural practices so that we can save our climate. Our climate is not doing well. That is why we have to protect the ecosystem so that the ecosystem –(Interjections)- -(Applause)-We have to protect the ecosystem because the ozone layer is drawing nearer. We have to promote the single currency. Probably, we should have a national bank here in Uganda  -(Applause)- single currency. We have to protect the rights of the children because there is a lot of trafficking and a lot of abduction. These children are used as radicals out there – across the East African Region. If you vote for me, honourable members, I will make sure that our children are protected. I ask, kindly, for your votes. Members of Parliament, I will deliver results. For God and my Country. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Lolem. We wish you all the best. (Applause) Next candidate.Mr Ategeka Moses, we have rules that run this House; you do not enter like that; this is not a market. (Applause) If you continue like that, I will give you matching orders. You have seven minutes to present your manifesto.2.11MR MOSES ATEGEKA: My name is Ategeka B. Moses, a graduate of International Relations and Diplomacy. I fit the position promoting international relations that we are lacking in the region. I have done mass communication and journalism for 15 years. I have had enough experience in international relations and investigative reporting, which we need to look after our nation and our region. I am a graduate with a certificate in PSVD, granted in the United Arab Emirates and the Middle East, as one of the experts in security management. I have studied enough to know and understand the principles of security that can create peace for our country and the region. [Ms Lolem]5981THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022One good thing about me is that I am an environmentalist who has worked hard to make sure that we protect and conserve our ecosystem. I have worked with very many people, including our own Members of Parliament. I know Teso subregion - we have been in Mbale to mobilise and established recycling technologies that are meant to clean our cities and make us better. (Interjections ) I said as an example of clean cities because I come from Fort Portal Town, the hub of hospitality, generosity and good people. As you know, other people got it wrong but allow me to allude to this adage that says; “Omutoro tayangwa” because they are always good people, committed to service and ready to work with the people.Members of Parliament, I request for your vote because I am capable and ready to defend this country in the East African region. I would like to bring the East African Community closer to your voters and people. I am ready, with zeal and determination, that whatever has been happening in the past. Today, we have a new vision, a new clear image of Uganda in East Africa. East Africa is now composed of seven States but they look at it like it is one of those small States. Uganda is a big country, and we must harvest big in the East African Community.I am going with passion, energy, and industriousness ready to put it at the helm. When we reach Arusha, we shall start negotiating for facts and issues; like the East African Bank; it should be here.How can you compare Uganda with others and then, deny the chance for Uganda to have the East African Bank? How can they undermine us when we have our people there? We are going to have it. All of you repeat after me; “we are going to have it.” ( Applause)I would like to assure you that I am very dedicated to the business tribunal. Do you know why our people are still being lynched and castrated in South Sudan? You do not know. (Interjections ) It is because we lack people to follow-up issues of this kind.We want EALA to bring up those situations through dialogue, and through the good offices in these countries, to make sure they understand that East Africa is a free border zone, where a Ugandan can cross to Juba and make money and come back home and be happy. I am very determined on that; the business tribunal will help us to make sure that we realise all the four protocols. I can assure you, honourable Members of Parliament that when you send me to Arusha - none of our Protocols is working well. The Customs Union and the Common Market are all redundant. How can we speak of a Political Federation, and a Monetary Union when we do not have those two things; the Customs Union, and the Common Market must first open the borders?If you have your business enterprises and firms down there, you should be able to go across the borders and take all your products into the region. Congo is on board; why should you miss that chance? We shall go to Goma, Kinshasa, everywhere and do business. Thank you.Dear honourable members, we have to promote tourism -(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Mr Ategeka, your time is up and we wish you all the best. Thank you for presenting your manifesto. Colleagues, we are just left with three people before we come to the end of the campaigns. Mr Joseph Tindyebwa, you are welcome to the 11th Parliament. You have seven minutes maximum of presenting your manifesto.  2.17MR JOSEPH TINDYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Distinguished Members of of the 11th Parliament, ladies and gentlemen I salute you all. 5982ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAI come from a background that brings experience that can be useful to our country, Uganda. At the age of 33, I attained a PhD degree after I had lost all my parents; but God was with me. Ladies and gentlemen, for the last 22 years, it has been known before this national Assembly, that it has been rare to have a representative that is representing the interest group of workers. While we are talking about economic integration, this is the day this national Assembly and distinguished Members of Parliament ensure that they comply with the East African Community Treaty.How are we going to solve the challenges that affect our labour? We talk about the movement of labour, yet our representation of the nine Members of Parliament lacks a man of credible qualification and the calibre, that can contribute to the East African Community in matters of policy. Why do I come here at such a time like this? In the words of John F. Kennedy, the President of the USA, he said; “You should not always ask what the Government should do for you. But also look for what you can do for your Government.”Colleagues, listen, I have taken steps to do all that it takes. I will sacrifice the time that you will give me, to fulfil the mandate to represent this country in the East African Community. The experience I bring to the East African Community is what I would like to briefly state: First, I have been able to serve in this East African Community as a senior lecturer. I have mentored the human resource capacity in the city of Kigali - Rwanda, Dodoma – Tanzania and Kenya – Nairobi. All that can contribute to the better welfare of our Community. For those who are doing business, my candidature comes in to bring in a debate on policies that can improve trade relations. We have been hitting a snag on matters of trade because you have not sent there policy debaters and implementers that are able to improve on work. Work oye!Dear colleagues, one of the reasons that I would like you to consider while voting for me on the 9th slot is based on the ability to articulate policies - the ability to analyse policies. I served this Parliament as a technical staff during the 10th Parliament. I was a Principal Policy Analyst. Why do you want to lose one of your own that has done a lot of legislative work, even for this House?  It is time not to consider the influence of political resolutions, money and anything and say, “Dr Joseph Tindyebwa, the right candidate to flag Uganda in the East African Community.” (Applause)Ladies and gentlemen, while we have 28 candidates, we do not have a candidate that represents the interests of workers. We are talking about human trafficking, which is a challenge. The other day, there was an issue brought before this House concerning labour externalisation.  (Interjections)  How are you going to realise economic integration if you leave out Dr Joseph Tindyebwa among the nine? (Applause)The time is now to take the responsibility to select competence. Take responsibility to go beyond local politics. We are dealing with regional politics. The time to lower the standard of Uganda has come to the end. I want to assure you, as you still search yourself again. I know you might have already taken a decision. However, I give you a word to take a second chance and look at what you can do in regard to this matter. I am a qualified person in matters of governance. I do not come here to tell you how I got the education qualification but how I am going to apply it in this East African Community. On matters of governance, we have heard a stall concerning putting into implementation the vision of the Political Federation. There are few Members, even those who have already presented a speech. Why did we fail the first time? Humbly, let me refer you to this. [Mr Tindyebwa]5983THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022The failure of the Political Federation question in 1964 was based on two issues; first was the distribution of legislative power in a federal legislature to be elected on a popular vote. Secondly is the division of executive power between the federation and other governments. Being an expert in governance, entrust me with your mandate. It will not be a loss at all. I promise to advance the welfare of Uganda. Finally, without teamwork, nothing can be done. It is one of the values of the East African Community. I have made humble progress in life because of teamwork. I want to promise you the nine Members of Parliament you will elect - I will offer myself in humility, with teamwork. Additionally, loyalty to your nation is important. I promise that I will always report back on the issues relating to the East African Community and how we can solve the following problems:The insecurity. We have had a conflict between Rwanda and Tanzania – the influx of the refugees - I want you to – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Joseph Tindyebwa. Your time is up. We wish you all the best. Next candidate. For the first time, I am seeing no FDC on the NRM side. Colleagues, let us listen to Mr Harold Kaija. Welcome. You have a maximum of seven minutes to present your manifesto. (Applause)2.25MR HAROLD KAIJA SCANDRONE  (FDC): God is good all the time. Asalam aleikum . Mr Speaker, I am very honoured to be before this Parliament. I have 20 years of experience, which I have used to gather wisdom, knowledge and experience. (Applause) In those years, Kaija Harold has got a Bachelors of Management Science, a Bachelors of Arts in Economics, a Masters of Business Administration (Finance) and a Masters of Arts in Economic Policy Management. (Applause)Mr Speaker and the two sides of Parliament, EALA where we are going, we need a person with experience, knowledge, facts, research and one who is aware of the geopolitics of the region. (Applause)The issues that we must address include the issue of having a single currency. The region needs it. In the East African Parliament, we must work towards having a single trade tribunal, which must sort the issues of the economy because as you are aware in this country, we have been suffering because of the way we have been treated. Uganda sends goods to Kenya, Tanzania, South Sudan and other countries but they are stopped at the borders. (Applause)Mr Speaker, I must tell you that Uganda has invested highly in the creation of the East African Community. We started with three countries. Uganda, with its blood and iron, brought Rwanda, went and brought in Burundi, DRC, South Sudan and we are now bringing in a country called Somalia. That kind of enlargement has been done by Uganda thus great opportunities. (Applause)However, Uganda has not benefited from the opportunities created in East Africa. (Applause) What we need today is to send representatives with a business mind. Today, the Kenyans have dominated the market of East Africa. Therefore, as we go there, we need Kaija to be added to the group to act as cement to join Ugandans and be able to achieve from these opportunities. (Applause)Mr Speaker, you must be aware that in our Community, if you want to get a job in Tanzania, you need a work permit. To go to Kenya, it is the same thing. We must work towards the removal of work permits so that Ugandans can move all over the East African Community and get those opportunities. (Applause)We need to create policies that must address the issue of inter-state political conflicts - and Kaija has the wisdom, calibre, intellect, and strength to do the job. (Applause)5984ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAI want to thank colleagues from the NRM that have supported me because as you are aware, the bus cannot move without a key. I have the master key to push that. Colleagues who are going to the East African Parliament, we are sending a team. I am aware that in the last term we had three people speaking on the Floor. I have been told that one of the voices has left so we need a team of people who are eloquent, who can speak for Uganda and stand when we need it. Mr Speaker, the country is bleeding. At this time, we need to unite the country. This is the time to vote Kaija to show that Parliament has started the move of integrating the people of Uganda. We need to deepen East Africa; I am telling you that I am ready, I am skilled, competitive and I can speak for the interests of East Africa. (Applause)Mr Speaker, the man is here; trust Kaija. (Applause) Kaija will do the job. I am happy to be with you.Lastly, I also want to tell you that we want to have an East Africa that has what we would call a Common Service Bureau, where there are projects for East Africa to work together as a team. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very happy to be here. Kaija oyee, Kaija oyee, Uganda oyee. God bless you. Eyalama noi, afoyo, mwebale nnyo, mwebare munonga; Amiina.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Kaija. We wish you all the best. Welcome, Mr Ebil Fred. (Applause) Colleagues, let us listen to Mr Ebil. You have seven minutes maximum.2.32MR FRED EBIL (UPC): Thank you, for that support. Mr Speaker, I am the UPC Secretary-General, under Hon. Jimmy James Michael Akena. (Applause) I am the UPC candidate for EALA but I am going to represent Uganda and put the country first in Arusha. I was in the Ninth Parliament, and as a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Speaker sent us to solve the issue of the border between South Sudan and Uganda. We were put on gunpoint, but we did not fear; we did not falter. We came back and the President nominated me to go and attend the East African Heads of Government Summit in Nairobi in 2014. (Applause)We discussed these issues, but we resolved that one of them was to be discussed at the regional Parliament. That is why I have come today, with humility, to seek your mandate to take the issues of the border dispute to Arusha. (Applause)I also went to the Greater north, Greater Karamoja region and the issues of famine were looming. While there, we discovered that our people were suffering. It hurts me, Mr Speaker, that these are some of the regional issues we should address. When you give me the mandate, I am going to handle the issue of cross-border conflict between Karamoja and Turkana. (Interjections) (Members sang.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us listen to the candidate. MR EBIL: I want to tell you something. I speak the truth, even if it is bitter. Honourable members, you know, I speak the truth. I am going to deliver the issue of a Single Customs Territory. I am going to ensure that we perfect the Customs Union. I am going to make sure I perfect the Common Market Protocol. I am going to ensure that we have and we realise, during our lifetime, the political integration of the EAC. I want to assure you, Members, that I will always be there in your constituencies to support the women, youth and the disabled so support me; give me the mandate. (Applause) I speak all this For God and My Country. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Ebil. (Members rose_)We wish you all the best. Colleagues, please, take your seats. [Mr Scandrone]5985THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022Today, I have seen your true colours - (Laughter) –  ( Applause) - Some of you appeared very humble as if you could never – (Applause) – now, you are the ones defying my orders. However, I have forgiven you.I am going to suspend the House for one hour so that you go to the tent in the parking yard, and vote for your best nine candidates in line with Article 50 of the Treaty, the guidelines and guidance given by the Speaker in the morning. In this one hour, please, go and vote. After voting, you will come back here so that we announce the results. I wish you all the best. (The House was suspended at 2.37 p.m.)(On resumption at 6.54 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE RESULTS OF THE EAST AFRICAN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS UNDER RULE 15 (1) OF APPENDIX B OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, having exercised your democratic right to vote for the nine preferred candidates to the Fifth Assembly of the EALA, I hereby declare the following results for the members who participated. Remember in the morning, I told you that we had 28 nominees and they have all participated. We have 529 voting Members of Parliament. The total number of ballot papers cast was 495. We were meant to be 495. However, when we counted, they were 478. Six Members did not vote and there were 11 invalid votes. I am going to announce the results that each of the 28 contestants got, as per the rules. 1. Rose Okullu Akol got 422 2. Kakooza James got 405 3. Mugyenyi Mary got 367 4. Musamali Paul Mwasa got 4015. Namara Dennis got 4156. Odongo George Stephen got 4037. Amongin Jacquiline got 3388. Kadogo Veronica Babirye got 3839. Siranda Gerald Blacks got 233 10. Kaija Harold got 99 votes 11. Ebil Fred got 139 12. Kateregga Mohamed got 36 13. Agaba Gilbert got 210 14. Ategeka Moses got 4  15. Buchana Julius got 8 16. Bwengye Lauben got 5 votes 17. Kapyata Dennis got 9 votes 18. Kiryowa Stella got 27 votes 19. Lolem Josephine got 11 votes 20. Kisembo Tendo got 6 votes 21. Ruhinda Fred got 5 votes 22. Mulangira Ambrose got 181 votes 23. Muwonge Daniel got 4 votes 24. Muhinda Allan got 4 votes 25. Naamara Patience got 35 votes 26. Nakitende Salaama got 6 votesHonourable members, as we wait for the two - they were not filled but they have gone to check. I want to first of all, congratulate all the candidates who participated. (Applause)As Parliament of Uganda, we will not take that for granted. We really believe you trust that this is the Parliament of the people of Uganda. We thank you all for showing interest in the EALA seats and having Uganda at heart. (Applause)However, we have some Members of Parliament who have failed to behave in an honourable way. It is very unfortunate. We have always agreed to maintain decorum but I get surprised when some Members behave in a dishonourable way. I am giving the last warning - and this must be the last warning – let us have respect for each other and respect for the institution. This is where you live day in, day out. Therefore, when you start fighting and beating a police officer - assuming he opens a case against you, what happens? It is very unfortunate. I cannot be a leader of hooligans. Never. (Applause) Let us have respect for each other. 5986ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALA7.01MR ANTONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity and I thank you for the leadership. I saw what happened today; it was not good at all but I think, to some extent, your warning is taken and I wish to request Members that this should be the last time. I want to add my voice to that. We have a duty to this country. The rest of the Ugandans are looking and wondering what is happening here. It is important for us to do the right thing. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have a duty to this country. We all belong to Uganda; nobody holds a title for Uganda. You cannot start slapping an innocent police officer. These police officers are on duty and they are human beings like us. I will not tolerate that; just know it will not happen again. 7.03MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I am in pain because of what you have just communicated. When somebody signs up for duty to serve our country, and he or she is in a uniform that bears our flag, they have to be respected and treated with all honour and dignity. (Applause) When they sign up for duty, it is a constitutional mandate. Honourable members, all of us here in this House swore to guard, protect and preserve the Constitution. Laws become laws because of this House and we cannot be the same individuals that break the very laws. (Applause).   Madam Speaker, I want to stay in solidarity with you, that there comes a time when you have to say, “enough is enough.” It cannot be business as usual. Seeing sons and daughters serving our country, making a lot of sacrifices during - and I am struggling, Madam Speaker, when I hear that one of us, made an attempt to fight or beat up a police officer - I have no capacity to determine what happens but as a parent, you are our mother. Being an MP does not change who you are; it reveals who you are. Madam Speaker, whatever decision you decide to take, this House stands in solidarity. I want to communicate to everybody in this House that this should mark the very end. We cannot claim to carry the title of “honourable” when we cannot behave in an honourable way. Madam Speaker, I stand with the family of that officer. He is an officer; he is someone’s son; someone’s daughter or someone’s husband. I stand in solidarity or with the leadership of this House and also the family of the officer. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we had stopped at Phiona. Phiona Rwandarugali has 23 votes. Dr Joseph Tindyebwa has 22 vote. I want to thank you very much, for exercising your right. The 11th Parliament is a very good Parliament because it listens.DECLARATION OF ELECTED MEMBERS  BY THE RT HON. SPEAKER IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 15 (2) OF APPENDIX B OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said before, having exercised your democratic right to vote for the nine members, you have heard the results for all the 28 members that participated. I now take the honour, in accordance to Rule 15(2) of the Rules of Procedure on Election of EALA, under Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, to I declare the following as the members who have obtained the highest votes; the nine members who are going to be members of EALA for the period 2022 to 2027. 1. Hon. Rose Akol Okulu, who obtained 422 votes. 2. Hon. Dennis Namara, who obtained 415 votes. DECLARATION OF ELECTRED MEMBERS5987THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 20223. Hon. James Kakooza, who obtained 405 votes.4. Hon. George Stephen Odongo. Congratulations. He obtained 403 votes. 5. Hon. Musamali Paul Mwasa, who obtained 401 votes.6. Hon. Kadogo Veronica, who obtained 383 votes. 7. Hon. Mary Mugyenyi, who obtained 367. Congratulations! 8. Hon. Jacqueline Amongin, who obtained 338 votes. Congratulations! 9. Hon. Gerald Black Siranda, who obtained 233 votes. I, therefore, direct the Clerk to Parliament to cause the publication of the names of the nine elected members of EALA and have them gazetted as per Rule 16 under Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure, and transmit the same to the Secretary-General of the EAC, by tomorrow.I take this opportunity – Mariam I will ask you to get out of this House; take your excitement to Owino - to congratulate all the successful candidates. When you go to EALA, you will be representing the country, Uganda, not political parties, and not shades of opinion. It is about Uganda, which is first on the agenda. Honourable members, I thank you very much for being patient. You have been here the whole day, from 8.00 a.m. Thank you for doing your noble responsibility. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, thank you for being here up to now. Sincerely, from the Speaker’s office, we thank you because honourable members, it has not been an easy thing. We also thank the members of EALA; you have been there for us, from constituency to constituency. Thank you. Maybe, can we hear something from the Prime Minister? Okay, LOP, can we hear from you?7.11MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Speak, I thank you. I join you in congratulating our colleagues who have been elected by the House and to equally thank all members of Parliament who have been here since morning. This is a rare display of democracy. The patience exhibited today is worth celebrating.However, I request, moving forward, that we consider looking at some aspects in these rules. I am aware that, for example, your ruling in the morning, about early voting is not something specifically provided for in these rules. I am also aware that Rule 18 of the Rules of Procedure that govern this House, gives you the mandate to provide guidance. For purposes of clarity, that is something that should come out clearly in the rules, so that somebody does not find people voting early, and then, makes claims of vote rigging, whereas not. Also, to provide guidance on issues to do with agents and moving forward, in terms of having a democratic process. Otherwise, we congratulate everybody, especially Mr Katerega Muhammad, for the 38 votes that he received; we really appreciate. (Applause) Aluta continua! THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Senior, just maybe a correction; it is not rule 18 but rule 8. It is very good to be a Speaker under these rules; you have all the powers. That said and done, we need some amendments to the rules, in terms of voting by proxy, and the time for starting to vote. For today, I exercised rule 8, which gives the Speaker some powers.7.14THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, allow me to join you in congratulating our EALA candidates who have made it back and those who have joined the EALA. (Applause)5988ADDRESS BY NOMINEES TO EALAMadam Speaker, allow me to thank you for following our rules to the dot. That is very good. I also thank you for leading this Parliament to the level we are now. I thank Members who have moved this journey. Some of our candidates started the day we were sworn in. (Applause) The journey has been long but it is good you have made it today. I would like to thank the President for the guidance. He guided us and has continued to guide us. I would like to request Members to join me in thanking the President of the Republic of Uganda. (Applause). I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Maybe for your information, today, I want to say that, as ladies of this country, we are very proud because we have added two ladies. (Applause) Honourable members, today marks the last sitting of our First Meeting of the Second Session of the 11th Parliament of Uganda. I commend you for the dedication you showed throughout all these meetings we have had. You have been a very good Parliament in this session. (Applause)During this meeting, the House performed exceedingly very well. (Applause) We have had 37 sittings. We have administered six oaths, passed 17 Bills and no Bill has been withdrawn. We have passed 16 resolutions, we authorised two borrowings, granted leave for three Members to introduce private Member’s Bills, paid tribute to the Queen and passed 10 other resolutions.We adopted 22 committee reports. Two Hundred and nineteen questions were responded to, during the Prime Minister’s Time. (Applause) Twenty eight urgent questions were responded to. The statement on Government Business for the succeeding week were six. Ministerial statements that have been considered were 35 and statements by the Leader of the Opposition, who is sitting right here, were four. Statement by Members was one. Therefore, as we thank ourselves - that is why I held a dinner for you yesterday because I was very excited with what you have done. When you continue doing very well, we will continue.Honourable members, as we go for recess, I urge you to work towards transformation of the living conditions of your constituents. As leaders, we should always make the society better than we found it. This requires effective representation among others. We shall have one month of recess. (Applause) The last two weeks of the recess will require you to do oversight role on the Parish Development Model – listen. -  You are saying there is no money; don’t you earn a salary? I do not like people who giggle. That is what you are supposed to do. This money goes to your constituencies and so, you need to show face and make sure the money is given out in a good way. 7.21THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, you will recall that this House, through your mandate, requested the Government to give an opportunity to the coffee and tea nursery bed operators to supply.Cabinet, chaired by the President, agreed to this call and we have made an implementation roadmap, which I felt I needed to inform Members about so that they can go and do their oversight role. We have agreed to let these the nursery operators supply Government with the seedlings they have because some of them are so mature that they cannot go to the other season. Mr Speaker, this is the implementation roadmap: one, starting today up to 3rd, we are identifying farmers who are going to benefit. We expect these farmers to have prepared their gardens and holes dug, two feet wide, two feet deep.We saw that the Parish Development Committees, together with the Parish Development SACCOs were nearer to these people than all of us. Therefore, we agreed that [Ms Nabbanja] DECLARATION OF ELECTRED MEMBERS5989THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 29 SEPTEMBER 2022the Parish Development committees identify these farmers together with the leaders at that level. That activity will end on the 3rd. On 5th, we expect all the districts to have compiled the list of beneficiaries and transmitted them to the Ministry of Local Government and Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA). After receiving these lists, UCDA will direct the regional officers to produce Local Purchase Orders to the nursery bed operators and that will be by the 10th.The nursery bed operators will then deliver the seedlings to the parishes on 15th   October so that by 16th or 17th, our farmers would have planted all the coffee and tea seedlings. I request that you follow up and monitor closely so that our people benefit.Secondly, we also request that you help us to avoid fraud. Lastly, after this season, like we agreed last time that the suppliers of coffee and tea seedlings would not be given another opportunity, they should prepare accordingly. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister. One thing I need you, Members, to know is that when you went out and followed up on Emyooga, whatever was happening changed. It is now better than any other programme because of the oversight role you play. You will be helping the people in your constituencies, but also yourselves, to ensure that you come back to the House. We want you back. When you do this oversight role, you can even own it by saying “I am the one who brought it” when it is actually a Government project. Hon. Kadogo promised to bring all of us back. (Laughter)Honourable members, I will expect regional reports on PDM from you. That will be the first thing we are going to discuss in the next meeting – how much money has been disbursed to your district, to how many groups and things like that.Hon. Prime Minister, we want the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us a record of how much has gone to, for example, Kakumiro, Alebtong and Bukedea. We want that report and it should be put in the Members’ Pigeon Holes for them to use as a working document. When they are making a follow up, they need to know what they are doing. Members of EALA, we expect you to, always, give us reports on what you discuss for us to keep abreast on what is happening there so that we can customise it.Honourable members, I want to, once again, thank you for the work you have done the whole day. I, therefore, adjourn the House sine die.(The House rose at 7.26 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)