Wednesday, 24 September 2014 

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am delighted to be with you and I thank you for the work you have been doing in the budget process. I have a number of areas of communication. 

 I have received a letter from the President of Uganda informing me that he has appointed Dr Ruhakana Rugunda as the new Prime Minister of Uganda. Under Article 108(1) of the Constitution, this type of appointment is done by the plenary so I am giving notice that the motion will be moved on Tuesday. I want to call on the whips to ensure that the members are here.

 I want to thank the members of Parliament for supporting the she-Cranes. They have qualified for next year’s World Cup and it was largely because of the contribution from Parliament that they were able to buy their tickets otherwise they would not have gone. So I want to thank you for supporting them and I ask you to continue that support. We shall also be moving a motion, maybe later this week, to congratulate them on that wonderful performance.

I also want to inform the members that this week we are going to mark 125 years of the Inter-Parliamentary Union. We have established an exhibition outside and we shall be having a debate later this week on the work of the IPU. We expect that a statement will be read out in Parliament to be followed by the resolutions of the last IPU meeting held early this year. We are also going to present on our website the theme, “Renewing commitment to peace and democracy”. 

We shall then hold that photo exhibition, which will showcase what we have been doing and the IPU flag will be flown along the drive into Parliament to highlight our solidarity with the ideals of the IPU. So we shall be inviting one of the members of the delegation to the 130th Assembly to present the four resolutions, which will be discussed by this House.

The other issue has to do with certificates of financial implications. I have noted with concern that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been reluctant to issue certificates of financial implication to members of Parliament who have expressed the desire to introduce private members’ Bills and have indeed been granted leave by this House. Examples of Bills that have suffered this fate include, but are by no means limited to, the Law Revision Penalties of Criminal Matters (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and the Minimum Wage Bill, 2013. All these are hanging because the minister has been reluctant to issue the same.

So I note and I want to remind the House that Section 10 of the Budget Act requires every Bill to be accompanied by a certificate of financial implication. It provides as follows, “Every Bill introduced in Parliament shall be accompanied by indicative financial implications, if any - so it is not always that there is an implication, maybe there is none but still the certificate should be issued - on revenue and expenditure over the period of not less than two years after its coming into effect.”

Rule 107 of our Rules of Procedure reiterates this provision and provides that, “All Bills shall be accompanied by a certificate of financial implication setting out- 
(a)  	the Specific outputs and outcomes of the Bill; 
(b)	 how those outputs and outcomes fit with-in the overall policies and programs of government; 
(c) 	the cost involved and their impact on the budget; 
(d) 	the proposed or existing method of financing the costs related to the Bill and its feasibility. 
(2) 	The certificate of financial implication shall be signed by the Minister responsible for Finance.”

I have deemed it necessary to communicate to the minister in this regard and I have informed her that the right of a member of Parliament to move a Private Members’ Bill is guaranteed under Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution and Rule 110(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

But the Minister of Finance has continuously written to the members sponsoring the Bills requesting them to ascertain the financial implications of their proposed Bills, which is the work of the ministry not of the Members of Parliament. This has got to stop.

The Ministry of Finance is a technical department of government responsible for analysing and advising on budget implementation. Therefore, requiring members to ascertain the implication of their Bills constitutes an abdication of the responsibilities of the ministry and a violation of the rights of members granted by the Constitution.

Therefore, the ministry must desist from this practice henceforth until Parliament amends it’s Rules of Procedure, requests for certificates of financial implication, whether favourable or not, should be responded to within 30 days from the date of receipt of the request. This measure shall subsist until the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline comes up with proposals for amendment of the Rules of Procedure to address the situation and Parliament pronounces itself on the same. So this is my ruling given today, 24 September 2014. (Applause) The Minister of Finance is here.

Another matter relates to handling of the Bills of the East African Legislative Assembly. Honourable members, as you know, the House under Rule 12 appendix (b) of the Rules of Procedure elects members to present Uganda at the East African Legislative Assembly. The Assembly is one of the organs of the East African Community established under Article 9(1) of the Treaty establishing the EAC. Article 65 of the Treaty provides that in pursuance of the policy of community popular participation in the achievement of the objectives, it is expected that the Council may take into account, in the exercise of its functions, the opinion of the general public in the Partner States on matters relating to the achievement of the objectives of the Community expressed through the debates of the elected members of their national assemblies and those of the Assembly and to foster cooperation between the Assembly and the national assemblies of the Partner States.

The Clerk of the East African Legislative Assembly is required to, as soon as practicable to transmit to the Clerks of national assemblies, copies of Bills introduced into the Assembly for information. This is in line with Article 65(b) of the Treaty. Several times the Clerk of EALA has sent Bills to this Parliament but there has been lake of clarity as to how they should be handled without us meddling into the legislative powers of the Assembly neither rule 12 nor the relevant appendix are provisions of how these things should be handled and yet as a national assemblies of a partner state we expected to express the popular views of the people we represent on the Bills to be considered by the legislative organ of the community. 

So for the time being and until the rules are amended the minister responsible for East African community shall lay the Bills on the Table, they will then be referred to the Bills on the East African Community for scrutiny, the community will be limited to the principles of those bills upon completion of scrutiny the committee shall report to the House and if the report is adopted it shall be disbursed to the clerk to the EALA. This is my ruling until the rules are amended given today 24 September 2014.

The third ruling has to do with work in the Pan-African Parliament, the African Union and the African Union Commission. Under Rule 13 Part III of the Rules of Procedure we elect Members to represent us at the Pan-African Parliament and this is under the Constitutive Act of the AU. 

As you are aware we have debated some reports of the Pan-African Parliament but this does not include the work of the AU and the AU Commission. It has been discovered that there is no linkage between the work of the AU and the national parliaments. For instance who follows up the decisions of the AU summit? Who briefs the House and the country? Many commitments are made but there is no follow up, these include treaties and conventions agreed by the heads of state that require ratification and notification.

Honourable members at our last meeting of the Speakers of the Pan-African Parliament, Uganda is outstanding by 24 treaties not 25. Like any other person who delegates authority, you should be able to receive and analyse the report of all these bodies. Therefore members of PAP our Rules are adequate and they provide as follows: 

Members of the PAP shall with such modifications as they are necessary, report on the activities of PAP in accordance to the rules set out in appendix C. Appendix C gives a procedure for reporting. We use the Rules of EALA to submit reports to Parliament. EALA is supposed to present bi-annual reports of the activities of the Assembly for the relevant chair to Parliament and to the committee on the EAC Affairs.

I am not sure that has been done as yet, I am therefore of the view that until we amend the rules of procedure to provide otherwise, the representatives to PAP should submit the reports on PAP, the African Union and the African commission to the committee on EAC until the rules are amended, this will be the reporting system so that our committees are able to analyse and give us recommendations on how to move. So this is also my ruling until the rules committee comes up with other measures to facilitate reporting on all these areas. Other matters I will communicate tomorrow.

Before I came, I received a call from the Leader of Government Business informing me that they are completing the statement. So I think we could defer and move to other things.

2.52
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Madam Speaker today I encountered an ugly scene at the gate of Serena when the guards told me that I have to get out of my car, put my hands up and they check me. I said I cannot do that. They said that it is only ambassadors who are not supposed to be checked but the rest are supposed to be checked. I asked whether they knew protocol. 

Rt hon. Speaker and members, there are things that we have to fight for and one of them is our rightful place. One of the cardinal things is that we must not only fight for the rights of our people but also our own rights. My question is that- may be the Minister of Internal Affairs is aware about this new development. Yesterday these activities were not there and we were allowed to go in. But today they are not allowing us and may be the Ministry of Foreign Affairs can help us. What is the rationale of saying that the ambassadors cannot be subjected to security check and then MPs have to moved out their cars and be checked?

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Rt hon. Speaker, I want to thank hon. Ebil for raising that question. The accreditation of diplomats more so ambassadors to any country is governed by the Vienna Convention and that convention accords privileges to such diplomats and we are party to that convention as a country and therefore we have to respect the privileges accorded to ambassadors.

So the ambassadors were absolutely in their right not to be checked. About us, hon. members and ministers, we don’t enjoy such privileges on such matters of security, everywhere we are checked.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE BORDER DISPUTE BETWEEN UGANDA AND SOUTH SUDAN

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister the matter on the Order Paper has three items, the border conflict in Moyo, Namboole blackout and Bushenyi incident. I don’t know whether this statement covers all those items.

2.55
THE DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. Moses Ali): This is a directive from the Parliament to the Prime Minister to come and give a comprehensive statement about the conflict in Moyo and the Sudan border and this is the statement. The statement the Minister of Internal Affairs will come later. It is not part of the statement on the conflict in Moyo. The minister’s statement will cover other issues which will not be covered in this one, so that is the statement I am ready with here.

THE SPEAKER: So are you ready?

GEN. ALI: Yes, Government statement to Parliament on the situation along the South Sudan- Uganda border. You check your iPads.

The border conflict between Uganda and South Sudan in areas of Moyo and Lefori sub-county in Moyo district started way back before South Sudan got independence.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure, yesterday we touched the issue of Moyo which was very pertinent and the honourable minister is presenting the document when members do not have it uploaded on the iPads. Would it be procedurally right that we proceed to listen to this without internalising or receiving a copy on our iPad?

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Clerk to check whether the document was sent to members? Okay, honourable members, I understand that in about three minutes it will be on your iPads. So, I don’t know whether we can allow the minister to start.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, before I raise the issue of procedure, allow me to congratulate you for a battle well fought that at last Busoga has got a king. (Laughter) I congratulate you upon that achievement.

Madam Speaker, this issue of border conflicts between Uganda and South Sudan has been a thorn in our place of late. People have lost property; people have lost lives and as we talk there is a lot of uncertainty in that part of the country. I would like to beg that if the the time given for the report to be uploaded onto our iPads is not forthcoming, I appeal to colleagues – yes we are safe where we are but people in that part of the country are not safe. We, therefore, grant the Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister permission to proceed with the presentation, while we wait for the three minutes so that by the time the report is uploaded, we will just join him in the presentation. I beg for your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the situation in Moyo is quite serious. I think most residents are asking for help because they want answers. So, let us allow the minister to proceed as we ensure the report is uploaded.

GEN. MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now I must start again. As I was saying the border dispute between Uganda and South Sudan in the areas of Moyo started way back before South Sudan got independence but they became more pronounced when South Sudan finally got independence.
This dispute has often led to the friction between the local communities on both sides of the border leading to harassment, torture, arrests, deaths and frustration of development projects.

The Events that Led to the Recent Conflict

On 2 September 2014, the Kuku in the disputed areas of Abaya – the Kuku are a tribe on the other side of South Sudan bordering Moyo District of Uganda – and Wano villages refused to be enumerated during the National Housing and Population Census saying they are South Sudanese.

On 4 September this year, the Moyo District Chairman, Mr Vukoni Jimmy Okudi with his delegation and the census enumerators went to the disputed areas to ensure the residents get counted. There were however arrested by the South Sudanese Police deployed in the contested area. They were released the following day after the intervention of the regional and Moyo District security team.

On 8 September, South Sudan made deployments along Sunyu, Drani-Afogi Road up to Vee Bridge in Wano Village claiming that they were protecting their territory.

On 10 September, the Moyo District Local Council held an extraordinary meeting to discuss the arrest of their district chairman and the border disputes and resolved, among others, to hold a peaceful demonstration.

On 15 September, the demonstration was held but later went out of control and turned violent. The demonstration was led by the hon. Anne Auru, the Moyo District Woman Member of Parliament and the district chairman, Mr Vukoni Okudi. These were accompanied by the hon. Tom Aza, the MP for West Moyo and hon. Kaps Hussan Fungaroo, the MP for Obongi County.

Consequences of the Demonstration

As a result of the demonstration, 10 huts including a church –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the document is now uploaded onto your iPads. You can access it.

GEN. MOSES ALI: The church that belonged to South Sudanese was burnt by the Madi. In retaliation, the South Sudanese mobilised and burnt seven huts belonging to Ugandans and injured a one Okuga James who was later rushed to Moyo Hospital for treatment.

On 20 September 2014 about 80 South Sudanese armed with SMG riffles, pangas, arrows and bow attacked the Madi Community in Goboro Parish, Kochi sub-county in Yumbe District. This sub-county borders Moyo. They stubbed a woman on the neck, burnt one hut and abducted three people. They were however, repulsed by the UPDF based at the Goboro detach. The injured woman was later taken to a health centre for treatment.

Due to the attacks between the Kuku and the Madi in Moyo District especially in areas of Goopi, in Metu Sub-county, Logoba Parish in Moyo sub-county and Abaya in Refoori sub-county, many Madi communities have deserted their homes with others fleeing to Adjuman District leading to internally displacement of over 500 people.

Government Efforts in Resolving the Dispute

Madam Speaker, in 2009 the two presidents – H.E Yoweri Museveni and H.E Salva Kiir visited Moyo and gave guidance to the communities there on how to leave in harmony. They advised the communities to continue using the disputed land for only cultivation but not to construct here permanent structures until the two countries undertake a border verification ad demarcation exercise.

Subsequently to this, a Joint Permanent Commission was established to bring together ministers of the countries to meet regularly and address any problems that arise. The last Joint Permanent Commission meeting was held on 5 December 2012 where upon the two governments agreed that the process of border demarcation required the two governments to sign a memorandum of understanding to pave way for the creation of the joint technical border verification and demarcation committee. 

Government originated a draft memorandum of understanding, which was sent to the Republic of South Sudan but the Government of South Sudan has not responded to date. This matter was drawn to the attention of President Salva Kiir by His Excellency President Museveni through hon. Asuman Kiyingi who met President Salva Kiir last Thursday as a special envoy of the President.

It has now been agreed between the two governments that the memorandum of understanding will be signed during the Northern Corridor Summit due to take place here in Kampala on our 52nd Independence Day celebrations on 9 October 2014.

After the signing, the joint technical committee will be constituted. It is this committee that will work out detailed modalities of handling the problem including the budget sensitisation committee on the border surveying, verifying and demarcating.

As we await the comprehensive solution, Government has taken measures to ensure that there are no more clashes. Last Saturday 20 September 2014, I led a Uganda Government delegation and held a meeting with a South Sudan government officials’ delegation in Moyo. Both sides agreed on a number of measures to calm the situation and secure the area namely: 

i) 	Both sides reaffirmed the guidance given by the two heads of state in 2009 and agreed to abide by it.
ii) 	There are to be joint security patrols of the area. Uganda’s IGP Gen. Kayihura and his counterpart are working closely and the joint patrols have already started.
iii) 	The joint patrols were to report regularly to the administrations on either side.
iv) 	That security be enhanced for communities from either country living deep inside each other’s borders so that no revenge, violence or killings are meted on them arising from the current and past clashes.
v)	That the process of border verification and demarcation be embarked on immediately.

In addition to this, the security leaders of both countries had already taken measures before my arrival and agreed on detailed arrangements to secure the area.

We also intend to propose to the Government of South Sudan that we hold regular meetings involving border association on either side. We are confident that these measures will ensure safety and security of our people in these areas until a final comprehensive solution is found.  For God and my country. Thank you for your attention.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We will comment for 45 minutes but let us just go to the points, no preambles. I think we will start with hon. Auru who has been named.

3.12
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. I want to thank the Leader of Government Business for the report he has given but I would like to observe that this report is not comprehensive at all. This is because I expected more than this. The number of people killed has not been mentioned in this report. The number of people who are unaccounted for has not been mentioned. Here it is mentioned that the number of houses burnt is 10 but over 140 houses are burnt. On Saturday alone in Metu Sub-county, Goofi village, while we were still attending the meeting, which was chaired by the Rt hon. Deputy Prime Minister and the delegation from South Sudan, 57 houses were torched. One person was shot in the leg and when I went the following day that was Sunday morning, it was reported that 12 people were missing in that village.

Rt hon. Speaker, the magnitude of destruction on the ground is much bigger than this. I really wish to request that Government comes up with a more comprehensive and honest statement. SPLA was able to deploy on the 8th September. What was Government doing? On receiving the information from my colleague, hon. Ben Atiku, I straight away passed that information over to the honourable Minister of Defence who was able to communicate and that indeed led to the release of the chairperson. That was on the 5th September but following that, Government should have taken it more seriously to defend its people instead of tear gassing the angry people in Moyo town; people who are left to be killed by the Sudanese and houses left to be burnt.

Rt hon. Speaker, as reported by the Rt hon. Deputy Prime Minister, it is not only the Sudanese who have settled in Wano and Abaya. We have the Madi there as well. If the LCV Chairperson went there, he went to count his people not –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one more minute.

MS AURU: So I would really like to appeal that Government takes more serious steps in defending its people rather than protecting the people of another nation.

Finally, we want to request Government to come up with a more comprehensive statement not this shallow one. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Nyakecho comes, let me get hon. Fungaroo who is one of the demonstrators. Three minutes, hon. Fungaroo.

3.16
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Rt hon. Speaker, thank you for this decision. With due respect to the Rt hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister who is also my elder from the area, I would like to say that the government has been inefficient, as you have seen, in the way the presentation has been made here. You will find that the number of people killed on both sides is over 20 conservatively. You need to find information about the Ugandans who were killed in South Sudan.

As there was a team of South Sudanese coming to burn houses in Uganda, we also received information about Ugandans who were killed in cold blood in South Sudan. There were also South Sudanese who were killed in Uganda. The Rt hon. Prime Minister has not included this in his statement.

Madam Speaker, whereas under the law the Police and the UPDF are supposed to protect the citizens of Uganda including other people who are here in Ugandan territory; in the case of Moyo, no protection was offered by the Police to the citizens of Moyo. 

Beginning with the Chairperson LCV, when he went with his team to carry out a national exercise in a disputed area, he requested for Police escorts. The RDC, DPC, DISO and then the acting DISO in Moyo refused to give escorts for the LCV Chairperson. When he went there, he found the South Sudanese force – you could see that their government was involved in the disputed but the Uganda Government was not visible on the ground. If the LCV Chairperson had gone with Police, those people would respect him and would not have stripped him bare-chested and tie him ‘kandooya’. The Chairperson was crying – real crying. Chaining people like slaves and marching them over a distance of 30 kilometres on foot.

Madam Speaker, this report of Gen. Moses Ali should be thrown out. Parliament should send its own team on the ground to find out the facts. (Applause). With due respect Gen. Moses Ali, you are part of   this very inefficient Government in our place. The people of Moyo have now come to understand that the Government does not care about them and this is not an issue of Moyo alone. The borer district runs from Koboko-Yumbe-Adjumani-Lamwo and up to Kitgum. I was one of the people who warned this Government in advance. 

On the coming of His Excellency Gen. Yoweri Museveni and His Excellency Salva Kiir, I was part of the people – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, two minutes. 

MR FUNGAROO: I was part of the team. I sat in front of the President of Uganda and we discussed that there was danger here. Now what is happening, civilians along the border across South Sudan have guns in their homes. On the side of Uganda, we do not have anybody carrying guns. If they choose to attack any village, they can wipe it out. There was actually an attack on Madisina Secondary School that was averted. The school was going to be burnt down like Kichwamba. The Police was informed by the neighbour – instead they were interested in protecting the shops of the South Sudanese. We got the rumour which needs verifying when you send a team down there; that money was contributed by South Sudanese traders in Sudan and Uganda and given to the Police. Instead, you could see the Police tilted towards protecting the South Sudanese. 

The UPDF was in Sudan protecting the Sudan government and the Sudan government deploying people to watch over the harassment of Ugandans. What is your interest as a government? [HON. MEMBERS: “Shame.”] 

The way forward, Madam Speaker, one, reject this statement and number two, send a team to go and carry out a fact-finding mission. Number three, there are people who are displaced, schools closed and the attack is not yet over as we cannot confirm this. You need to resettle the schools and account for the unaccounted for and on both sides, you need to find a way for UPDF to come from South Sudan- they can still remain there the way they want but why don’t they protect Ugandans even when they are there? There are Ugandans in jail in South Sudan and when this is reported to you, you do not care. Why do you care about Gen, Salva Kiir’s government more than Ugandans? (Applause)

Lastly, we the people of Northern Uganda and the people of South Sudan have historical ties; blood brotherhood. But I would like to appeal to my brothers from South Sudan that what happened there should be condemned. First of all, treating the leader and chairperson of a district – suppose the person who was stripped bare-chested was the Governor of Central Equatorial State, what would the South Sudanese do in protest –(Member timed out_) 

3.22
MRS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for the opportunity – (Interjection)-

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you for very much the Leader of the Opposition – I mean the Leader of Government Business –(Laughter)  
 
THE SPEAKER: Order.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: - for the statement you have presented to us on Moyo. So far, two members have contributed on this statement and both of them are from Moyo and have all said that the statement is not comprehensive. Both of them have said that the Prime Minister has left out a lot of things. In lieu of that fact, is it procedurally right for us to continue debating this statement that is shallow and not comprehensive enough for us to debate?

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, the members that spoke were part of the demonstration but there could be other members with other information that may benefit or enrich the Government position or the situation of the citizens. Let us use the 45 minutes we have agreed on to get more information and then we shall decide on whether to abandon the statement or not. Yes, the member for Yumbe is there.

MRS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, for a long time as you are all aware, there has been a challenge between the relationship of Uganda and South Sudan. 

But what really troubles me as a Member of Parliament and not forgetting that in the recent past, I was a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and I remember a very nasty scenario where our colleagues on the committee were actually arrested and hijacked by these South Sudanese. They were detained for so many hours with no regard, respect whatsoever and remorse that these were diplomats and Members of Parliament of the sovereign State of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, that background notwithstanding, today we still have issues. We all know that South Sudan is still a young country making three years but it is also not an excuse that they should continue mishandling Ugandans. The fact remains that when these South Sudanese are in Uganda, they enjoy everything that Ugandan citizens enjoy. They move freely and drive their Hummers – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, members. Let us hear hon. Nyakecho. Order, please.

MS NYAKECHO: They drive their Hummers all over the place; they sleep at the Serena and no Ugandan points a finger at them. But Madam Speaker, I do not know how long Ugandans are going to stomach this because time will come when the ordinary citizens will reiterate and say, “When we come to your country, this is what you do to us and so we are also going to do this to you.” Their children are in our schools and they enjoy equal benefits with no discrimination whatsoever.

The other point that I really want to bring out is this issue of the border conflict. The borderlines are not clear and drawn smartly. It is high time that the Prime Minister sat down as Government and planned not only the border of Uganda and South Sudan but even with Tanzania, Rwanda and other areas. We need to have a definite and clear border such that these Sudanese do not come all the way. The next time, they will move their border to Otuke and say that they now end there. (Laughter). We need to sort this.

As I conclude, I do not want to waste time for my colleagues – 

THE SPEAKER: Before I invite hon. Mulongo, I hope that the Government will explain to this House. More than one and a half years ago, we had a debate here on border disputes and there was a commitment by the government to come up with information and these are the areas they had talked about – Yumbe, Koboko - all these have been on the Floor of this House but it seems nobody is bothered. 

3.28
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issues at hand are very sensitive and they evoke emotion. This is because every state, every government, has the responsibility of not only protecting and defending its sovereignty but also to protect the lives of their people. The description of the treatment given by those who have been hijacked and arrested by the South Sudanese security forces is appalling and that cannot be the first time. As you know, even some members of Parliament here were once taken captive by the rough Sudanese security authorities. 

Madam Speaker, the question that I have and which is very disturbing is that it is in 2010 when their Excellences the Presidents of Uganda and South Sudan respectively met and went to Moyo and addressed the communities at the border areas and assured them. Why hasn’t the government taken steps for example to declare the area a No Man’s Land, expanded it and have some kind of interim administration? Why is it that for all these four years it is now that we are thinking of such measures?  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, surely I have to agree with my colleagues that a lot of things are missing out of the statement as provided by the Prime Minister. We have missing children in those border areas because there have been attacks and counter attacks. There are schools that have been displaced. So, we have children - both Ugandan and South Sudanese - missing and this calls for serious investigation as to how it happened and why there was no immediate response when our Ugandan colleagues were being attacked across the border.

Madam Speaker, we know that the African Union did direct that the nation states do verification of their borders, and we have seen some parts of the borderline around Uganda and Tanzania are being done but may parts have not been completed. 

We should also get a comprehensive report as to why such other areas have not been completed up to now and why this area, particularly that of Sudan and Uganda, which includes ethnic clashes and so forth has not been resolved. 

So, I support the motion that we have a very comprehensive report and that actually we have an independent investigation from this House to verify and obtain facts as to what is happening to that part of Uganda. 

3.31
MR ABDI CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. Today, I will not speak as a diplomat but like a politician. We will leave diplomacy for hon. Baba but today, we are talking with all the emotions that this matter deserves. The attack on Moyo is an attack to Uganda and we should not take it lightly because we are a country, sovereign in nature with the UPDF Army with sophisticated expensive weapons. We should not be talking about this matter but we should be talking about having supplementary budgets for our forces that have been committed in Moyo, fighting a force that has attacked us.

We should also be talking about acquiring more weapons, more jets like the Lockheed Martin that have been made by Americans which is also a number one weapon in the world. And of course as a Parliament, I would be among those to approve such a budget with no objection at all. And in fact even the Minister of Defence here should be telling us to be ready for war at any time. And so, honourable members, we should not take that position of diplomacy anymore because the question of South Sudan has been a problem to us. You help a neighbour who doesn’t appreciate at all. Some of us have been committed in operations in Northern Uganda; we have been committed to helping South Sudan in their liberation. What is the problem in South Sudan in terms of fighting our own people here? We should be ready for an attack at any time – (Member timed out_) 

3.33
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The message of my honourable colleague is loud and clear but we, the people of Northern Uganda, have lived with our brothers and sisters from South Sudan for a while to the extent that we are even referred to as the Rutugu or Anyanyas specifically because we almost merged with them. So, we have lived with them for quite a while and it is quite disappointing that they are really cutting the hand which has been feeding them.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we are aware that we are sharing our schools, our hospitals and all the services with our brothers and sisters including bringing in very many stray diseases in this country, which is taking a toll on our economy. It is also quite clear that as a country, we have even allowed our brothers and sisters from South Sudan to own properties in this country despite the fact that it is not possible for Ugandans to do the same in the other country. An example is as you branch off to Akright Housing Estate, there is a whole estate owned by the Sudanese and many other properties which they are buying and owning in this country. So that is the point on which I want the government to come clear; under what circumstances are these people owning properties in this country? When you go to South Sudan as you land, they will tell you, “Our land our; our country” so you go consciously but we are all equally disappointed at what is happening. 

For the record, as I stand here to speak, my own cousin has experienced one of the worst scenarios in South Sudan. This lady was working in South Sudan and one evening from work with 12 fellow girls from Uganda – one is from Bududa, one is a Langi and one is a Muganda - they were abducted. They entered a taxi thinking that it is a normal taxi and when the two tried to jump out they were killed on spot. 

As I speak, in Kitgum in our home, we buried a strange body. Many Ugandans were killed but one lady escaped, after being raped for 46 days in captivity. That girl saw 40 Ugandans being killed, where she was captured. I tried to raise it the other time, this girl is traumatised, and we are keeping her under the bed because she doesn’t want to even come out because she was once going to be killed. They have their offices in Kampala and she says the spirit of the lady from Bududa who later on died keeps on haunting her that you escaped; we were killed. This is what is happening in South Sudan on Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, we want our Government to redraw the agenda on our relationship with South Sudan. Our people are dying in cold blood and we hear that government is protecting more of the Sudanese than our Ugandans; this is a total shame. I think there is a lot of anger among those people where they are resenting us. My take is that we need our UPDF Army to be withdrawn back home and we redefine our relationship with our neighbours.  (Member timed out_)

3.38
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter on the Floor is of such great public importance that it is even constitutional. Article 209 of the Constitution provides for the functions of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, one being to preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda. And when you look at Article 212, it gives the functions of Police as to protect life, property, to preserve law and order, to prevent and detect crime, among others.

Whereas these are constitutional commands, it is surprising that we give more attention to areas where we are not even commanded by the Constitution because for instance, it is not anywhere in this Constitution that Uganda shall ever commit its troops to protect neighbours but when it comes to your own people, you shy away from fulfilling your constitutional command.

Two, I was watching TV last night and I saw the Inspector General of Police. He was giving orders to arrest people, Ugandans, who formed crude methods and weapons of defence, bows and arrows, for purposes of self-defence and that is as a result of failure by government to come in and defend these people. Now, instead of that anger being directed at the aggressors, it is rather directed at your own people and this is very absurd.

Madam Speaker, I would propose to government - fortunately the two ministers are here - let us not treat these matters as casual matters. When there is a problem with Mijingo, our President called President Uhuru Kenyatta and the matter died down. The same way, a statement by the Leader of Government Business was saying the President of Uganda contacted his counterpart of South Sudan, but this is adhocism, these are temporary, you are not solving the problem. Can we, as a country, move that we solve these matters once and for all, because you are lucky Museveni is there now, but tomorrow he will not be there and the destiny of this country cannot be in the hands of one man called Yoweri Museveni; he is like you and me, tomorrow he will not be there but can we put strong and lasting mechanisms in place to solve these problems because an attack on Moyo is an attack on Sembabule and for that matter I stand up in solidarity with the people who have suffered the brutality and the armed aggression from our neighbourhood.

Lastly, I would like to say that government does not seem to be in charge. The gist of the information given to this Parliament - this is people’s Parliament. (Member timed out_)

3.42
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is sad to note that the baby we helped to grow up is now fighting us. I was a victim – it was last year, 2012, when I was a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs. As a committee, we went to visit the borders and we were taken captive, we saw the scenario ourselves, when we entered about 30 kilometres inside Moyo, in a sub-county called Lefori, I do not remember quite well. That is where we were taken captive.

We went there with the chairperson LCV and other Members of Parliament. there was no respect for us; we were put at gun point and above all, there was no network, Parliament of Uganda and Government of Uganda would be surprised to hear that their Members were killed because in that area women and children alike were armed with guns and other weapons, but for us, we only had policemen and about two of them only who were guarding us, so that incident was really a serious one.

Madam Speaker, I remember as a committee, we reported this matter, we also agreed that we were going to meet the President but the issue was also discussed in this House but nothing was taken as serious. If you saw what transpired there, for us when we were moving in the sub-county, the Sudanese were coming to the Heath centre, others were coming to pick their certificates from the school but nobody from Moyo was allowed to go on the other side. We wondered what kind of relationship it was and above all, when we left Moyo just to go to the next district, we found a Sudanese army armed with a gun, I think we also queried ourselves, we asked, “what kind of country is this, a situation where an army from a different country move in the next country with a fun?” and there was nobody to stop him from moving with a gun in the country. (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving me way. The information I would like to give is that some few months ago, when chaos erupted in south Sudan, three Ugandans were burnt alive and they all died. By the time they were being burnt, people gathered around the fire, some of them were clapping their hands as three Ugandans were being burnt.I really feel South Sudan community is really very merciless and they think their being young is attracting sympathy from all the countries, I really feel this is the time we need to whip them, we will need to show good examples that they should not tamper with our fellow Ugandans.

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you very much, for this information. Madam Speaker, we love Sudan, we love our neighbours, Uganda is such a generous country, but we feel South Sudan should learn from the rest of these other countries and they should learn the kind of relationship people want the rest of these other neighbours to enjoy.

It was only last month that one of our own in the Lango sub region just returned from South Sudan; he got an accident there, he killed one Sudanese, but he was detained there, not until 65 cows were paid. In fact it was after serious noise that was caused from Uganda, we also went to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs who had to raise attention to South Sudan and the man was eventually released after paying all those cows. Sudanese have also caused accidents in Uganda but we do not mistreat them the way they mistreat Ugandans. Of recent, you have just heard. (Member timed out_)

3.51
MR WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of boarders is a very serious one. In my reply to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, I raised it and it is there on the internet, people can refer to it. When this issue came up last week, the government told us that they were sending Minister Kiyingi to South Sudan and the Second Deputy Prime Minister was going to lead a delegation to meet the South Sudanese. But I am very disappointed that the statement made by the Second Deputy Prime Minister is very shallow, no substance and colourless. 

I expected some substance in this statement because Ugandans have shed blood for the South Sudanese and our people are in South Sudan protecting the government of Salva Kiir while our people are being killed. The people we have hosted and given land are now claiming to belong to South Sudan, what a shame.

I rose on this Floor of Parliament sometime back when the late son of John Kisukye was murdered in cold blood. I raised the issue of when our Members of Parliament were taken hostage but this government has never acted. We saw a very disturbing video which was recorded and it was shown to us by hon. Atiku. The then Speaker hon. Oulanyah accepted that we watch this film on this Floor, very disturbing pictures. I am on record that I object to the sending of our troops to South Sudan and the reason given by government was that they were going to protect our people. We have seen South Sudanese with guns and our people just have arrows and people are being killed while this government is looking on.

We want Government to come up with a statement to tell us the outcome of the talks between Kiyingi and South Sudanese Government. What were the outcomes of the talks? To show Government of South Sudan is not serious –(Member timed out_)

3.54
MR TAYEBWA ODOO (FDC, Busenyi Municipality, Bushenyi): This is not a simple matter that we should just pass over in a simple way. The good thing we have the Minister of Defence, the Minister of Internal Affairs, the generals here and we start talking as if nothing has happened to Ugandans.

I can remember that in 1978 when Amin invaded in Tanzania, you know what happened. It is very dangerous to find that Ugandans are being harassed in their country; houses are being burnt, and students are not studying. I saw on TV when people were just on the truck moving and we are just here. I think by now the Ambassador of South Sudan should have given a statement, apologising to us and I think now as Parliament we should move a motion. We should stand up and mourn for our bereaved that have died. It is not something simple. 

In our culture, among the Banyankole, when somebody comes to your home and invades your children and wife, it is very a shaming; you would rather die there and then as a man. Madam Speaker I think you allow us to stand and mourn our people that have died. It is not a simple thing that we have lost these people and even as a Shadow Minister for Disaster and Relief this time tomorrow I have to go to Moyo and assess the situation and give a better report.

Gen. Moses Ali really I saw you having a meeting, whom did you go with? You just went alone. How can we believe this report that you are giving us when your people are dying in your constituency? The way you are talking it is as if you do not belong to those people from Moyo. I beg move a motion so that we can see what we can to do to these people. 

THE SPEAKER: Members let us hear more contributions.

3.57
MR WADRI EZATI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much Rt hon. Speaker, as I submit on this statement made by the Second Deputy Prime Minister, I am heavy hearted. Heavy hearted in the sense that it is Terego county which has offered sanctuary for Sudanese refugees. There is no other constituency other than Terego which has been given the sanctuary for the Sudanese refugees from South Sudan and yet they are not giving us similar treatment. They are not grateful for all that we have done for them. Mind you this report which the Prime Minister has given is just the tip of the iceberg.

Those of you who were here in the Seventh Parliament you remember two of our colleagues hon. Tiperu and hon. Alonga were sent to mobilise people for immunisation of children. This happened in Yumbe District. Now is a situation in Moyo where the same people who have been provided and catered for by Ugandans have turned against us. When I was young and a mother wanted to wean a child, the mother would put red pepper on the tip of the breast. I think it is the time for us as a country- because for the last 10 months Juba has existed as a country because of the blood of our sons and daughters who are now suffering in South Sudan. Is that the way we are going to be paid? That we are holding you together as a government; your existence is in our hands but at the same time weak as you are, you are able to undermine our own authority and mistreat our people. It is normal to arrest a person if it is for the right cause but human treatment must be given.

Here is a situation where an LCV Chairman of a district is tied with his hands behind and forced to sleep on the floor of a pit latrine overnight and this is the information that the Rt hon. Prime Minister knows but he has been very shy to put in his report.

The reason Gen. Moses Ali could not be candid is because he was caught between a hard ground and a rock. He is a Prime Minister; he is a member from West Nile and therefore he should not have been the one to make this statement. It should have been made by somebody who goes to the ground and is able to make a free statement without any fear of repercussions.

Gen. Moses Ali I know that you were not yourself when you made this statement. If you were to be a General you should have stood your ground… (Member timed out_)

MS BAKO:  Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. If the Second Deputy Prime Minister does not have a copy of the constitution, I would be glad to donate one to him because the National Objective and Directive Principles of State Policy No. IV is very clear about national sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. It says in parts that the State and citizens of Uganda shall at all times defend the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda.

That said, Madam Speaker, the Second Schedule on page 199, clearly defines the international boundaries of this country. So, what is so difficult with the Uganda Government to clearly mark these borders? Madam Speaker, if I count the number of meetings that have been held in the region regarding borders, all you see is nothing but Government in action. And why does that happen? In fact it helps me question the actual nationalities or the identities of the people in government. Are they actually Ugandans who have Ugandans at heart or they are just immigrants? It is one thing to be in government and it is another to be a nationalist. That is why we are teaching nationalism in Uganda. Otherwise, how many ministers whose actions are challenging Uganda’s Constitution by not living up to it? Give one reason why we are actually hard on our budget? We have not even afforded to account for the last year’s expenditure. Why, because Government and Ministry of Finance borrowed in excess to salvage the situation of a decaying country, South Sudan. Now a supplementary came in excess of what is legally acceptable why, because South Sudan was falling apart and so we have to borrow. But take note that the taxpayer in Uganda is borrowing to stabilise another country and this is what we get in return? It is very disturbing, Madam Speaker.

Therefore, with all these at hand, what is the state doing? The Ngurudoto Accord was very clear when Migingo was at stake; when the Rikwanzi Island was in a crisis. I was with the ministers in Ngurudoto and the Accord was very specific and time bound that by 2009 all international boundary questions with Uganda should have been resolved but nothing happened. And here we are still glossing over it. Are these people in charge of our country Ugandan or they are foreigners and so cannot think and help us – (Interruption?)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give to the House is very brief. In many countries those scenario are solved diplomatically. And I know that Uganda has diplomatic relations with South Sudan. The information I want to give is that Uganda has powers to suspend diplomatic relations with South Sudan to recommit that Government on the obligation of protecting the lives of Ugandans dying from there. Thank you very much.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, hon. Christine Bako for giving way. The information I want to give is that during the Yumokfu war where all the Arab countries attacked the Israel the same day, the biggest killing force was that from Egypt, because it was very equipped with over 100,000 armed with tanks, aircrafts and everything and they closed the Suez Canal.

But amongst the Egyptian general, the field commander was a Jew and he felt – while he closed the Suez Canal – that he could go to destroy his own people. So, he leaked the information to his brothers and sisters in Israel that saw the Egyptian army surrendering without firing a single shot. That is what strengthened Israel and gave them the survival.

So, as a nation, it is important to note that as we handle some of these issues, we need to broaden our horizon by looking at ourselves to identify who should be a thorn for us, at what time and where. I thank you.

4.03
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth, Northern Uganda): Madam Speaker, I would like to say that life is full of irony. Whereas the LC V of Moyo was being arrested because he just crossed 30 kilometres into South Sudan – the disputed area rather, Madam Speaker –(Interjections)– no, no, okay, Madam Speaker – (Interruptions)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of order I would like – 

THE SPEAKER: No, the point of order was raised form this side.

MS AURU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of order. The honourable Evelyn Anite – this is –(Interjections)– I don’t know whether she is from South Sudan but this is a member who does not even know the distance from Moyo to the nearest South Sudan Town of Kajokej. And this is an honourable Member of Parliament who does not know where exactly the LC V Chairman of Moyo District was arrested from.

Therefore, is she really in order to misinform this House that the LC V Chairperson of Moyo District was arrested 30 kilometres inside South Sudan yet the birder is not yet even clearly known?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you explain whether he was 30 kilometres inside South Sudan or in Uganda?

MS ANITE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I understand the emotions of the lead demonstrator because I was really trying to make my point but –

THE SPEAKER: No, no, honourable member was he 30 kilometres inside South Sudan or in Uganda at the time he was arrested?

MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, the point I was trying to make and which I wasn’t given time to –

THE SPEAKER: No, no, honourable member, you said the chairman was arrested 30 kilometres inside South Sudan. That is what we want you to answer. Was he 30 kilometres inside South Sudan or in Uganda?

MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, the person I trying to refer to and who was arrested 30 kilometres inside South Sudan is an MP of Uganda –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I was not referring to – Madam Speaker, can I just make my statement?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, point of order from hon. Hassan Fungaroo.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank very much, Madam Speaker. With all the information already given about the several incidences of arrest or leaders of Uganda by the South Sudanese Authorities within Uganda - for the sake of the chairman LC V - the place from where he was arrested is clearly marked on the map issued out by UBOS for purposes of the recently concluded National Housing and Population Census as being inside Uganda. Again for the sake of the MPs who were arrested the other time when they went for a fact-finding mission, the information is also presented here and it is even on our Hansard. Is our sister hon. Anite in order to continue confusing this House instead of concentrating on the sole candidature of this man?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, address the minister’s report.

MS ANITE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to withdraw that. I did not mean to debate on the LCV chairman but allow me to make my contribution. Madam Speaker, I was saying that life is full of irony. Whereas members of Parliament –[Members, “Order!]- I have withdrawn. Madam Speaker, I withdraw the first statement.

THE SPEAKER: She has withdrawn.

MS ANITE: Hon. Kassiano, I have withdrawn and I am debating afresh. What is your case? Sit down, I have withdrawn.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, she begun by withdrawing. She has withdrawn.

MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, we need to be very patient and tolerant of one another in this House. I was just starting my debate. Madam Speaker, I did say this and I want to say it again. Life is full of irony. Whereas members of the Parliament of Uganda were arrested in South Sudan on-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have told you to address the statement by the Prime Minister. Leave that issue.

MS ANITE: Okay. Madam Speaker, on the 10th – (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is the honourable member in order to keep insisting that the members of the foreign affairs committee, and I am a member, who went to the border of Uganda and South Sudan to ascertain the situation and they were arrested inside Uganda- Is she in order to continue saying that members of the Foreign Affairs Committee were arrested in South Sudan? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are out of order. Let us hear from hon. Oleru.

4.11
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Can I be protected?

THE SPEAKER: Order, members.

MS OLERU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. The issue we are debating is a very serious one that affects the people of West Nile and the country in general and it is a very sensitive issue that goes bi-laterally.

Madam Speaker, the incident that happened in Moyo has affected Yumbe directly. Just last week I buried one of those who were killed in Moyo. We have already buried him and that is all. I know my own government is not going to do anything nor will South Sudan and that is how we are losing our people.

Madam Speaker, I just wanted to know the basic benefit that my own government is getting from South Sudan that has made it very easy for my government to do barter trade with its own citizens. Why do I say so? Our people have been killed, battered and they have lost their property but my government is here dilly-dallying day and night.

Madam Speaker, we have given this Parliament permission to create peace in South Sudan. I would just wish that for two days we withdraw our troops from South Sudan and we see. That country will not exist. After giving them that benefit, they are paying us using blood; it is a very sad thing.

In Yumbe District we have a bridge that we were supposed to put up as local government but South Sudan has stooped us from constructing that bridge saying the stream is in their land, which is six kilometres inside Uganda. That is how we are suffering. Our own government has invested and we have the culverts but we cannot install them but my government is very quiet.

Madam Speaker, I want to give you an example of one woman who was killed by a Sudanese who crossed over and then went back to her country freely. Here we are and I do not know what we are doing. South Sudan has been weighed and found wanting and their days are numbered. Thank you.

4.14
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): I thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker. As Ugandans, I believe we are disappointed regarding the help that we are rendering to South Sudan. When you look at the help that Uganda has rendered to South Sudan, we do not deserve the payment we are getting today. You remember when South Sudan needed our troops to go and support them. We came to this House and we allowed our troops to go. They are there, working under very hard conditions but they are still protecting the South Sudanese.

We have passed budgets here to support South Sudan; we are paying taxes, our children are going to pay for the loans we borrow on behalf of South Sudan but see what we are getting back as payment.

Rt hon. Speaker, just last week hon. Bernard Atiku told us on this Floor that he has a video that shows people being burnt alive and I asked him to forward that clip to me - [Hon. Osegge rose] – I have only three minutes, my sister –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, honourable Nalongo. Rt hon. Speaker, the information I just want to give is that the video that hon. Atiku was showing here of two men and one lady are people from Soroti and what I want this House to know is that Soroti is a gateway to Sudan. Whatever Sudan is importing through Uganda passes through Soroti and the people of Soroti are saying if no action is taken in the shortest time possible, they are going to close that route and you know when they say it they do it. So I am cautioning Government that we are not going to allow our citizens to suffer. Thank you.

MS KAYAGI: I thank you, my sister. Rt hon. Speaker, I had an opportunity to watch that video and it is so painful and horrible. As an old lady struggles to run away from the fire, you see men, cruel Sudanese, pushing this lady back into the fire –(Member timed out_)

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: One minute.

THE SPEAKER: Okay one minute and then hon. Lanyero.

MS KAYAGI: I thank you. You watch these people burn to death. When we come here, and with due respect to the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, and we see such a report that does not have that strong ‘voice’ of condemning the act of these people, to us the Ugandans, we feel betrayed! (Applause)

Madam Speaker, we have given a lot of money to South Sudan and if we are paid in this way – as we debate this issue, let us be very sensitive. If Government does not take any step, we are going to start seeing a lot of bloodshed around. I watched our very own security officers telling people in Moyo not to protect themselves and throw those arrows away and yet they are allowing these South Sudanese soldiers walk in with guns. What do you expect Ugandans to do? We have South Sudanese who have taken over Arua Park in Kampala here. If the youth MP says that they walked 30 kilometres in South Sudan, how many kilometres are there from South Sudan to Kampala? Should we also start saying that they should not come to our country –(Member timed out_)  

4.19
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am very happy that we are debating this today because for us who border Sudan, this is what we have been going through all the time.

Last year in April, five boys from Lamwo were abducted by the Sudanese while they were cutting timber because they said that they were in Uganda. I run to the Minister for Internal Affairs, I talked to the Sudan Ambassador and he was not helpful. Finally when we went there with the GPS, these people had actually come 18 kilometres inside Uganda. As if that was not enough, a man and his cattle were abducted. Even when people from abroad – these white people who come to look for minerals were abducted from Lamwo and taken into South Sudan with claims that they were in South Sudan and yet actually they were not.

In view of all this, now that it has happened in Moyo, Lamwo is sitting on a time bomb. For example, if you go to weed your sim-sim garden, the Sudanese would say that you are in Sudan and they would ask you to first sign that you are in Sudan before allowing you to weed your garden – in your own country and that is what we are going through!

The other day, the minister was talking about the roads going to Madiopei and then Musingo. The Chinese had started to construct the road but the Sudanese have chased them away saying that it is not part of Uganda. So, we are having all these problems. Madam Speaker, is the Government in control? (Member timed out_) 

4.22
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Koboko borders Sudan very directly and in our stay with the South Sudanese, the following is what I have observed:

One, you remember, Madam Speaker, that all those that go for trade in South Sudan return when they are either directly or indirectly injured, people are robbed and beaten, property taken and people are abused. This is all done by the South Sudanese in Sudan.

Two, you may recall a very big number of boda-boda riders who are Ugandans and have been chased away from South Sudan by the Government of South Sudan.  You also remember that Members of Parliament on the foreign affairs committee as was mentioned here, who had gone to check on our borders were arrested inside Lefori Sub-County of Moyo District and nothing has been mentioned and done by our own government.

Three, two weeks ago, the Government of South Sudan made a pronouncement or declaration that by 1st October, all Ugandans working in South Sudan must leave their country and come back home and so far, no statement has been made by our own Government.

Madam Speaker, and this happens in my constituency, whenever a Sudanese has a problem with a Ugandan, the Sudanese is handled with kid gloves and the Ugandan will suffer. I think that this is a very unfair thing –(Interruption)

MR AYOO: Thank you, hon. Awongo, for giving way. The information that I would like to give in relation to the point that was being made by hon. Awongo is that I met a group of Ugandan youth that was arrested in South Sudan that managed to escape and return. They told me that they were arrested and told that Uganda had a strong Government. They asked, “Now where is your Government? Can your Government come and help you now?” The point that I am raising is that there seems to be a lot of undermining and looking upon Uganda by South Sudan for some reasons that we may not know but we need to know to get to the roots and that is when we can deal with the problem. I thank you.

MR AWONGO: Thank you. In most of our constituencies that border Sudan, you find Sudanese moving freely with guns in these areas and our own security forces will not even mind to arrest them. Is it in order for South Sudanese to move freely in our country with arms?

Finally, is on the issue of the border. I am aware that these borders were drawn in 1884 during the partition of Africa. How come South Sudanese’s are claiming new borders and who is that to demarcate new borders? I think that our own –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we have spent almost two hours on this matter and I want to say that I express my personal disappointment with the Government. (Applause). We were here, I think, in the 8th Parliament when we were cajoled, convinced and lobbied to vote for funds to establish a market in Sudan and we were told that it is in the interest of this country to develop relations. The expectation was that our people will be there to trade but they have been chased and the government is quite. 

There is a man called Ssenoga, one of those traders who supplied goods to Sudan and was slashed for trying to follow up his money. He moved to every government office trying to follow up his money and I do not know what has happened to him. I wrote letters to the President, the ministers and everywhere and even called my counterpart in Sudan but the government is quite. 

These are Ugandans abandoned by their government to ‘chase’ money with the Government of South Sudan. Now the other day, the boda-boda riders were sent back but the boda-bodas were retained and the government is quite. These are ‘small’ people. Now finally, we have been told to leave. What do you want the people of Uganda to do? What are we benefitting from this relationship? 

We want a convincing answer from the government; what are we going to do about all these things? They are continuing. Who wrote to the Ugandans? I understand hon. Kiyingi went there.

4.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was assigned by the President last Wednesday the task of going to see President Salvar Kiir as a special envoy and immediately I got the instructions, I made arrangements. It was around midday and I made arrangements with our mission in Juba to seek an appointment with President Salvar Kiir to deliver the message from his brother and promptly we got a response that President Salvar Kiir was going to see me immediately I arrived on the evening of Wednesday. But somehow I failed to get a flight to Juba on Wednesday and I travelled on Thursday and when I arrived, he was still waiting. In fact I think within two hours of my landing in Juba, I was in Juba State House and the President was –(Interjections)– I am giving this background to give you the impression that I got of how seriously the President of South Sudan considers the matters that you are raising here.

Madam Speaker, the President – 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have finished almost two hours on this serious issue, an issue which has taken the lives of Ugandans for many years; an issue which has taken Ugandan’s money in business; the issue which has been talked about for many years and there is no solution; the issue which has ever been brought to the attention of the President and he has never done anything. Is the minister in order therefore to tell us casually, including all the techniques?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we would like the government to take this matter seriously. I do not think we want to know how you were dressed, whether the sun was shining –(Laughter)– what did you agree with the President of South Sudan? 

MR KIYINGI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I will go straight to the point. I raised three issues with President Salvar Kiir in the meeting, which was attended by his foreign minister and the director African affairs. The most critical one which we are discussing here was the Moyo incident. I raised all the issues and the sentiments that I had picked the previous day expressed on this Floor and also from Cabinet and I told President Salvar Kiir that Ugandans were deeply disappointed by the way they were being treated as if they are not allies. 

I reiterated the incidents in Moyo and also recalled the situation of the arrest of the members of Parliament. His Excellency Salvar Kiir regretted the incidents - in fact, on the specific incident of census enumeration, he said that it was such an unfortunate incident that he could not even understand how responsible administrators could have behaved liked that. In his view, even if those people believed that that area did not belong to Uganda, there was no harm in them being enumerated. In fact, he said that in any case, those very people usually cross to the Ugandan side to access services and the exercise was meant to plan for those very services, which they access in Uganda. So, he was totally in agreement that they had been out of order and what they did was wrong. 

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to clarify; you are telling us stories. Did you read them in the newspapers, did you record them or were you just discussing as you took your tea casually? So I would like you to clarify whether you got a document on what he told you or it is the story that we will always read. 

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister whether when the President sent you to see his counterpart Salvar Kiir in South Sudan; he gave you clear terms of reference with results or outcome from that meeting, which you can report home about. Thank you. 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I am seeking further clarification on two issues. One, what we read from the newspaper was that our President sent an envoy and the Minister of Foreign Affairs knows what an envoy is, but the manner in which he is communicating is as if he was discussing with his colleagues because when you are an envoy and you are delegated with a message - what the people of Uganda would like to know and they wanted us to know here is what was the content of that message and if there was any formal reply, then it must have been a formal reply and you should have communicated.

My second point of clarification is that you are the Minister for Regional Affairs; all this mess has been happening under your docket and I have never heard you make any statement nor come to Parliament; I have never heard you respond even to the utterances of the South Sudan Ambassador to Uganda. I have never heard you summon the ambassador of South Sudan here. In other countries, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs would summon and give a strong message; I have never heard that from you and yet you are the owner of that docket. 

Now the point I am seeking from you is that, when the President finally landed on you as an envoy to send his message – because he could have landed on anybody – did you brief him as the sector minister of all the other happenings and how Ugandans have suffered in South Sudan; did you inform him of the content or any form of message that should be conveyed to the South Sudan people? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before the minister comes let us welcome the pupils and teachers of Chepunyaru Boarding School, Kapenguria, in Kenya. Please stand up. You are welcome. (Applause)

Let us also welcome, on this side, pupils and teachers of Charlton Community School, Pallisa, represented by the hon. Dr Mutono and hon. Amoit. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I will start by responding to the clarifications sought by members. The interaction with President Salva Kiir was formal and minutes were recorded from that meeting.

As to the terms of reference, I can say they were very clear. They were given to me by H.E, the President and it is these terms of reference that guided me when I went to meet President Salva Kiir. Of course, the President has received the report about Moyo harassments, the arrest of the LC V chairperson and the census enumerators. In fact, he went through those issues and said that these were matters that needed us to get some assurance from President Salva Kiir and how they would be addressed from that side.

Regarding the summoning of the ambassador in Uganda, I can say, I have done this a number of times though I usually don’t publicise this. I am sorry but next time I will do it.
As to whether I discussed at length this issue with the President, actually the President is usually on top of the situation because he gets all this information first hand from our intelligence agencies. So, he briefed me while aware of the issues –(Interruptions)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a country we are at pain mourning our fellow Ugandans killed for being good neighbours. But we are also equally at pain that the whole minister who has been asked to give us a solution to the problem and the terms of reference – you have guided, Madam Speaker, more than twice that we get to the point where we should have our people rescued. But the minister is still just telling us stories. There is no way we are going to continue not having a solution to this problem – is the minister proceeding well when he failed to give us what was agreed on to alleviate that situation? Where are those South Sudanese who were involved in killing our people? What action was taken against them? Is it going to be a free thing as usual?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I appeal to you tell the House what these two governments are doing about the suffering of Ugandans. That is what we want to hear.

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for guiding the debate on the core issues. In fact, I thought all of us would be asking for the way forward –(Interjections)– yes, but let me briefly – actually in the report that was delivered by the Second Deputy Prime Minister, those issues were hinted on.

We agreed that the source of the problem is the undefined and uncertain borders. We must actually re-demarcate these borders. But this is a scientific exercise which cannot be done by a motion or wishes. The borders have to be resurveyed and marked.

The other thing we agreed on – 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have explained about the borders, you are now explain about life – our traders being chased and our money being taken. That is what we want to hear.

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, all those issues were discussed with the President – (Interruption)

MS ABIA: Madam Speaker, I have just drawn the attention of government to the Second Schedule of our Constitution that clearly demarcates our international territorial existence with our neighbours. But the minister is misleading this House by claiming that demarcating the borders will require a scientific process, aware that we have a whole institute of survey and we have surveyors in this country. The latitudes and longitudes of our country are clearly demarcated in the Constitution. 

Is the minister, therefore, in order to mislead and affirm government incompetence to demarcate the national boundaries and the international boundaries in Uganda, which are clearly indicated in the Constitution? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that demarcation involves two countries; maybe the others require science. But anyway, you answer our question, honourable minister.

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise guidance. The question of mistreatment of our traders and that of the expulsion of our people were discussed. As a matter of fact when we objected sand protested to the decree or directive that had been issued by the minister responsible for labour and public service, President Salva Kiir issued an order rescinding that directive. He said that whereas there was a review of the labour legislation in that country, the intention was never at any time to chase Ugandans from South Sudan or foreigners for that matter from South Sudan.

As a matter of fact that directive was highlighted immediately in all public media in Juba and was carried the following day in major newspapers there, including the Juba Telegraph making the point clear that Ugandans were free to be in South Sudan like other foreigners.

But specifically, Madam Speaker, on the question of Moyo issues, I want to say that we agreed that we would sign a memorandum of understanding. We agreed in 2010 during the Joint Permanent Commission meeting that we would sign memorandum of understanding and a draft was originated by us. The Attorney-General here cleared it before it was forwarded to them, and before we get to sign it.

But because of the problems they had in the course of doing their business, we never had another Joint Permanent Commission meeting –(Interjections)– no, it was in 2012.

But when I raised this issue with the President, he informed me that the memorandum of understanding had finally been cleared by the Ministry of Justice in South Sudan and that it was ready for signing. I actually requested that I sign it so that we could get moving but they felt that to give the matter the weight it deserves let the MOU be signed by the ministers of foreign affairs in the presence of the heads of state and they are coming on Independence Day. There will be a summit of the Northern Corridor, it is at that meeting that that MOU will be signed and then the process of constituting the committee which is going to work out a budget, sensitising of the community and to answer the question of whether everything is now settled. 

It is stated in the Constitution, the boundaries of Uganda are clearly marked and delineated in the Constitution but they are not marked on the ground that is why there is confusion and that confusion requires technical people to sort out –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Our Constitution is very clear. The submissions of MPS from areas where the suffering Ugandans are, have clearly stated here and it was noted that even within our own country there was no presence of security and that is how neighbours could walk in and out, kill our people and go back without being arrested. The minister is here telling us that they are doing that because as a country on the ground we don’t know our boundaries.

Is the honourable minister in order to misinform us and even give a leeway for neighbours to walk in and out to kill people on a premise that we do not know our boundaries on the ground?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe can I ask the Minister for Lands; we assigned you the work of establishing our borders one and half years ago. Please tell us about the borders.

4.54
THE MINISTER OF LANDS (MR DAUDI MIGEREKO): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What happened in Moyo was most unfortunate and we all condemn it; the loss of lives, property and all the problems that have ensued ever since.

The issue of boundaries has been a very serious matter but the fact of the matter is in order to have stable boundaries whose integrity is respected, the neighbouring countries must be involved in the survey and demarcation of the boundaries. It is a fact, you cannot move unilaterally and survey and demarcate the boundary and you believe the neighbouring state will allow you to get away with this. Because of the seriousness of this matter, we sought the support of AU so that they can help us to get the cooperation of neighbouring countries.

We had gone there to seek the support of that continental body so that they could get the neighbouring countries to cooperate with us in the exercise of surveying and demarcating our boundaries.

MR TAYEBWA: I am getting surprised, from what the Minister of Lands is telling us, that we do not have boundaries! That we need neighbouring countries to demarcate our boundaries! Is it in order for the minister to come up and tell us that we don’t have boundaries because the neighbouring countries have not obliged to the demarcation. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: How did they draw the map of Uganda if we do not know the boundaries?

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, you remember we were together in the Constituent Assembly, and if you look at Schedule No. 2 in this Constitution, all the information regarding the boundaries of Uganda are clearly stated and everything is well given in figures and words, in rivers and hills. 

For the honourable minister to say that you now have to consult another country, I find it very strange! Look at this Constitution and if there is a dispute that is when you go. Is the honourable minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what do you say about the second schedule of the Constitution?

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, the Constitution gives us the coordinates but we must establish these on the ground. The coordinates are known.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the problem is that the second schedule says: “Commencing at the highest point of Mt Sabyinyo; thence in a northeasterly direction to the southern extremity of the Bunagana ridge marked by Boundary Pillar 1; thence along the watershed of Bunagana to its highest point...“ If it is -
 
MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, we have all this information but there has been a dispute and we have to clear this dispute. Under the joint country commission involving Uganda and South Sudan His Excellency the President and the President of South Sudan directed that we hold discussions over these matters.

As you are admitting that we are running state matters and this is the way we run them; it was agreed that we come up with a memorandum of understanding and Uganda drafted that memorandum of understanding in the roadmap to resolving these problem.  

Secondly, that we name a verification team and Uganda named a verification team but our brothers from South Sudan did not mention their team.

Some of the issues that hon. Kiyingi as a special envoy had to deal with was to draw to the attention of His Excellency the President of South Sudan the importance of ensuring that the MoU which would ensure that work is done on the ground and the team to undertake the work on the ground is named, and they come and start working immediately.

We have received a feedback from hon. Kiyingi, the special envoy, that when the sitting of the northern corridor takes place, just before our Independence anniversary, South Sudan Government will make sure that the MoU is signed and the verification team is also named so that we can be in a position to go to the ground to resolve the boundary disputes which has been disturbing us.

I thank you, Madam Speaker. I will come here with a comprehensive statement to cover all the international boundaries where we have been having disputes and the solutions that Government has come up with. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to state that I saw the hon. Daudi Migereko talk in haste. But anyway, in adding to what the hon. Asuman Kiyingi has said – he said that he met H. E. Gen. Salva Kiir last Thursda. He also gave us all the details of the discussions that they had. But after Thursday, people of Moyo District were attacked on Saturday and that was after they had talked. So, may we know from the special envoy as to whether there were any remedial arrangements so that as we wait up to 9th October there will be a cessation of hostilities? That is important because after their discussions, hostilities are instead escalating. So, what do we have to tell our people? Are there any remedial arrangements that you came up with?

5.00
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I also would like to thank colleagues for the concerns about our state relationships with South Sudan. 

Certainly, we have condemned in strongest terms, the acts of individuals. In our state relations, we have done whatever it takes to stand by the people of South Sudan to liberate themselves. The liberation of South Sudan strategically changed the map of Africa bringing completely a different thing. We are very happy to have stood with them in an effort to liberate themselves.

Madam Speaker, since Juba was occupied by the SPLA, we have been very happy to work with them to defeat LRA. Without them, I don’t know whether –(Interruptions)

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, during the time when the LRA operated in Northern Uganda, lives were lost. Today, when the LRA is no longer there, lives are being lost. So, is the honourable minister in order to rejoice the departure of the LRA yet the death of the people of Northern Uganda continue? Was his interest only to see the LRA leave Northern Uganda and that the continued death of the people there is no problem to him?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the country is aware of the benefits and our sacrifices for the people of South Sudan. What we are asking is: Why are they not reciprocating? And why is the Government not protecting the people of Uganda against the South Sudanese? That is what people want to know.

GEN. ARONDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since they became independent, we have been working with them to help overcome their internal situations in terms of nation building. What am I talking about? We have made sure we work with them bilaterally in the area of security. The police institutions – I mean the IGPs are working together. The military commanders are also working together. Even today, since the clashes occurred; they have been working together. And I want to say that since this clash took place, we have for the first time set up a joint force comprising of placement from both Uganda and South Sudan. They are working together in patrolling the disputed area to ensure what happened does not happen again. 

Militarily, we have got the military component. They are also working together to ensure the gains we now have since the clash do not get tempered with.  Madam Speaker –(Interruptions)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, the issues we have raised here are of constitutional nature. The issues to do, for example, with the demarcation of the boundaries are constitutional matters. So, I don’t know whether it is procedurally right for us to go into details discussing departmental relationships between the Government of Uganda and that of South Sudan, totally neglecting the core issues of boundaries because you cannot wait for boundaries to be determined by your neighbour. What is it that the Frontbench have done to confirm – because all of you used this Constitution when you were swearing as ministers to defend it?

What Ugandans want to know now is - the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, have you confirmed that what is in the Constitution of Uganda is the legitimate boundary that we should be demanding, or you are waiting for a collaborative effort from the neighbouring country in order to determine that?

So, Madam Speaker, I think procedurally the issue we are focusing at is to do with boundaries and the protection of the sovereignty of this country. The sovereignty rights of this country must be defended. If you are responsible for maintaining law and order, you should do that within the sovereign state of Uganda. If other people can cross into your territory and kill people, you only need to just resign and walk away from state power.

GEN. ARONDA: Madam Speaker, the question of borders, as you rightly said, Government has been involved in it. We have issues with the DRC border and the Republic of South Sudan. We recently finished with Tanzania when we demarcated that border with the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania.

I want to say that our border with South Sudan will be completed as time comes. The same will be done for the border with DRC because measures are already in place. 

But I was addressing the question whether we are doing enough to protect our people or not. I want to state that we have never been wanting when it comes to protecting the people of Uganda. We have never; we have never. And what has happened is a clash that took –(Interruptions)

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, I get saddened when I hear a Minister in charge of Internal Affairs and formerly the CDF of this country stand on the Floor of Parliament, after listening to a debate of two hours in which members emotionally laid issues regarding the death, the killing, the burning of houses and the indiscriminate actions – can you imagine what the minister is now telling Parliament! So, is the minister in order to say that as a ministry or as a person he has not been found wanting when there is evidence on the ground - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, explain to us where you were when the houses were being burnt and the people getting killed. Explain that to us.

GEN. ARONDA: Madam Speaker, we have challenges as a country. Recently, we had an unfortunate clash in Bundibugyo. Some time back we had problems when authorities in Tanzania expelled some of our Ugandans in a manner they did it. And recently – but instead of declaring war on our neighbours, we would rather work together with them. The acts that have been conducted by the individuals were condemned by the President of South Sudan; they were condemned by the political, military and the police leadership and they are being solved one by one. Madam Speaker, we regret this and they are being investigated and the Republic of South Sudan will take action. We do not condone them, we condemn them and we are working with them to ensure that they take action on their individual undisciplined people who are harassing our people so that it does not happen again.

The measures we have taken are to ensure that what they did does not happen again and we are working together politically, militarily and diplomatically. So, Madam Speaker, I want to assure this House that the government is doing enough to ensure that our relationship –(Interruption)

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Internal Affairs is saying that he is working together with the Minister of Internal Affairs of South Sudan. Are they working together to ensure that they kill Ugandans; because they are working together but people are being killed? So is he in order to say they are working together to kill Ugandans?

THE SPEAKER: Let him clarify what they are doing together.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I have never been so disappointed with the front bench the way I am disappointed today. What I am hearing from our Minister of Internal Affairs is that our Constitution is now subject to audit. I thought that this is a final document that Ugandans have come up with, which is foundational to our governance and the rule of law.

Chapter two, Article 5 sub section (3) of the Constitution clearly states, “The territorial boundary of Uganda shall be as delineated in the Second Schedule of this Constitution” and you, Madam Speaker, even guided and attempted to read this Second Schedule but I am being told that there was discussion with the Tanzanian Government and that there is a negotiation with Sudan with regard to the territorial boundary of Uganda. Can we now be told the amendments that we have? Can we be told whether anybody has any authority to amend our Constitution, which was drafted, sealed, promulgated and enacted by the people of Uganda?

It has made my heart to bleed today! I was part of this exercise and this is a finalised deal. Nobody has any authority, not even the head of state, to amend a comma in this Constitution without the mandate of the people of Uganda. What am I hearing today really? Is the government telling me that they are now colluding with foreign countries in order to alter the boundaries of Uganda?

Madam Speaker, please guide us because it is high time that this Parliament stood its ground and guides the government appropriately. The government has failed this country and we are just here listening. This is an insult to the people of Uganda. I am asking you, Madam Speaker, whether the minister is in order to make reference to this Constitution as if it does not exist. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just wanted to remind ourselves that we have been told repeatedly that the Organisation of African Unity took a decision in 1964 that the boundaries as of 1964 would be the present boundaries. So I do not know what you are negotiating about.

Anyway, honourable members, we have spent a lot of time on this matter. Yes, hon. Karuhanga.

MR KARUGHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas this House has listened to a very unsatisfactory report from the minister and considering the many lives and limbs lost, the blood that has been shed and further considering the impression that there is a confusing prevalent situation on the borders, I would like to move a motion that this House resolves that a select committee of Parliament be constituted to investigate this matter deeply and report to this House in the shortest time possible.

Two, Madam Speaker, that the report be rejected in totality; and three, that the withdrawal of the UPDF in South Sudan be highly considered. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is the responsibility of Government to ensure the territorial integrity of this country and although the minister has attempted to provide a report to this House, this report is inadequate. The only thing we can do is to ask Government to withdraw this statement so that after proper consultation, they provide a better statement to us.

As a Parliament, we should not move in a manner that can escalate a situation that is ordinarily supposed to promote mutual understanding. Whereas it is true that we can set up a select committee, we shall be bogged down and the government will have an excuse not to do their work and that will be the excuse to Parliament. Let us give them a deadline when they can come with specific issues that must have been addressed other than setting up a select committee. So I stand here to oppose that but advise that Government withdraws the statement so that they can provide something meaningful. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker, I stand against the motion of a select committee. I was a victim in Lefori and it is not a joking area. We were just going to visit the administration and we started the meeting by looking at the Moyo side and discussing the local government. But I am telling you if you put a select committee, the members will not come back. (Laughter). So, I do not think that Parliament has the mandate – with us we were there and we had the whole DPC and all the bullets we had in the car, we had soldiers surrounding us but the local Sudanese came with guns and stones. 

You cannot just take it as a laughing issue as we know what happened there and I am telling you that this is bilateral issue and I think that they should take it seriously and be able to give us feedback to support these people as Parliament will not manage, and we already have evidence that it is not an easy area. People were even killed in the garden. So, I think that we should not just say a select committee because we shall waste resources. I thank you. 

MR EKANYA: Amendment to the motion, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amoding and then hon. Ekanya. 

MS AMODING: I want to thank you for this opportunity, Madam Speaker. Given the circumstances that we are dealing with, it is sort of an emergency situation. I pray that the Executive comes up with more than a statement if they are to come back here with a plan or ultimatum. A plan of, first of all, evacuating our Ugandans who are deep in South Sudan, and then also the other plan of action that we ultimately want; the withdrawal of our troops from that country because it is a bilateral issue and a two way. It is a win-win; you gain, you get, you give but the look of things now indicates that we are not getting anything out of South Sudan and instead we are losing so much and I do not think that with this kind of situation, we can gain much from the trade.

Therefore, for me, I would rather think that the Executive would come here with that statement with a clear plan of, first of all, evacuating – we should send out a signal as a nation to that country since our people have been told to evacuate that country; we should be able to plan in that way so that a strong message is sent out to the Government of South Sudan and also implements in return.

MR EKANYA: I would like to amend the motion moved by hon. Karuhanga bearing the fact that the government is having a problem of personnel –(Interjections)– that is the military and police personnel to defend Ugandans and our borders. 

So, I would like to amend the motion that we do not constitute a select committee but we withdraw our troops from South Sudan in order to come and defend the territorial integrity of Uganda so that the safety of Ugandans is guaranteed and that is when –(Interjections)– the safety of Ugandans and their property has been guaranteed and that is when we can negotiate to go and defend the Government of South Sudan. 

Madam Speaker, some colleagues may not know that it is even the UPDF that is guarding President Salva Kiir and it is everything. Therefore, we reject the report and withdraw our troops in order to come back and defend our territorial integrity but we do not constitute a select committee. I beg to move.

MR PETER ERIAKU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Just a few weeks ago, you mandated the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to go to South Sudan to see how far the implementation has gone. Honourable members, while we were there, we found Ugandans trying to survive and looking for ways to make a living far deep in Bol and the northern parts. They were very clear to us that without the UPDF in South Sudan, they would not have made it back home safely. 

I would like to appeal – yes it is very painful for us but on the issue of withdrawal, we should first and foremost be sure that all our sons and daughters have come out. But if we are in a rash to withdraw the UPDF basing on the heat of the moment, then we would have sentenced whoever is across there to death, because if these people are killing us right near our home, what happens if the UPDF withdraw when our brothers and sisters are still there? So, I would beg that let us not get to the point of withdrawing the forces right now. I thank you.   

MR ALEPER: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that this is a very critical matter and if we are not careful with the way we are handling this, we may not solve it. 

The motion is before this House and amendments have been moved. If I may proceed in giving further amendments, then would I urge this House on that particular motion that is before this House to say that let us resolve that Government urgently deploys to the area of contention now and failure to do that is where we can now go and say the withdrawal of our troops. 

For now, as an amendment, we delete that particular provision of withdrawing our troops because we do not solve a problem by adding more problems. Our Government has the responsibility and the Constitution has been referred to which is true. But we also have the mandate as a Parliament to make appropriate laws and to also make appropriate resolutions that bring harmony. 

I listened to the Minister for Lands when he said, and I want to bring that to the motion – another amendment that where there is dispute and this is, honourable colleagues, in practise if you bring it into a small context – Madam Speaker, you are a lawyer – where there is dispute, there is nowhere you can have one person resolving a dispute and definitely, two parties have to be brought together. It has been acknowledge that our Constitution provides for the boundaries and with due respect, you have read – but there is another party disputing what is in our Constitution but we are saying, we are aware about where our boundaries are. 

So what we do now as further amendment is to ask in that motion that Government expedites the process of resolving these border disputes between South Sudan and the Government of Uganda – (Interjection)- I am just amending, please.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to the honourable colleague. The Government of South Sudan gave the ultimatum to all the foreigners in South Sudan to leave their country by 15th of next month – [Hon. Members: “It has been rescinded.”] Thank you.   

MR ALEPER: Madam Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, there was a statement that was made of recent by the President of South Sudan but it was retracted and withdrawn. I think that what this Parliament should be asking is to the effect that we need something formal to show that it was withdrawn and it would be proper.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Can I give information? The information that I want to give you –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before you go, I have here on my ipad the Juba Telegraph of Friday 19, September that says, “President dismisses expelling Ugandan nationals in South Sudan”. This is the Juba paper.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you for giving way.  First of all, when you deploy at the borders, you are sending a sign of war and you can ask the Generals because the other side is also going to deploy.

To show that South Sudanese are not serious, the Government of Uganda – as you have heard from the two ministers – We prepared a memorandum of understanding and sent it to South Sudan Government but they refused to sign it. They did not even name a team. All this shows they have never accepted. So, when you see South Sudan soldiers at their border with us that is a sign of war. But you see that they have rejected that memorandum of understanding and Government of Uganda is just begging them since 2012. 

What we are saying is that our soldiers should be out of South Sudan so that they protect this country. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR ALEPER: Thank you, my colleague for that information. Madam Speaker, four items have been drawn to be integrated in this motion. May be to refresh the minds of the members, we have said that Government should urgently deploy – we have the Minister of Defence who has to tell us now if they are incapacitated. Otherwise, Government must deploy urgently.

But we have also said that the issue of the border be urgently expedited. But I also thought that probably – and I beg for your guidance, Madam Speaker – this House, as they deliberate because that is affecting our people, people are being killed – the more we continue more problems will heap in that part of our country. So, for now, I beg to move that if there is any other comments that the Minister of Defence can make to that effect –(Interjections)– no, we have already made a suggestion to deploy but some members think that it is only necessary to withdraw our soldiers. But I don’t support that. I propose that we delete that particular item from the motion. Thank you.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to cause some amendments but also to support some of the amendments that have been tabled.

Madam Speaker, certainly the matters obtaining at the border are such that the State of Uganda must be felt by the people to protect them. Therefore, I want to support the deployment of Ugandan force along the border to protect the territorial integrity of our country and also for the security of our people.

Secondly, I also want to support the progressive withdraw of our troops guided by the fact that we have got our citizens in South Sudan who need the protection  of the UPDF while still there. This will give a clear signal to the Government of South Sudan and to influence their behaviour towards us. That is the way we do things in the modern world.

Three, I want to reinforce the support of the withdraw of this statement by Government so that Government withdraws it, creates an in depth analysis before coming back to Parliament with something – 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the issues raised are grave. But the proposals are also grave. But we need to appreciate the implications of whichever decision we make. So, we have noted the motion. But I want to propose that we sleep over it and take a decision tomorrow after reflecting on the impact of whatever decision we want to take. So, let us defer the decision on this motion to tomorrow, but it is noted. It is deferred to tomorrow. Next item, please.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the matter we were discussing, there was a statement by the minister on the Bushenyi incident. Before we go to the next item, I thought we would first hear the response from the minister on the matters we raised on this issue.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, at the beginning of this debate, I asked Government whether it was about Moyo and Namboole and Bushenyi and they said it was only about Moyo. They didn’t present a statement on either Namboole or Bushenyi. So, that is still pending. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you so much. I stand to seek for your indulgence. The Bill we are supposed to move to second reading and go to the committee stage is a very serious Bill. My sense is that we need to handle that Bill when we have seriously prepared.

Yes, we debated that Bill but today, most of us are still handling figures to do with appropriation. We have had a very intensive period where we start at 10.00 am and end at 8.00 p.m. So, we have not had the opportunity to look at the Hansard and prepare.

During the budget process and taxation in particular we discovered several challenges to the extent that if we didn’t make a compromise, Government was almost going to shut down because of legal lacuna. But anyway, we agreed to move forward.

Therefore, I would like to seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that you give us time to move to the second phase so that for now we go and read the Hansard about it but first we conclude the budget debate. I beg to seek.

THE SPEAKER: Well, admittedly members have been busy for more than a month of the budget process. Perhaps you are not updated on the Bill. So, let us defer the consideration of that Bill. I will give you another date. Next item please.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 19,300,000 (APPROX. US $29,336,000) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT (IFAD) FOR FINANCING THE PROGRAMME FOR FINANCIAL INCLUSION IN RURAL AREAS (PROSIRA)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Finance, please move the motion.

5.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a Resolution of Parliament authorising Government to borrow SDR 19.3million (approximately $29.360million) from the International Fund for Agricultural Development for Financing the Programme for Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has reminded us that he already presented that proposal here. It was sent to the Committee on National Economy. So, let us hear from that committee.

5.37
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Something changed today because I thought the minister had moved a motion long ago but all the same, the report is ready and with your permission, I beg to lay the original report on Table. (Interruption)

MR KYEYUNE: Madam Speaker, it is well known that we only allow Members of Parliament here in this august House. But I see as if we have a stranger; is she in order to be with us here while we are proceeding? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Where is the stranger? (Laughter) Honourable members, the person you refer to is hon. Amali Okao, Minister of State for Micro Finance.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the original report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by government to borrow SDR 19.3 million which is an equivalent of $29.336 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development  (IFAD) for financing the programme for financial inclusion in rural areas. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, equally so, I beg to lay on Table the minutes that relate to the same loan request. I beg to lay.  I now beg to present the report on behalf of the committee. 

Introduction

The Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow SDR 19.3 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) for financing the Programme for Financial Inclusion in Rural Area (PROFIRA) in accordance with Rule 166 (2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure.

The request was presented to the House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 7 November 2013 and accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration. 

The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now we beg to report, Madam Speaker.

I request to skip the methodology because it is well laid and members can read it.

I will proceed to the background. After the implementation of financial sector reforms in the 1990s, over the last two decades, Government of Uganda has initiated, implemented and supported various micro credit schemes aimed at fighting poverty in the country with a focus on creating evolving funds for micro credit to households at the grass-root level.

The Government of Uganda developed the rural development strategy as a means of enhancing the deepening of microfinance and rural financing using the sub-county as a planning and monitoring unit. The rural development strategy is focussed on support information of SACCOs in sub counties where they do not exist, strengthening of existing SACCOs, instituting effective SACCO supervision and regulation and then enhancing access to quality funds for lending for active and productive entities.

In the implementation of rural finance services strategy, Government was to support the development of SACCO infrastructure in the sub-county level. This infrastructure was strengthened through restructuring of three major Government of Uganda micro finance support programme that provide wholesale credit and capacity building fund.

These programmes included the rural financial services programme formally the microfinance outreach plan, and the rural micro finance support project now known as the micro finance support centre, among others.

The rural finance services programme under which the Government of Uganda has been implementing its rural finance services strategy has its roots in the rural development strategy, which the government launched in the financial year 2005/2006 with the aim of poverty eradication.

The rural finance services programme aimed at enhancing the ongoing efforts of the government, its development partners and the private sector players. This was to create a healthy and extensive rural financial system, which could give the poor rural population opportunities to greater access to financial services.

Madam Speaker, the rural financial services programme was implemented through several agency organisations including: the Association of Micro Finance Institutions of Uganda, the Uganda Cooperative Savings and Credit Union (UCSCU), the Uganda Cooperative Alliance, the department of cooperatives in the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Uganda Cooperative College, Kigumba.

Each of the above was providing specialised services to SACCOs as detailed in the table two. Madam Speaker, considering that the report is very voluminous, I would request that I skip sustainability of SACCOs, UCSCU need for a regulatory framework, then I go to a project for financial inclusion in rural areas, which is on page 5.

There is a growing broad nation-wide consensus of the need for continued development and promotion of rural financial sector through the focus on financial inclusion. This is one of the key pillars of Uganda’s efforts to eradicate poverty and provide the means to access agricultural development, and stabilise economic activity in rural areas.

Furthermore, the government has realised the importance of fostering the development of community level financial institution such as savings and credit groups and SACCOs and of developing appropriate regulations for the lower end for financial service supply.

This project, Madam Speaker, will focus on the large portion of the rural population that has little or no access to financial services and on two rural institutions that is, Savings and Credit Cooperatives (SACCOs) and the Community Savings and Credit Groups (CSCGs) that have successfully demonstrated that sound and appropriate financial services can be provided to even the poorest members of rural communities. The project will build on the successes of inferred financial rural finance services programmes and facilitate the strengthening of a minimum of 500 SACCOs to enable them become sound and financially sustainable organisations that can provide their communities with a range of services. 

A minimum of 225 households will directly benefit. This initiative will be complimented with support to transform the union of SACCOs into a financially sustainable body and by policy initiatives create conducive environment for SACCOs. 

Madam Speaker, the support for the establishment of a minimum of 15,000 community savings and credit groups and strengthening of a further 10,000 involving some 375,000 people in total will focus on the core areas of the country where few savings and credit groups have been established that provide households in these areas with a first important step into the rural economy, and means to finance micro-business initiatives and means to meet household expenses. 

Strategic and policy context of PROFIRA; country and rural development context: Ugandan’s development experience over the past two decades has been characterised by high growth and significant decline in poverty. Growth accelerated from 6.3 percent in the 1990s to an annual average of seven percent during the 2000s, implying that Uganda has sustained one of the highest growth rates in the world over the past two decades. 

What is evident is that there is a broad range of financial intermediaries in Uganda, the supply of financial services to rural areas is still limited and is far from meeting the demand. The country, in spite of having a large number of commercial banks is characterised by a low intermediation banking system where all key ratios such as deposit to GDP, credit deposits and private credit to GDP are at a significantly lower level than in most of the sub-Saharan Africa countries. 

Furthermore, lending deposit interest rates are high, financing for long maturities is rare and the share of credit to agriculture is very low at around six percent. Like in the banks, other forms of financial institutions that make up Tier II and Tier III provide few services to most rural communities. 

Strategic and policy framework: There are a series of strategies and policies in existence and under review that provide the framework for rural finance programmes. These include – they are listed down and I beg the indulgence of the members to read them. 

Project description; project and target group: 

Target group 

The project will target two broad categories of rural population. One is the financially excluded, that is the population not using formal or informal financial institutions. And two are the financially included; those who are members of formal financial institutions, such as the community savings and credit groups and the SACCOs. 

With your permission, Madam Speaker, that information is available; let me proceed to the project development objective on page 9. A number of studies including the last survey in 2009 which assessed the demand and use of financial services has highlighted the limited coverage of financial institutions in certain areas of the country especially in the North which until recently suffered from an on-going conflict but also in other areas such as the central with its high population density. 

Formal financial service providers still reach less than 24 percent of the rural population of Uganda while almost 50 percent of the population use informal financial arrangements and more than 30 of these remain unbanked. 

Furthermore, the coverage is very uneven; in those areas where community savings and community groups have been established and in the areas where SACCOs are functioning well, rural communities are able to access the basic financial services that they need, essentially savings and small short-term for both production and consumption needs. But there are large parts of the country where rural communities and especially the rural poor have no access to financial services. 

There are no community savings and credit groups and SACCOs and if they exist, they are not able to provide the services required. 

Madam Speaker, the development objectives of the project is to establish sustainable financial services that will enable rural poor households to carryout economic activities thereby being able to meet important household expenditures. 

The project targets to directly reach 750,000 Ugandans who will be acting members of supported SACCOs and community savings and credit groups. The project will thereby increase income to improve food security and reduce vulnerability of the families of these beneficiaries who especially stay in the rural areas. 

Project component 

The project comprises three investment components which together will facilitated the expansion and strengthening of community based financial services; call them savings and credit cooperatives and then community savings and credit groups. 

Component one includes SACCO strengthening and sustainability. Component one will focus on SACCOs that are not yet sustainable but have demonstrated the potential to become financially strong and sustainable institutions. It will consolidate and complement the support provided by rural finance series programme basing on the work it did in strengthening SACCOs. 

This component will also provide performance-linked support to help strengthen it and develop it into a sustainable member based business focus organisation capable of providing professional support and representing SACCOs. This component will be implemented through two sub components, that is, SACCO strengthening and developing a sustainable SACCO union as will be highlighted in the subsequent table. 

The expected outcome of component one is, enhanced level of service provision by SACCOs and increased membership resulting in improved services to members and then also the expected indicators for the component are:
    1. Three hundred thousand members of the project supported SACCOs of which 150,000 are new; 30 percent are women, who are non-youth and 15 percent youth. They should actively save to increase the amounts. At least 80 percent of the project supported SACCOs offering at least two savings and three loan projects to their members.

Component two, this will include community based financial services and it aims to alleviate rural poverty by facilitating the establishment of community based inclusive financial services in the poorer areas of the country, which are generally those where coverage is limited. The main thrust of the component is expansion of what is commonly referred to as village savings and loan associations. 

Methodology 

A well-structured, disciplined and successful approach involving poor rural communities with high participation by women.  Component two will be implemented through two sub components; that is, establishment of new community savings and credit groups and also community savings and credit groups strengthening innovations, and partnerships which are contained in table 2. 

Madam Speaker, with your permission, let me move to component three, which is policy and institutional support and project management. Component three involves the support to the policy and institutional environment for community based financial institutions as well as the resources for the management of the project. This component will be implemented through two sub-components, that is, policy regulatory and institutional environment and project management, which is also contained in the sub-unit table.

The expected outcome of component three is at least 90 per cent of the project supported SACCOs, which are audited annually by qualified auditors. Then the indicator for component three is SACCO audited accounts and progress reports.

Madam Speaker, table 2 highlights in details what I have already in regard to the three components added. With your permission, I would like to beg the indulgence of the House to allow me to move to page 15, which talks about project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability.

Project Costs

The total project investment and incremental recurrent costs including price contingencies are estimated $36.5 million or Shs 105.8 billion. The foreign exchange component is estimated at $11.9billion, which is 32 per cent. Taxes make up approximately $4.9 million or 13.5 per cent of the total project cost. The total baseline cost is $31.3 million whole price contingencies on account of the perceived fluctuating of inflation at foreign exchange rate over the seven years which is actuary the project duration account for $5.3million of 17 per cent of the base cost.

Summaries of the project by comment and expenditure categories are presented in tables 3 and 4. In summary, the first component of SACCO strengthening and sustainability, the total amount is $12.57 million. 

The second component of community-based financial services – the total is $11.42million. Policy and institutional support and project management has a total of $31.982 million. All the figures I have read exclude the contingency which is highlighted at a tune $5.347million.

The project cost summary by expenditure has been given on page 16. At this point, let me move to project financing. The project costs are proposed to be financed by IFAD loan of $29 million and IFAD grant of $1 million, government contribution of $4.9 million exclusively in taxes and duties. But there is beneficiary participation $1.4 million equivalent and a contribution by the Canadian Cooperative Association and the World Council of Credit Unions of $250,000.

The IFAD grant will allow the project to centre into a financial partnership with a consortium of Expense International Cooperative Associations and to provide the necessary managerial and technical expertise to support the project under sub-component 1.2. The government will not use resources to pay for such relatively expensive international technical assistance, although this input is considered essential in supporting the project in positioning itself as a reliable and sustainable SACCO organisation in Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Please just make your observations and recommendation. The Members can read the rest because they have the report on their iPads.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker for your guidance. 

Observations and recommendations

Conducive policy framework for project activities

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that the policy framework is a propeller and intervention with twin objectives of providing financial support to the process of expediting the formulation and early implementation of the proposed Tier IV regulatory framework, which will in turn help the project to achieve its objectives.

However, the Bill is still in Cabinet. But the absence of the Tier IV regulatory framework has left a legislative vacuum with respect to the regulation of SACCOs which causes a risk for the sustainability of the project investment in capacity bundling of SACCOs.

The committee recommends that Government fast tracks the approval of the Tier IV regulatory framework for its subsequent presentation to Parliament. Once this law is enacted, it will effectively regulate SACCOs and money lenders. It will also be helpful is protecting the savings of the poor plus ensuring that weak microfinance institutions do not undermine the stability of the financial system.

Government should also put in place, a policy framework, to facilitate the development of community savings and credit groups across the country without directly interfering with the operations including the injection of external capital. Another observation relates to long-term capacity and sustainability. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the committee observed that there might be insufficient capacity by this SACCO to develop into a real business focused institution. A viable and sustainable apex body is a key element of a healthy and structured SACCO sector, that will be an important factor in enabling SACCOs to maintain financial sustainability.
The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Finance should ensure that UCSCU management is re-oriented, rationalised and structured and a solid income generating base for the organisation created.

Mentoring of SACCOs

The committee observes that whereas the provision of capacity enhancement input through coaching and mentoring, a bigger institution to SACCO development, the implementing agency for SACCO mentoring was not carrying out effective SACCO mentoring. This is mainly attributed to the mentoring methodology that was defined as a routine provision of onsite technical support to all SACCOs depending on their needs or challenges. Under this methodology, the funds disbursed were used to facilitate SACCO mentors in terms of fuel and motorcycle repairs in the course of their work. This methodology needs to be improved in order for it to be more effective. 

The committee therefore recommends that Ministry of Finance should ensure that UCSCU builds adequate capacity to carry out effective mentoring and monitoring of SACCOs.

SACCO sustainability and production

The committee observed the high rate at which SACCOs were collapsing. This is mainly attributed to the fact that many SACCOs were founded on shaky structures of members who did not have viable production units. For example, in Bangladesh, SACCOs are attached to production as the end result.

In spite of project training, mentoring and support, a high proportion of SACCOs supported through financial services programme are not able to attain financial sustainability and become dynamic and find savings and credit institutions capable of sustainably providing financial services to rural clients. We cannot have SACCOs whose sole aim is to collect savings and lend money. These should be left to banks and micro finance institutions that are monitored by the central bank and have skilled personnel to access people’s pay back.

Therefore, the committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that there is careful selection of the beneficiary SACCOs from the potentially sustainable ones with a proper tailoring of capacity building to the actual needs.

There is also need to ensure that beneficiary SACCOs under this project are linked to production and commercial activities as it may be the most sustainable way of making SACCOs beneficial. This will generate income, create jobs and sustain performance.

SACCO governance standards 

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that the majority of SACCOs are managed by people who do not have relevant skills and knowledge to effectively operate them, for example, microfinance practices, savings mobilisation, financial management and loan appraisal, among others.

On the other hand, some SACCOs have boards of directors, which is an excellent step towards governance. However in some SACCOs, the board members are involved in their day to day running leading to conflict of interest.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should ensure that skills gap training and sensitisation is made a standard requirement of every member of the SACCO management committee for any of the beneficiary SACCOs under this project, given the amount of money controlled by SACCOs.

The Ministry of Finance must further ensure that the board of directors of beneficiary SACCOs for this project exercises an oversight role in ensuring that stakeholders’ interests are well protected in order to ensure growth and continuity of the SACCOs.

Government counterpart funding

The committee noted the slow progress in meeting the set targets of the basic modular training and advanced modular training to SACCOs in providing finance services programme as pointed out in the report of the Auditor General for the year ended 30 June 2012. This was partly attributed to limited funds caused by the delayed release of government counterpart funding. 

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that the required counterpart funds, as a result of this project, are timely disbursed during the implementation of this project.

Utilisation of NEPAD loan for the rural finance services programme

The committee further noted that although the funds absorption had improved towards the end of the project to over 99 percent, there was generally low budget absorption of funds under the NEPAD loan for the rural finance services programme over the years as pointed out by the report of the Auditor General for the year ended 30 June 2012.

The major causes of the low absorption of the NEPAD loan was attribute to delays in procurement and time spent on signing memorandum of understanding with implementing agencies, among others. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should expedite the procurement process of goods and services for use by the project beneficiaries by ensuring timely submission of expenditure justifications and accountabilities by implementing agencies in order to access project funds.

Potential for financial sector deepening

The committee observed that SACCOs have enabled low income people to access financial and non-financial services. SACCOs have created financial products and services that are packaged in a manner that has enabled low income people who are unable to access formal finance services to access comparatively small loans, saving schemes and other services for working capital and income generation.

These small income earners and users of SACCO financial services have later graduated to be clients of other financial intermediaries. The emergence of SACCOs has also provided an opportunity for deepening the financial sector through linkages with the formal sector.

When SACCOS bank with the formal banking sector, it provides opportunities for enhanced rural savings mobilisation. The committee recommends that Government should ensure that SACCO networking activities in all regions are undertaken for expansion as a SACCO mode is an appropriate mechanism in areas where banks and microfinance institutions have limited outreach.

Targeting of the poor

The committee observed that a major challenge of this project will be that of ensuring a poverty focus. Though this project is designed to target the poor who do not have access to financial services and are therefore financially excluded, there is a high possibility that the beneficiary SACCOs under this project might turn out to be those SACCOs that target a small portion of the poor who are normally code named the economically active poor that have the repayment capacity and qualify to get credit from the SACCOs than the core poor who do not have pre-payment capacity.

In addition, the overall number of SACCOs and especially those that have a good potential to become operational and self-sufficient in the next seven years is much higher in the less poor parts of the country than it is in the poorer regions due to lower numbers of SACCOs and particularly financially viable SACCOs in this area.

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that the distribution of potentially viable SACCOs covers all the 112 districts with each district having at least four beneficiary SACCOs and the selection criteria should be adjusted accordingly.

The committee further recommends that for districts without SACCOs, the intended service in such a district should be extended to the community savings and credit groups in that district.

Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment 

The committee observed that there is high demand among the village women to participate in establishment of community savings and credit groups. The target for women participation in community savings and credit groups will be a minimum of 70 percent under this project. A proactive policy for youth participation will also be adopted with specific targets for those between 18 to 30 years.

The committee recommends the integration of deliberate measures or strategies in the project to attract those SACCOs and community savings and credit groups with reasonable numbers of women and youth. 

Loan Investment Costs

The committee observed that a greater percentage of the loan investment costs of approximately 77 percent, will cater for the training and capacity building of SACCOs and community savings and credit groups in financial literacy, SACCO governance, business development skills, savings and other products, development or refinement, financial management, strategic planning, credit or default management and SACCO automation. The price contingencies on account of the perceived fluctuations in inflation and foreign exchange rates over the seven years of the project implementation are estimated at $5.3 million, that is, 17 percent of base cost of the project cost.

The 17 percent was considered high by the committee. Although training and capacity building are necessary project interventions especially for SACCOs that are very weak, training and capacity building alone without operational support might not lead to the realisation of project objectives. The application of subsidies under the rural financial services programme by providing operational cost subsidies to SACCOs assisted them to break even in relatively shorter periods.

The committee therefore recommends that the contingency be reduced to 10 percent, an equivalent of $3.2 million and 7 percent which is an equivalent of $2.18 be extended to the beneficiary SACCOs in form of operational cost subsidies and grants.

Contributions by the Beneficiary SACCOs

The committee noted that 3.9 percent ($1.443 million) of the total project cost will be contributions from the beneficiary SACCOs towards SACCO strengthening. The committee observed that such contributions requested from SACCOs are likely to exclude some SACCOs from participating in some of the SACCO strengthening activities.

The committee recommends that the SACCOs should not be charged for strengthening their services but can contribute in kind to aid their smooth training. SACCOs which have facilities like premises and furniture can contribute them to facilitate their training.

List of SACCOs

The committee observed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has a SACCO directory from which a preliminary list of potential 654 SACCOs that meet the basic criteria for support under this project, had been drawn. The committee noted that the list was not satisfactory as it contained a number of inconsistencies and required to be updated to enable the extraction of SACCO beneficiaries and also guard against the selection of SACCOs that do not exist. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should fast-track the process of carrying out a microfinance institutions census as this will help in the verification of existing beneficiary SACCOs when establishing the four beneficiary SACCOs per district.

Establishment of New CSCGs

The committee observed that while it is proposed that the project will strengthen 3,000 existing CSCGs and establish 16,000 new CSCGs, there are more CSCGs already in existence than can be served. Establishing new CSCGs when there are those already in existence will be misuse of resources.

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Finance should ensure that the project strengthens the CSCGs that are already in existence.

Half of $7.894 million ($3.947) that had been earmarked for the establishment of new CSCGs should be used to support the activities of the existing CSCGs and another half ($3.947 million) be used to support SACCOs in form of cost subsidies and grants.

List of CSCGs

The committee observed that this project targets to support a minimum of 15,000 CSCGs. However, a complete list of existing Community Savings and Credit Groups (CSCGs) has not yet been generated.

The committee recommends that:

    • The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should fast track the generation of the list of the beneficiary CSCGs and upon completion of assessment of the potential beneficiary CSCGs, the list should be presented to Parliament, prior to the implementation of this project.
    • The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should also ensure that the distribution of the beneficiary CSCGs covers all the 112 districts; with each district having at least 160 CSCGs and each parish at least two CSCGs and the selection criteria should be adjusted accordingly.

Project Monitoring and Accountability

The committee observed need for establishing and maintaining an effective and efficient system of regular performance monitoring of SACCOs and CSCGs that will be supported under this project.

The committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should monitor the training activities of the agencies that will be procured to undertake SACCO and CSCGs trainings in order to ensure that they have the capacity to effectively implement training activities and also to ensure acceptable levels of funds absorption and timely accountability.

The committee recommends that in order to track the progress of physical implementation of the project investment activities, the project implementation unit should ensure the timely submission of monitoring and evaluation reports to Parliament. This will enable Parliament to provide effective and efficient oversight over this project.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker and Members, the committee therefore supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow SDR 19,300,000 (equivalent to $ 29,336,000) from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) for financing the Programme for Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas (PROFIRA) subject to the proposed recommendations in this report. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson and members of the Committee on National Economy for this report. Let us hear from the Shadow Finance Minister first and then hon. Oboth. I am looking for those who have not spoken yet. 

6.26
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geofrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank the Minister for Finance. But for the last 10 years, I have thanked the people of Kamuli who have kept you and me in this place and other Members of Parliament. I also thank the people of Tororo. Why am I saying this? 

For more than the last 10 years, this Parliament has asked for the law on Tier IV and hon. Omach tactfully matched out. When hon. Omach was the chairperson of the Committee on Finance, he wrote a very stinging report against Government saying that no loan should be approved without the law on Tier IV but hon. Omach has been a Minister for Finance for some time and every time we get to this point, he says the law is before Cabinet. 

I want to thank the committee because it has said that this money is needed but there is no legal framework. So if there is no legal framework and somebody steals this money, how will the person be arrested? The committee has asked that the law be fast tracked but this law has been before us, Madam Speaker and colleagues, I think for the last three years. Government started negotiating this loan five years back after Parliament recommended that we need a law on Tier IV but well aware that there was no law, they started negotiations. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, this is not the first loan that we are approving for strengthening rural financial services. Some of you may remember we had PAPSCA; remember those vehicles of PAPSCA and you know what happened. There was a very condemning report by PriceWaterhouse Coopers who audited PAPSCA and after that we had the farmers’ forum under the Uganda Commercial Bank. Then we approved a loan from the African Development Bank for rural financial services strengthening programme one; then there was another one from the Arab Development Bank too for rural strengthening. Under that, I remember the professor who is now the chancellor for Makerere University; it was agreed that the money was to strengthen SACCOs in those areas but the SACCOs could not be established especially in Karamoja and all those districts. In fact, if you look at the SACCO map of Uganda, it is only strong in Buganda and some parts of Bushenyi, Kisoro and those areas. The money was exhausted, the Auditor-General wrote a condemning report and money got lost and there was nothing on the ground. 

What we have seen, when hon. Wandera Kazibwe was the Vice President and she started mobilising the SACCOs in the country, then people started forming their own SACCOs. The SACCOs that have survived were people’s initiatives without government interference but all SACCOs where Government got involved, people said this is government money for thanking us for the votes – entandikwa – and as a result, our people also moved to start the “Nigiina” – the village saving groups which are in millions in every village. They meet every Sunday, they are supported by NGOs to give them boxes and books but the challenge is our people share this money during Christmas because they do not have investments. The proposal is they only save money; all of them either trade in fish or in cassava. 

What we suggested to Government was to establish silos. If you want rural strengthening and support, like the chairman said of Bangladesh, SACCOs must be linked to production and we have recommended in this House year in and year out that our people are losing their output in agriculture due to poor post-harvest handling. Their crops get wasted, people pour milk because you do not have silos and stores.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, may I inform you that Government constructed silos in Kyazanga and in Masese and sold them. 

MR EKANYA: So because of lack of that, our people are being cheated by middlemen and then after harvesting during drought our people have no food. Colleagues, I really want to thank the chairperson; he has said that we even do not know how many rural financial groups and SACCOs this money is meant for but at the end of it, the chairman goes ahead and says we should approve it. Yet in the report, the chairman has said that until the minister tables the list of institutions that are to benefit, this money should not be released but then you go ahead and say, the money should be released.

In the same report, the chairman said that for this project to succeed, SACCOs must contribute money for strengthening them but at the end, the chairman said SACCOs should contribute in kind in terms of furniture and houses and yet we know that microfinance rural financial services have been moving around the country. The old project gave out furniture - a safe and a table. Now you are saying during capacity building, bring those chairs and tables so that that is your contribution in kind. It makes the project unsustainable. I really wonder; this is part of the money. Really, colleagues, the way you have seen - most of this money - the way the chairman has put it - is to be “eaten.” 

Capacity building - I wonder whether this government talks with the left hand and sleeps and wakes up. Under NAADS the government said we stop capacity building and money be channelled for input and in this budget we are going to pass, we have removed all the money for capacity building and NAADS has been stopped and now we have single spine because capacity building turned into people’s houses in Kampala here. But this money, really, Mr Chairman - 

SACCO strengthening; we do not know which SACCOs we are going to strengthen. The money for capacity building - you do not know whom you are going to do capacity building on; you want people to contribute in kind yet there is no legal framework. Somebody gave me a note to do research. He established that some people have a syndicate of borrowing money to enrich themselves. This is part of the money. Somebody wrote a note; I did my research. This is part of the money borrowed deliberately for people to do capacity building and you know what capacity building means.

Without really going into much, our total debt as we stand - the book is here; every Ugandan as we speak is indebted to a tune of Shs 1 million – even a kid in the village. I am not exaggerating; the book is here. We are going to borrow about $3 billion for the standard gauge railway, which is a very good project; we are borrowing money for Karuma; we are borrowing money for Isimba. As we speak, our debt sustainability is being questioned by the IMF and the World Bank. Last week, Col. Mwesigye watched in the media as the people in Ghana were demonstrating because the Government of Ghana, after HIPIC I and HIPIC II because Ghana and Uganda were the same level on debt relief. They over borrowed and went to bond market and now because of over borrowing from abroad, they are borrowing domestically. People cannot borrow from commercial banks and the economy is nearly closing. So, there was a massive demonstration. If we do not control borrowing, that is where we are headed.

As we speak, the Minister of Finance reported the other day that URA collection has declined by more than Shs 60 billion –the purpose is what you projected, the reason is people cannot borrow, there is no business. People are not paying debts and therefore Government is not getting income because Government – domestic borrowing this year alone to finance this budget is going to be about Shs 2 trillion. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Shadow Minister, you are making general statements. What do you say about these proposals? What you are saying is good but let us deal with the proposal. 

MR EKANYA: Now the proposal, Madam Speaker, is misplaced because there is no legal framework. Two, we do not know the SACCOs as the chairman has said that require strengthening. There is the Auditor General’s report –(Interruption)

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Ekanya, for giving way. As a Committee on National Economy, we had a lot of deliberations and it took us long and we interfaced with the ministers and other stakeholders as well. Of course the loan comes from IFAD which is almost an institution that is concerned with agriculture. So, how is the project supposed to move further as we are supposed to align the objectives of IFAD and agriculture as well, so that when we are talking of enhancing SACCOs, we want also to enhance agriculture and of course enhance household income of individuals at the local level. But as a committee, we had also reservations that okay, the SACCOs have not been moving well, and yet, we need to move further again to the question of involving community based organisations or community based groups so that at least we can go to the lowest level in the villages – these “malwa” groups so that we can deal with them.

So, that is exactly what the committee looked at, and if you look at –

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, you are now contributing. What is the information you are bringing to the House?

MR CHEMASWET: The information I would like to give hon. Ekanya is that on the question of the list of the SACCOs they had provided had 654, and of course as a committee we said we need to expand the list again. On the question of the target that is supposed to be achieved by this capacity building by the seventh year as stated by the chairman is that we would have achieved almost 15,000 groups in the Republic of Uganda. If you take an average, you will be having like –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are debating your own report, please, let the House debate that report.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, there are serious issues; you have had petitions to your office of people borrowing money and they cannot pay because of the legal framework. There is no action, even people have gone to rural areas and robbed others in these SACCOs. People save their money, women are divorced, houses are removed and because the leadership of the SACCO cannot be arrested, people borrow money, there is no legal framework and the government cannot do anything. That is the major challenge we have in this country. That is one, COWI and others.

The second issue is you do not know the people you are going to give capacity building. You have said it in your own report. You have asked that the minister to table the beneficiaries first. I want to thank you very much. 

The other issue is the strengthening of agriculture. Government under NAADS has said it suspended capacity building. Now, here, this one is capacity building. Madam Speaker, I want to rest my case and really request that this loan be deferred until we have a legal framework.

6.41
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Speaking immediately after the shadow minister with –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Since the former Prime Minister was dropped, I have not seen the Government Chief Whip take the front and even now, she is sitting behind and wanting to contribute by coming from behind.

Is she still the Chief Whip or she has withdrawn because the Prime Minister has been dropped? If she is still the Chief Whip, is she in order to continue sitting behind and yet she is the number three in the Front Bench and now that there is no Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Ministers have all gone, we would expect her to lead the Cabinet from the front? Is she, therefore, in order to lead from behind?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, she is monitoring effectively from that position. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question could be, do we need the money? Do we need to borrow? Are these SACCOs and the village banks helpful? Do we have them in our constituencies? Do we see them doing some work? Do we see the women changing their lifestyles because of the small money even without government intervention? 

If the answer to those questions is in the affirmative, then we cannot fault the committee. I can only join to thank them. (Applause)

The question of legal framework is a big question; what is the default rate for these village savings groups? I have seen personally – I have 108 women groups in the villages; they are able to save money and take their children to school, they are making big changes and this is the first time I am seeing it – (Interjections)– if others have failed, should we make it a justification to fail other programmes?

If other loans have not been helpful, has government not learnt anything? Can we now stop, if you eat a bad banana and you have a running stomach, hon. Ekanya, will you stop eating bananas? These are the kind of questions we need to address ourselves. Considering that the committee did a good job by pointing out the weaknesses, I think the report of the committee would help us make a way forward.

Definitely, we need the law and the Minister of Trade needs to revive the cooperatives. Our people are being cheated left and right, we need this. People are losing that sense of working together and the mutual trust for the good.

Bukedi Cooperative Union is nowhere to be seen but I know those who benefitted and I know those who are benefitting from the small savings groups. I am making a case today for the small village groups to benefit from these loans – (Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you for giving way. I want to assure you that as we talk now, SACCOs in my constituency even some people are saving using boxes. The moment they are sensitised and they are trained, they will be wonderful and the country will develop.

So, the information I am giving you is that even some people are saving in boxes; even our SACCO here at the Parliament is doing well because it has been training people and most of us are in the parliamentary SACCO.

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up, then we go to hon. Aol.

MR OBOTH: Thank you very much, hon. Odo. Refer above - (Member timed out_)

6.46
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy about this loan. I can say I am happy because when we talk about SACCOs and those - maybe you can call them small interest groups, it is mainly women and women are very poor. So we need to support them but as we go to support the women using this loan, it is important to take stock of what took place in the past. We had Entandikwa, which did not work well for our people. So, we need to find out the loopholes which made Entandikwa fail.

We should also really review taking Ministry of Finance wholly because when we go down on the ground, you will find that these groups are mainly under Gender and Social Development Ministry. So, how can we involve CDOs and also the gender ministry in this venture? We can also learn from the youth capital venture fund, which was under Ministry of Finance and it failed but we wait to see the youth livelihood programme which is under Ministry of Gender. 

When we talk about supporting the community, it is usually community development officers and assistants who are on the ground and they work directly with these groups. So we need their involvement to monitor. Otherwise if we try to improve on the loopholes like the legal framework being in place we should support this. We have been crying very much for funds to support women so that women are also empowered but we must be mindful that we are also going to a bad period where we are bound to be exploited about our own interests.

Let us stand out and when we borrow money like this it should go to benefit our people regardless of their party affiliation. The former vice President, hon. Kazibwe, went to our place and left our women in a dilemma, they kept on questioning and that was nearing the time of elections. We must not use this fund for –(Member timed out.)

6.49
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee and I want to say that I support the loan. I am concerned about the selected districts, how I wish Butambala was part of them. I am hoping that this pilot project will not take a whole seven years without being reviewed so that our district can be included but the issue of connecting to the grassroots is very important. 

Indeed there are so many SACCOs in my own district some of which were inaugurated in 2010. They were given checks but they have never touched the money or benefited from the Government under the microfinance. This project will go a long way in empowering and reviving those SACCOs, the women especially, because we have so many organised women groups, they are saving and borrowing among themselves but they want to be enhanced in terms of capacity. How I wish we can borrow from the youth livelihood programme’s design. Under capacity building, they have only allocated 14 percent, administration and policy is 14 percent then capacity building is 26 percent, supply and project support is 60 percent.

But under this one, I can see that a lot of money is again going to be wasted in capacity building and I believe we have built some capacity for our SACCOs. We just need to enhance and maybe do a little bit of panel beating but not waste a lot of this money on capacity building and we end up not even giving hoes, seedlings or money to buy seeds so that they can input in the agriculture activities - (Member timed out_)

6.51
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I am not objecting to borrowing this money but if you read the reports of the finance committee, year in year out and the monies we allocate to microfinance - every year, we have been asking for a law. Monies have been misappropriated in SACCOs because there is no law in place. The officers of Police have their hands tied.

In the courts of law, you cannot prosecute anyone for having misused the monies of the SACCO. We moved around the country with the minister here but every SACCO we went to said: “Not Government money, first help us and get the law.” Because even our small savings as a SACCO, you cannot prosecute anybody when you do not have a law in place. If we want to help the rural women, we are talking about, if we want to help the SACCOs, the law is in Cabinet, let it expedite the process in a very short time and bring here the law. When we have the legal framework, then we can go and put this money in the country.

Number two, all this money is for capacity building. If this money was partly going into loans or SACCO activities, you can say pass it. But 100 percent of this money is for capacity building, which is going to conduct workshops and seminars and trainings –(Member timed out_)

6.53
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the loan on condition that we have the law first because as far as I am concerned, the legal framework is supposed to be a guiding tool. It is supposed to help our people whom we are advocating for because as the institution of Parliament, I feel it is very bad for us to be giving out money without even the legal framework or the guiding tools.

In my district, most of these SACCOs are collapsing and I have been to the minister in charge of this sector complaining about many of the SACCOs including members from Finance borrowing and not paying. Then who is benefitting from this money? That is why I urge Members that yes, we need this money for the women - we have very many women down there who are yearning for this money - but if we are to borrow this money, it should go to the targeted beneficiaries.

The issue of sustainability is very crucial as far as I am concerned. There is no other way we are going to sustain this without members having income generating activity. Another issue is about the targeted group. Without the legal framework how are we going to select this whole benefitting group per sub-county? There is a proposal by the committee that at least each of the 112 districts should have four benefiting groups. But there are some of these districts which are very big and if you give them just like four and compare them with these smaller districts and there are some of these districts which are really benefitting and others are not.

Then there are some of these sub-counties whereby these SACCOs are not operational but we are seeing even those that are operational collapsing - (Interruption)

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. I don’t know whether we are proceeding right. I want to understand the purpose of this loan - not a single cent is going to finance the SACCOs. This money is purely for capacity building 100 percent. 

Secondly, you are aware that the Government came up with a list - in my own district, there were five SACCOs deliberately sponsored by Government and I injected my own money to make sure that they kick start their activities. Today, all of them collapsed with my own money in it. There is no way they could arrest the managers who were involved in the management of the SACCO.

I feel that you need to guide us, Madam Speaker. How can this Parliament agree to borrow money for capacity building – money that is not directly going to be injected in SACCOs but for capacity building – and borrow money but after borrowing it, there is no law that will guide the utilisation of this money? But you need to know that it is this Parliament that is supposed to protect the ordinary person supposed to benefit from any kind of this money.

I think someone is assuming Parliament does not have the capacity to analyse these things and understand them. But we have that capacity. We have the capacity to defend the rural poor who don’t understand the legal implications of one of these things. We are borrowing money in the name of the poor yet it is going to be eaten with the poor not being able to trace it.
So, I still feel that Parliament must be guided before we take any decision regarding the legal framework of making sure this money is not misused especially in view of the fact that in the past, such money was stolen and nobody has given us accountability of how the SACCO sector has performed so far. Nobody has given us that information. I beg to be guided, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, can you tell us the components of this loan and what they are going to do, item by item. Please give us an itemised breakdown.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me start with the issue raised by the senior honourable Cecilia Ogwal. She has fears that somebody thinks that Parliament does not have the capacity to analyse these issues. But I want to allay her fears because the committee did the work for Parliament. That is why when the committee realised that all the money had been meant for capacity building, we went on to pick off a percentage that will go to the SACCOs directly – and I think this also answers the hon. Sasaga’s concerns – and even strengthening will not only involve capacity building. It will also look at the purchase of things like computers and so on.

Madam Speaker, when you look at our report, you realise that the committee is saying – okay, let me take you to this page – in our report we state that over Shs 20 billion had been earmarked for establishment of new groups. But honourable members, you realise that these groups already exist in your constituencies. Not so? So, what are we establishing? 

So, as a committee, we decided this money should not go into the establishment of new groups but rather should be sent to SACCOs in form of grants and subsidies also to groups in form of financial support.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the entire package –(Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and chairman of the committee for giving way. I stand to seek clarification. If you are to get some money to give support to these groups – but there is some money coming in for capacity building. But in capacity building, they are going to carry out the training for the beneficiaries about the coming of these funds and how to utilise them when they finally arrive. They will be told the instructions under which the funds will be utilised. But that is the legal framework, we are talking about. Isn’t it?

So, the clarification I am seeking is: how could you move to secure the money with an aim of doing capacity building but without a legal framework. So, which legal framework are they going to give to these people? That is clarification I want to seek from you.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for the issue raised. First of all, capacity building has really nothing to do with the legal framework. You don’t need to have the legal framework to tell people how to utilise this money. This is all about training people in financial management. The legal framework will help in how to tell these people how the SACCOs – (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, you guided that the chairman of the committee should first of all breakdown these components. What did Government propose? What has the committee proposed so that we can look at them? It will be after that that we will look at the issues of the legal framework. I think if we moved that way, it would help us. So, I don’t know whether you need to guide him again.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, chairman of the committee, please break down the components of this loan. What is it supposed to do? How much is for what? That is what we want to hear.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to refer the House to page 15 of the report where we have the summary of the components. The costs are indicated in that table.

But Madam Speaker, as I said at first, the project had three components. There is the one on SACCO strengthening and sustainability. There is one on community based financial services and lastly, the one on policy and institutional support and project management.

Under SACCO strengthening and sustainability, we have $10.128 million; developing a sustainable SACCO Union is at $2.629 million, the total being $12.57 million.

Under community based financial services where the village groups fall, we have establishment of new groups and this is according to the Government proposal and this will cost a tune of $7.894 million. Strengthening of the existing groups will cost $3.526 million and totalling to $11.42 million.

The third component under policy and institutional support is where we have the development of the regulatory framework, taking $1.845 million, project management of $5.26 million giving a total of $7.105 million. All these costs do not include contingencies because they are given hereunder. But as I said, this is the position of Government.

As a committee, we did the following. We touched contingencies, that is, the 17 percent and we reduced it to 10 percent so that the balance goes to groups and SACCOS.

I now present the committee’s recommendations – (Interjections) - colleagues, information can be presented in many ways. It may be in a table - let me get to the recommendation that brings that out; page 30 of the report, the first paragraph which is on establishment of new community savings and credit groups. If I can read verbatim, “The committee observed that while it is proposed that the project will strengthen 3,000 existing groups and establish 15,000 new groups, there are more groups already in existence that can be served. Therefore, establishing new groups where there are already existing groups will be misuse of resources. The committee therefore recommends that Ministry of Finance should ensure that the project strengthens the groups that are already in existence.”

Now half of $7.894 million, which is an equivalent of $3.947 million that had been earmarked for the establishment of new groups should be used to support the activities of the existing groups and another half, which is the same amount should be used to support SACCOs in form of cost subsidies and grants.

Another recommendation talks about the contingency. The observation starts from page 28, which is about loan investment costs. With your permission, Mr Speaker and colleagues, I can read verbatim. The committee observed that a greater percentage of the loan investment costs will cater for training and capacity building of SACCOs and groups in financial literacy, SACCO governance, business development skills, savings and other product development or refinement, financial management, strategic planning, credit or default management and SACCO automation.

The price contingencies on account of the perceived fluctuation in inflation and foreign exchange rate over the seven years of the project implementation are estimated at $5.3 million, which is 17 percent of base cost. The 17 percent was considered high by the committee.

Although training and capacity building are necessary project interventions especially for SACCOs that are very weak, training and capacity building alone without operational support might not lead to the realisation of project objectives. The application of subsidies under rural finance services programme by providing operational cost subsidies to SACCOs assisted them to break even in relatively short periods.

The committee therefore recommends that the contingency be reduced to 10 per cent,  which is an equivalent of $ 3.2 million and 7 per cent, which is an equivalent of $ 2.18 million be extended to the beneficiary SACCOs in form of operational cost subsidies and grants.

That is the position of the committee. So, Madam Speaker, colleagues are very right. While Government had proposed all this money for capacity building, we said no, part of these monies - because we actually went to the field and what they need largely is money. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, of course, we appreciate your efforts but on many occasions, this House has been told that our recommendations are merely advisory. I want a commitment from the Government that they will fulfil this. I want it on record before we pass this loan because we will pass the loan and they will go on with what they had planned.

7.13
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would also request that when members rise on points of procedure, they actually raise procedural issues but instead they make contributions.

Madam Speaker, we have been at the sub-county level as SACCOs. As Government, we had gone to sub-county level. Now the minister is proposing that we go to village savings groups. We were at the sub-county and we had the sub-county SACCOs in some of the sub-counties and I do not know whether we have them in every sub-county of this country. We may not even have achieved that.

We are stretching so much to move to the village level. I would propose that we go to the parish level because at that level, we can be able to say that we are going to make sure that this money is at the parish level and people can access money from that level. But now you are telling us to go to the village when we have not even been able to satisfy the sub-county level. That is one.

Two, when we talk about the money that we are taking to the villages or parishes, we should be very cautious about this. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal said here that her money went with them. When we allow people to establish SACCOs targeting money from Government, we cannot sustain those SACCOs because people form them –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I implore you to allow me to make a substantial contribution at a future point. The information I want to give to my colleague regards the point that people are raising about the legal framework. Once you send this money to the SACCO, it will lend it to person X and this is how we have been losing billions of money. Forget capacity building. Money given to the SACCO is intended to benefit people. The SACCO will lend it and not recover it and the simple reason is that the SACCO has no legal existence and therefore it cannot sue to recover that money. That is why people are emphasising this question of legal framework. Is it the cart before the horse or the horse before the cart?

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much, my colleague, hon. Sseggona. Madam Speaker, when they know that Government is bringing money, they will begin SACCOs just to target Government’s money. Once they have got the money, they will collapse the next day so we must be very cautious about this and if it is the legal framework that should work, then we should begin with that.

Madam Speaker, regarding the issue of having SACCOs or village savings groups at every village, you are targeting 112 districts but there is no way you can have that without money for capacity building. There are some districts that do not have the groups that you are talking about and we need to train them.

You know the groups that we are talking about and some of which will be there; the Nigiina groups that have not even handled money. If we are to handle these ones and they are going to be accountable for this money, we really need to train and equip them. That is what I was saying that going to the village is too far for us. If we cannot satisfy the sub-county, let this loan go to the parish level and the village groups can come to the parish. When we have satisfied the parish level, we shall then move, at an appropriate time, to the village level but for now, it is too far to move to the village level.

7.17
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for being frank and bringing this report. When the chairman was presenting the report, I looked at somebody from Wayas travelling to either Bugiri or Iganga to access banking services. I looked at somebody travelling from Pabbo Sub-county to Gulu to access banking services. I looked at somebody travelling from Irundu to the nearest bank, which is either Iganga or Kamuli. I looked at somebody travelling from Jaguzi to Iganga to access banking services.

I therefore, Madam Speaker, want to support the committee report that actually the first access should be to those districts that do not have banking services.

Secondly, I want to also thank the committee for being frank in saying that capacity building will not help us. Many loans have been acquired but much of the money goes through capacity building. I therefore want to support the committee report that these monies should go directly to the participating SACCOs and elevate especially the lives of our rural women and youths.

Madam Speaker, our people know how to save money and it is true that our women can save money. But what has been lacking is the government push. If this loan is going to help our women and rural people to have the culture of saving as it is always stated - we are now moving and saving money and we need to see the government support in this. 

I want to support the committee stand that actually we should acquire this loan but with caution that we fast track the law because without the law, as hon. Sseggona has stated - he is my lawyer, I have brought to him a number of people who are demanded money by the SACCOs from my constituency but the problem –(Member timed out_)  

7.19
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you. I have also stood up to support the report of the committee but on condition that this is money from IFAD. Some time back in 1999, we got money from the same funding and that money was given to the region on Bunyoro and Tooro and it was almost amounting to Shs 4 billion. It was given to women groups at the time and these groups were performing very well as the recovery rate was 95 percent. 

But later on, these groups formed SACCOs at the sub-county level and the government came in and said that these SACCOs have to be registered to be full-fledged. When they registered them, there was no law, according to the Tier IV that was governing the recovery of this money. The money that was being recovered at 95 percent kept on reducing and up to now, I have been asking the Minister for Finance where that Shs 4 billion that was given to that region is. Why should the government continue dishing out money without regulations? (Applause)

However, it is very true that it was tested without reasonable doubt that the money being given to women groups, the recovery is 90 percent and above because it was tested in that region and it is on record. What I am now requesting the government to save us on this as we approve this loan – last time, as the Committee on Gender, we were proposing that we should look for money to create the Women Fund in this country. If we can get this money and we put it to the Women Fund and on condition that this 77 percent they are talking about for capacity building -, where we have reached in our country, the people at the grass roots have – they are already being given the training in group dynamics by our Community Development Assistants. This is their work. The most important thing is to have our legal system into place and then we give this money to these women groups that will do the needful and will increase the household income and poverty will be eradicated in this country. I thank you.  

7.22
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its report. Before I raise my observations, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson. 

On Table 4, on project costs summary by expenditure category (investment costs), we are borrowing Shs 36.6 billion. But in the first category on investments costs, that category is consuming Shs 27,500,011 and technical assistance to contracted service providers is taking Shs 24,823,000. I would like to get clarification from you on what this money is going to do.

I support the loan but I would like us to be very sincere to each other. They are talking about recovery of 99 percent of loans given to the poor people. Is it the true picture on the ground? It is not because they are just borrowing from “A” to pay “B” to make “B” appear that they have recovered 99 percent. What we require is cheap and affordable loans with a very long time repayment schedule so that people are able to borrow and be able to pay back. Again, these are rural people who are in farming. Unless you look at agricultural insurance, if the season fails, what happens to the person who has borrowed? Where will he get the money to pay back the loan? You have your women and farmers in your constituency, aren’t they always running to you to assist them to be able to pay these loans? We will borrow and give out this money but these people will not pay. (Interruption)

MR ERIAKU: Thank you, hon. Mawanda, for giving way. Madam Speaker, my simple analysis of the situation is that when you talk about savings, you must have earned and for you to earn in the rural area, you must have produced and sold. 

Under the Ministry of Trade and Industry, there are two types of cooperatives and one is called the Production and Marketing Cooperative and then there is this SACCO – the Savings and Credit Cooperative Organisation. I am wondering why we are giving priority to savings when we have not yet produced. 

So, I am in line with hon. Mawanda in that I wish we were borrowing money to first of all strengthen production and marketing and then when we have sold, you can save but to begin saving when you have not earned.

MR SSEGGONA: Additional information. I thank you. Madam Speaker, we have one Government but the problem is duplication. We already have the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; there are cooperative societies under the Act that exist in accordance with the law and have the structures. Once you borrow money and you do not return that money, you can recover.

We have also paid heavily is establishing and enhancing capacity under her ministry and I am glad that she is here. Why would we look at a venture where we have no structures and no law because the argument is about the law and it is bi-partisan? Nobody is saying that we should not borrow this money. Why can’t we simply deal with an institution where we have structures?

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much for –(Member timed out_) (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baba Diri.


7.27
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the loan and say that this loan has come in time.

I remember that in 2006, when the Government came up with a policy of establishing SACCOS in all sub-counties - in Koboko, we are established and we now have nine SACCOS. But why have some of them failed? They failed because:

    1. They have too many overhead costs where you have to pay the loan officers, the managers and so on and as a result, the interest rate went very high to 36 percent and the people were not able to pay. I would like to know whether we shall cater for the payment of loan managers as overhead costs, otherwise if we do not, it will be the same situation.
    2. Some of these collapsed because of people who run away with the money and we are insisting on a legal framework. Let the minister tell us, where is this Bill? What is the problem? Why can’t he bring it here for us to pass it so that when we pass this money, we are sure that people who have gone away with money can be arrested and can pay back that money?

Madam Speaker, the other smaller group in my district - there are very many groups in my districts called trim groups consisting of 30 women and they are very effective but now you are talking of community service groups. Which were they talking about? Can we say we are going to reorganise these small trim groups so that they get this money? And how are they going to get it? Are we going to put some kind of regulation and also maybe some people to train them? So, we need to know the framework - how it is going to be done so that when this money comes it can really benefit the women. I support this loan and we need the law now so that as soon as we pass the loan, we can pass this law. Thank you. 

7.29
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the committee and therefore support that we get this loan but with a few observations. Madam Speaker, we have a full-fledged – I don’t know whether to call it a sector or department of microfinance which is led by someone whom some of you do not know. When I look at the summary of expenditure and the project summary, when you look at the salaries and allowances, it is Shs 3.3 billion. I thought we were going to use the existing structures. Why do they want to use salaries and allowances? And I also see vehicles. Are they vehicles for the SACCOs or for the existing structure?

Madam Speaker, when the chairperson gave us the breakdown, I calculated and it went to Shs 18 billion. So, their suggestion of what should go to the SACCOs is very little money if you total it up. The rest of the money is still under some suspicious expenditure. 

I support hon. Mawanda when he says that technical assistance, contracted service providers is Shs 24 billion. What is this technical assistance? These people have been giving money in microfinance, they have been in existence; what technical support do you want? We have so many groups.

And also, Madam Speaker, to tell people to form groups - the groups are already formed and the groups should be demand driven; not for you to come and say form groups. When you tell them to form groups, people are going to just form groups so they can get that money and it will be “eaten.”

Lastly, many SACCOs are actually falling out because of lack of a regulatory policy. We need this legal framework. Let this loan go but the legal framework –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the discussions we are handling are very crucial and there are turning points in microfinance in this country but I do not want this House to waste time making resolutions in futility. I want the government to go on record on the Hansard that they accept the recommendations, one by one, before we take a vote because many times we make recommendations here and they are just thrown in the dustbin. So, I want a formal commitment from Government on the proposal by the committee. Shifting this money from point A to point B; I want it on the record so that we don’t give hope to the people of Uganda that we have solved their problem yet we have just wasted time. So, I want the Minister of Finance tomorrow to go on record of the Hansard in respect to those recommendations. 

So, honourable members, I adjourn the House to 2 O’clock tomorrow. I want answers to all of them tomorrow, here. The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 7.32 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 25 September 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)



