Friday, 5 September 2014

Parliament met at 10.25 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It looks like the honourable member for Kitgum wants to communicate for the chair because I can see her getting up already.

Honourable members, the time is right; let us see if we can handle these two reports this morning before we allow our colleagues to go for their prayers. That will be it for now. Let us do business.

10.26
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Yesterday at around midday, while carrying out the national population and housing census, the chairman LCV, the vice-chairman LCV and leaders of sub-counties of Moyo Town Council and Moyo Sub-county, enumerators of the national exercise and two members of the UPDF were abducted by suspected soldiers of the SPLA. They were frog-marched from the location where they were up to the border and across to South Sudan. At 5.00 p.m., traders who were coming from Kajo Keji to Moyo witnessed them bare-chested and tied with ropes as they were being marched towards Kajo Keji County headquarters. 

This is in relation to the longstanding border dispute between the Republic of Uganda and the Republic of South Sudan. This Parliament and the people of Uganda are aware about this issue because a petition was presented here at a date I cannot recall now, but it can be got from the Hansard.

The Head of State, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, and the Head of State of the Republic of South Sudan, Gen. Salva Kiir Mayardit, were informed in September 2009 when they visited Moyo but there is tension now. With the head of the district in detention abroad and in an unknown place, the people of Moyo are asking whether the Government of Uganda cares about them because this issue has never been solved.

If action is not taken, the life of the chairman will still be at risk because we know our brothers from South Sudan. It is on record that Ugandans have died there, it is on record that Ugandans have been tormented there. Does this government of President Museveni care about its own citizens or does he care about Gen. Salva Kiir’s government?

We have brought this to you so that you get to know that we need help. I appeal to the people of South Sudan not to forget our history, not to forget that they need us and that we have assisted them in many difficult times. Why should they now mistreat the people of Uganda like this? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister of Defence.

10.27
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank my brother, hon. Fungaroo, for raising this very important point. 

I learnt about this unfortunate incident from our colleague, the honourable Woman MP from Moyo, yesterday afternoon as we were sitting here in the House. She gave me the details that hon. Fungaroo has given. In fact as I speak, she is already in Moyo and she has just called and told me about the tension, unrest and anxiety among our people out there. Some people, I am told, have started protesting against this uncalled-for action on the part of some elements in the Republic of South Sudan.

The honourable Minister for the Presidency was alerted much earlier than me. He has had a telephone discussion with his counterpart in the Republic of South Sudan. As I speak, there is a delegation going from the Office of the President and Ministry of Foreign Affairs to ensure that our brothers are released and brought back home as we sort out the problem of the border.

I would, therefore, like to assure hon. Fungaroo and colleagues that we are hopeful that our brothers will be released alive. Regarding the issue of the border, the process is on-going to solve it. I believe that the elements that came and captured our people are lawless elements in the Republic of South Sudan and not the government. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

10.28
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. 

Yesterday a colleague reported here how buses are being ambushed and people being robbed. I also want to bring to your attention that in the city right now, there is a wave of theft which is happening within the taxis. When you sit in a commuter taxi, you are robbed there and then. A case in point is two weeks ago when a daughter of my neighbour was also robbed of her laptop as she entered and sat in a taxi going to Muyenga, her work place.

Yesterday, a reverend sister by the names of Adolfo Luma of the evangelical congregation in Arua was travelling with all her original documents. As she sat in a taxi going to Bugolobi where their congregation meets, her laptop and things were removed. She was told, “we are no longer proceeding” and when she got out, she found a stone placed in one of her bags. In another case, there was a young man who also had a laptop. When he tried to resist its theft as he was conscious of it being taken from him, he was threatened with a knife. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to bring it to your attention and to the attention of the concerned minister that within this city there are increasing waves of theft within taxi commuters. If something could be done about it urgently, it would go a long way in making travelling in the city safe, otherwise people are going die or be robbed in broad daylight. When you sit in a taxi and they say, “we are no longer proceeding”, they would have already robbed you. Thank you.

10.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, I thank the honourable member of Parliament for Kitgum for raising this matter. 

The nature of crime in this city and around the country keeps changing. First, we had kanywa musaayi - people who were breaking into houses and causing harm to the occupants. We then got the iron bars – (Interjection) - blood suckers. We had the iron bar criminals hitting boda bodas and various people at night as they went home. Now, we have this case of grabbing people’s bags when they are going home. The nature of crime keeps changing and as the police and intelligence try to catch up with them, another system evolves. However, like we have dealt with the others, the police and the intelligence are also seriously dealing with these ones. 

Of course, the police and the intelligence cannot be everywhere, but they are trying their best to make sure the citizens of this country are safe. We regret the incidents that have happened to these people but we will try to up our activities to make sure this is minimized. 

10.32
MR JOHN OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Due to the heavy rainfall that started in late June until today, there is no road network in Agago. You cannot reach Agago from the northern side, that is, Kitgum, or from the eastern, southern or western part of Agago. You cannot reach Agago District. That means even government activities cannot move on. Even for the census process which is taking place, moving around is very difficult. When I went for the census, I got stuck on the road. 

Besides, Mr Speaker, this heavy rainfall has flooded many places especially in the sub country of Omot at a place called Latinling, Potongo, Parabongo, Kalongo, Wol in Paluti – People are looking for places where the ground is a little bit raised like on anthills; that is where they are now putting their shelter because all their buildings are falling down due to the heavy downpour and the floods. Most of their crops are rotting because the ground is waterlogged. Gardens are now like swamps. Places where there was no water are now flooded. 

Mr Speaker, I raise this matter because we have tried our best to reach the concerned person. I have personally been calling the people of UNRA to save the situation; unfortunately, they tell me they either lack equipment or they cannot move due to other reasons. We are now worried because schools are due to open and yet the primary schools are flooded. 

Our appeal is for government to respond and help the people of Agago. Their crops have also been submerged in water and that means famine is coming. This is the important issue that I have tried to raise often. I reached the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness but they are not giving me an answer in this regard. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

10.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Dr Simon Chebrot): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you all know, there has been a lot of rain this year and many roads have been damaged. However, I would like to assure the member that I will organise a team from UNRA to visit the area to assess the situation and come up with a programme on how to address the issue of Agago. 

Mr Speaker, also allow me to respond to the issue which was raised regarding the status of roads in Bwindi. I would like to inform you that there are three roads and these are basically tourism roads. The road from Gusorora to Mbonjera to Matinzi is about 6.5 kms. I would like to inform honourable colleagues that this road has now been completed; it has been graded and gravelled and the culverts have been installed. 

There is another section of about 9kms from Nyarusiza to Rurembere and Kyanika. This road is almost 60 per cent complete. However, we are waiting for culverts to install on that road. Although it is being done by a private company, during the negotiations we had agreed that we will issue the culverts to this company. However, delivery of culverts has delayed but we are soon receiving them, possibly next week. So as of now, the road is passable, that is, the 6.9km. 

The third road is from Mukya to Musongero to Mupaka, which is about 30km. As I explained earlier, this area has a difficult terrain but we are working around the clock. I have just had a meeting with the contractor this morning. He assured me that they are grading and as soon as the rains stop, they are going to put gravel on the road. We hope that if the rains stop, by the end of September we will have finished these road works. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

    I. REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2013/2014
    II. BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND THE BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

10.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to present the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial year 2014/15. Before I proceed with the presentation of the report, I request that I lay two documents on the Table. I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee which captured the deliberations of member’s views while considering the ministerial policy statements. Secondly, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the report I am going to present to the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, in line with section 11 of the Budget Act, 2001, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and rules 138 and 177 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, the parliamentary sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs considered the ministerial policy statements for the fiscal year 2014/15 for the following votes under its purview: 
    a) Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence 
    b) Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs 
    c) Vote 120 - Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control 
    d) Vote 145 - Uganda Police Force 
    e) Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Services. 

The committee hereby submits its report to the House for consideration and subsequent adoption. Mr Speaker, we used the methodology underlined below and I request that I do not go through it given the time constraint. 

Observations and Recommendations 

The committee has made observations and recommendations. This section also contains the budgetary and policy issues and they are structured on a vote by vote basis.

A) VOTE 004 – MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

The first part under Ministry of Defence shows where the ministry derives its mandate and I request that I do not read that. Members can read to refresh their minds.

Fiscal Performance

Mr Speaker, table 01 shows the fiscal performance of vote 004 for the financial year 2013/14 and budget estimates for the financial 2014/15.

The approved budget for the Ministry Defence for the financial year 2013/14 was Shs 1,186,104,429,058. Out of this, the main appropriation was Shs 1,016,104,309,057 and the supplementary funding was Shs 170 billion, hence a revised budget of Shs 1,186,104,309,057. Of the revised budget, only Shs 1,083,584,232,174 was released by 30 June 2014. The committee was informed that out of the total release, Shs 1,068,039,115,333 was spent by 30 June 2014, leaving Shs 15,545,116,841 as unspent balances. The details of the unspent balances are as follows: 

AMISOM, Shs 15.4 Billion 

These funds were received from the AU in late June 2014 and could not be paid out by 30th June. However, the money has since been paid out, except Shs 141,522,834, which was mainly for food items, medical supplies and treatment abroad. Those payments were bounced and returned to the Uganda Consolidated Fund.

Mr Speaker, the budget proposal for the financial year 2014/15 has not significantly changed from that of last financial year. The increment is only on the AMISOM mission’s budget, which has been increased from Shs 244.4 billion to Shs 253.2 billion. The development budget has remained as Shs 103 billion.

The proposed budget for the financial year amounts to Shs 1,107,301,761 of which Shs 750,663,053 is for recurrent expenditure while Shs 356,638,708 is for development.

Observations and Recommendations

Supplementary Expenditure

Mr Speaker, the committee was informed that during financial year 2013/14, the Ministry of Defence received supplementary funding amounting to Shs 170 billion as detailed below: I beg that I do not go through these details. I implore members to read through them.

The committee noted that though this particular supplementary request was not approved by Parliament, the funds had already been spent by the sector given the urgency of the items it was spent on, especially the conflict in South Sudan.

The committee was concerned about the delay of the UPDF pull-out from South Sudan. The Minister of Defence assured the committee that after the on-going reconciliation process bears fruit and the situation stabilises, UPDF the pull-out will be effected.

The committee noted that supplementary requests distort budget implementation. We, therefore, recommend that the budget for such supplementary needs should be factored in in the sector’s budget ceiling. The committee further recommends that the pull-out of the UPDF from South Sudan should be expedited.

Retirement form the UPDF

Mr Speaker, the committee notes with concern the delay in retiring soldiers from the army. The committee notes that with the exception of 2007 and 2008 when major retirements were carried by the UPDF, all the other retirements have seen less than 20 UPDF personnel retiring per year.

The committee was informed by the Minister of Defence that the lack of funds has posed a serious challenge to the process of retirement. However, the Minister of Defence could not readily establish the financial requirements for retirement from year to year. Besides, there was evidence of lack of clear policy guidelines regulating the retirement process from the army.

Members were concerned about the possible consequences of non-retirement and the committee therefore observed thus:
1. 	It is not only unconstitutional but also a gross violation of the human rights of soldiers. Keeping such a disgruntled group of soldiers is a threat to national security.

2. 	The committee also observes that the lack of such a plan implies that the ministry cannot effectively budget for the retiring soldiers. 

The committee therefore recommends that a clear policy and plan for retirement be instituted so that deserving soldiers can be retired sand adequately provided for in the sector budget.

Production in the UPDF

The committee noted that there is lack of financial and material support to some production sectors in the army despite repeated parliamentary recommendations. The National Enterprise Corporation (NEC), for example, was established in 1989 by an Act of Parliament (Cap 312) but has been crippled despite initial investments.

Luweero Industries Ltd, which is a component of NEC, has been undercapitalised and is even in a dilapidated state. Production at the Luweero Industries Ltd stopped in October 2010. Currently, only production trails are going on. Other NEC subsidiaries are not doing any better due to limited financing; for example, NEC Pharmaceuticals Ltd has been at a standstill since 2006.

The committee recommends a comprehensive review of the NEC strategic objectives, with a view of enhanced capitalisation, management restructuring and enhanced production. The Ministry of Defence could borrow a leaf from other countries like Ethiopia, Egypt and others whose armies are successfully engaged in production.

Uganda Air Cargo Corporation 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, the Uganda Air Cargo Corporation is a statutory entity created under the Uganda Air Cargo Corporation Act of 1994, Cap 322 of the laws of Uganda. It is wholly owned by the Government of Uganda. However, in April 2014, the International Civil Aviation Authority carried out an audit at the Entebbe Airport and found that three airlines were not meeting the international standards set by that body. As a result, the licence of the Uganda Air Cargo Corporation, among others, was temporarily withdrawn.

The committee noted that Uganda Air Cargo Corporation did not protest the licence withdrawal, implying that they had issues to sort out. The committee, therefore, recommends that the corporation should expedite its efforts of redeeming its licence. Also, the Ministry of Defence should push them to achieve this. 

The Military Referral Hospital

The Ministry of Defence informed the committee that a consultancy contract for the development of the detailed design, tender documentation and construction supervision for the UPDF National Referral to be located at Mbuya Military Hospital had been signed. The hospital will have a 200-bed capacity, equipped with facilities and efficiently managed on a self-accounting basis to make it self-reliant. The design work is expected to take five months, after which sourcing for the contractor shall begin. The construction is expected to take 18 months from the date of signing of the contract.

This is the fifth year Parliament has been recommending for the establishment of a military referral hospital. The committee notes that this issue has been outstanding and the result has been that the army is incurring a huge expenditure to meet the treatment expenses of soldiers abroad.

The committee notes that each financial year, the Ministry of Defence presents a progress report like the above update, but nothing so far has been done on the ground. We, therefore, recommend that Parliament should stay any appropriation to Ministry of Defence for treatment of soldiers abroad three years from now, in which time the referral hospital should have been established and operationalised. We give Ministry of Defence a three-year grace period to complete the construction of the hospital; thereafter, Parliament should not appropriate anymore funds for treatment of soldiers outside the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chair, what does that mean? Are you asking Parliament to stay this particular year’s budget?

MS NAMUGWANYA: No; we want them to expedite so that within three years the hospital is in place. If that does not happen at that time, then we may not appropriate more money for this kind of treatment abroad. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it should be, “Parliament in future...” The way it is worded now, it means this particular budget. 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Parliament in future - the future means three years from now.

Classified Expenditure

The committee noted that the budget for classified expenditure increased from Shs 122 billion in the financial year 2012/2013 to over Shs 300 billion in financial year 2013/2014. The committee was concerned about the sudden rise in expenditure and wondered whether it was utilised cost effectively. The minister explained that this classified expenditure was justified and audited by the Auditor-General. The committee recommends that a thorough audit of this component by the office of the Auditor-General in line with the Audit Act be carried out to ensure value for money.

UPDF Missions Abroad

(a) AMISOM Operations 

The committee observed that UPDF operations have pacified and brought some peace in the war torn Somalia. However, the committee noted that the operation has been marred by corruption and mismanagement of resources by some officers, which has tarnished the image of the UPDF and the country. The minister informed the committee that the implicated personnel have been apprehended and measures have been put in place to check the vice.

The committee was concerned about the lack of a clear government strategy in the post-conflict era. The committee recommends that Government develops a policy for all possible situations where the UPDF has played a role.

(b) UPDF Mission in South Sudan

The committee was informed that there is no budget provision to finance the UPDF in South Sudan in the current budget. It was anticipated by the Ministry of Defence that the troops would have returned home by the start of this financial year. However, this has to be synchronised with IGAD deployment plan, which is still on-going.

The minister further informed the committee that Kenya, Rwanda and Ethiopia agreed to contribute troops to the IGAD mission in South Sudan but none of them has so far deployed troops. In the absence of the IGAD troops’ contribution, the UPDF has to remain in South Sudan. The committee was further informed that a bilateral agreement was executed requiring the Government of South Sudan to meet the fuel costs for the operations within the Republic of South Sudan.

The committee therefore recommends that Government should engage IGAD to take charge. The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides funding for UPDF operations pending withdrawal. 

Allied Democratic Forces

The committee was informed that the insecurity in the eastern part of the DRC continues due to historical, social, cultural and geo-political factors. However, the ADF rebels have been defeated and are currently scattered in the jungles of DRC on the run. Despite that, they pose a security risk to Uganda and DRC.

The committee recommends that Government should engage the Government in DRC further, with a view of encouraging the remnants of ADF to surrender and benefit from amnesty. The Government should further engage the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region to pursue a sustainable solution to the ADF problem. 

Off-budget Support to the UPDF

The committee noted that while the Ministry of Defence receives off-budget support in the form of donations and cash from its strategic partners, this is largely unreported to Parliament. This implies that activities or output accruing from such off-budget support is largely out of the purview of Parliament. This does not provide a full picture of all resources available for the sector for effective parliamentary oversight. The minister explained to the committee that his off-budget support is always reported. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Finance should always ensure timely reports on the off-budget support to the UPDF for effective parliamentary oversight.

Desertions from the UPDF
The committee was concerned about the desertions from UPDF and the financial implications of such desertions besides its effect on force generation and planning. These desertions are attributed to windfalls from peace operations, unmet expectations and opportunism.

The committee notes that desertions are a major threat to national security as they undermine operations and also contribute to general crime in the country. They are also a huge cost to the national resource and as such they should not be taken lightly. The committee notes that increased desertions exert a huge cost on the military, especially considering the cost of training, feeding, clothing and medicare that are eroded and the process of apprehending such deserters is equally costly.

The committee therefore recommends that the law on desertions should be enforced and alternative approaches should be explored to attract deserters back into the force. The Ministry of Defence should continue to ascertain the factors driving desertions and address them from time to time.

Recruitment, Training and Promotions in the UPDF
The committee noted with concern that despite the continued calls for fairness, equity and adequate regional representation in the UPDF, the leadership is yet to fully address it. There were also concerns about promotions, selection criteria for training and recruitment. In some cases, district quotas are filled with recruits from other districts.

The committee recommends that a subcommittee be constituted to look into the underlying issues of the alleged criteria for training, promotions, welfare and desertions in the UPDF. 

Disarmament Operations in Karamoja

The committee was informed that the disarmament operation remains on course in Karamoja sub region and that much of the region is largely peaceful. However, there are isolated cases of criminal killing, inter-clan and cross-border thefts of animals which still occur especially from the Turkana of Kenya and Toposa from South Sudan.

The committee therefore recommends that Uganda Police gradually takes over the disarmament process for sustainability. This will require bolstering police presence in the region, nurturing and maintaining synergies with the local leaders, communities and other security organs.

Secondly, the committee recommends that the police and the military should be enhanced to reduce the escalating wave of crime in the sub region.

Additional capabilities, training and enhanced capacity of the Anti-Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) should be ensured to effectively counter crime.

The committee urges Government to engage the neighbouring countries of South Sudan and Kenya to carry out disarmament in the areas neighbouring Karamoja.

UPDF Participation in the NAADS Programme

The committee noted that despite the on-going participation of the army in the NAADS programme, there is no clear policy guideline or memorandum of understanding between the two implementing government agencies, that is, Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Defence. Besides, the resources for implementing this new arrangement are not reflected in the Ministry of Defence budget. This is likely to create accountability problems since the two ministries have different accounting officers. 

The reporting relationships and accountability centres are not yet clear. Furthermore, there is no clearly defined reporting mechanism between the civilians and the military deployed in this programme.

The committee recommends that Parliament should ensure that government puts in place a clear framework for the engagement of soldiers in the NAADS programme.

Compensation for the Helicopters

The committee was informed that Government of Uganda has presented the bill for compensation in respect of the helicopters to the African Union and payment is awaited. The committee recommends that Government follows this up to ensure that compensation is done. 

Ninth Edition of the EAC Military Games and Cultural Event, 2015 

Uganda has the obligation of hosting the EAC military games and cultural event 2015 in August 2015, pursuant to the rotational arrangement amongst the partner states. Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda shall send participants to the event in several sports disciplines. Shs 10 billion is required to host the event. 

Expenditure for this event falls within the financial year 2014/2015. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Minister of Finance provides funds for hosting this obligatory international event.

B) VOTE 009 – MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS HEADQUARTERS

The table below indicates the financial performance of Ministry of Internal Affairs for the financial 2013/2014 and the budget estimates for 2014/2015. Members can go through that.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs received a total of Shs 10.8 billion out of which Shs 10.5 billion was released and spent by the end of the financial year. The unspent balance was attributed to the negative expenditure on capital assistance, which is a system error which the ministry is reconciling with the Ministry of Finance.

The proposed budget the financial year amounts to Shs 11.06 billion, of which Shs 10.02 billion is to be approved for recurrent expenditure while Shs 1.039 billion is for development.

Observations and Recommendations

Prevention of trafficking in persons

The committee noted that Article 21 of the Trafficking in Persons Act 2009 mandates the minister to set up an office of the coordinator of anti-human trafficking under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The committee was concerned about the increasing cases of trafficking in persons in Uganda, especially children and teenagers.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs informed the committee that the companies and directors are vetted by the Joint Intelligence Committee comprising of ESO, ISO and Uganda Police Force before Ministry of Gender gives them the licences to operate. The Ministry of Internal Affairs’ role is to coordinate and mobilise the police, the Internal Security Organisation and local authorities to reinforce the monitoring of these companies in partnership with Ministry of Gender.

The committee was further informed that follow-up mechanisms are being developed through partnership between Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Ministry of Gender. 

Ministry of Internal Affairs chairs the national taskforce on the prevention of trafficking in persons. Ministry of Internal Affairs also houses a coordination office of prevention of trafficking in persons. The Ministry of Internal Affairs is intensifying civic education to raise awareness and to guide the public against using unlicensed labour recruitment firms. Ministry of Gender is reviewing the regulations regarding the externalisation of labour to make it criminal for any individual or company to export labour without a valid licence from Ministry of Gender. They also work in partnership with the international office for migration to repatriate victims. 

In view of the escalating problem, the committee recommends the strengthening of both internal and external mechanisms of dealing with the vice including inter-agency collaboration.

Monitoring NGOs –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chair, you are reading the whole report; that will take the whole day. Please, give us a summary.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, let me summarise. On monitoring NGOs, the concern was that NGOs are not adequately monitored by Ministry of Internal Affairs and they are posing both a security and development risk to this country. 

The committee recommends that Ministry of Internal Affairs and the NGO Board strengthen their monitoring and supervision function to ensure that wrong elements do not use NGOs to spread inappropriate practices and engage in activities detrimental not only to the security of the country but also the moral fabric and societal values.

Creation of a Separate Vote for Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratories
Mr Speaker, the committee noted that the Directorate of Government analytical laboratories is underfunded and it requires a separate vote in order to attract the due attention that it needs. The committee recommends the fast tracking of this matter in order to ensure timely and accurate reports from the directorate for easy administration of justice in the country.

National Focal Point on Small Arms and Light Weapons

Mr Speaker, you are aware that we have a huge problem in this country of small arms, which is posing a security threat to the people of Uganda. They are being used all over the country. You have just heard about the several deaths in the country.

The committee recommends that due to increased violence in the country and the use of firearms, this activity should take the first call on the sector budget for financial year 2014/2015.

The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Finance finds resources to address the funding gap of Shs 1.73 billion, which corresponds to an accumulated annual subscription of Shs 188 million to the Regional Centre on Small Arms and Light Weapons over that period.

Mr Speaker, first of all, the activity is underfunded and we are recommending for more funding. However, we also have arrears accruing to the regional centre on small arms and light weapons.

Support to National Focal Point (NFP)/SALWS USALAMA Operations 

Mr Speaker, we were informed that preciously, USALAMA operations were meant to fight transitional crimes centred on motor-vehicle theft, narcotics, drugs and game trophies. However, two years ago, it was extended to firearms trafficking. The committee notes that it is very important that NFP is the lead agency in the implementation of the mutual peace and security pact in the fight against illicit firearms.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Internal Affairs comes out with clear policy guidelines to enable stakeholders understand these operations for better law and order in the region.

Resettlement and Reintegration of Reporters and Transitional Justice System

Mr Speaker, the committee was concerned with the static budgetary provision for the Amnesty Commission, which is the lead agency in the integration of reporters and responsible for their rehabilitation. The committee was informed by the ministry that Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is spearheading the formulation of transitional justice policy and the laws, and a benchmarking activity was carried out recently.

The committee recommends for more funding for the Amnesty Commission and the expediting of the transitional justice framework.

Construction of Ministry of Internal Affairs Building

Mr Speaker, the committee has continued to be concerned about the unbefitting headquarters building for the Ministry of Internal Affairs. This has been a concern for the last three years. The committee recommends that Parliament lobbies the necessary funding to build a befitting home for the headquarters and the directorate of immigration.

We do recommend this because many non-nationals of Uganda come to our country and they have a lot of business to do with Ministry of Internal Affairs and VCID. When they find it in a horrible condition, it does not paint a good picture of the country. 

C) VOTE 145 - UGANDA PRISONS SERVICE

Mr Speaker, the table below indicates the budget performance for 2013/2014 and the budget projections for 2014/2015. Members can go through it.

Uganda Prisons Service received Shs 87.6 billion and did not receive any supplementary budget. By end of June, Shs 85.5 billion had been released to them representing a budget performance of 98 per cent. The unspent balance of Shs 182 million was returned back to the Treasury and evidence to the effect was presented to the committee.

Budget allocation for this financial year amounts to Shs 120.8 billion.

Observations and Recommendations 

Welfare of inmates

Mr Speaker, the committee was informed that prison authorities are grappling with major challenges in the areas of congestion in prisons, feeding, health care and the often slow pace of prosecution due to the backlog of cases.

We also need to note that most of the prisons were built in the colonial era dating back to 1927 and many of them are dangerously congested. Mr Speaker, if you can allow me to quote a few examples; I can quote Butuntumula Prison in Luweero District, which was designed in 1960 for 14 inmates. Today, it is carrying 141 inmates. When you look at Buwambo Prison in Wakiso, it was designed in 1988 to carry six inmates, today it is carrying 91.

The average congestion in Ugandan prisons stands at 258 per cent with some prisons holding up to eight times their designed holding capacity.

This is partially due to the steady increase in the average number of prisoners from 31,173 in 2008/09 to 38,477 in June 2013.

Although the prisons authorities have an investment plan to guide this challenge, the limited funding available to finance this investment plan grossly impedes its realisation. The prison authorities plan to construct and renovate Dokolo, Kapchorwa, Mbarara, Patiko, Rwini and Isimba prisons.

The committee, therefore, recommends a comprehensive review of the prison establishment to ensure that the holding capacity is increased to avoid the current inhuman conditions prevailing in some prisons especially for long sentence servicing prisoners. 

The committee further recommends that Government and the prison authority should work out a mechanism of addressing congestion holistically.

All the JLOS sectors should sit together and agree on a comprehensive multi-sectoral strategy to decongest prisons like counselling ex-convicts, community sensitisation and crime prevention.

The committee recommends that Government should, in the next two to three financial years, beginning with this financial year, avail Shs 16.2 billion to enable construction of the six low security prisons as a step towards the amelioration of the debilitating challenges of congestion of prisons.

To further address congestion, Government should deepen and expand the implementation of community service especially in areas where it is yet to be implemented as an alternative mode of rehabilitation of offenders. This will help in decongesting prisons.

Staffing: the need to boost custodial staff numbers

Mr Speaker, the committee was concerned about the increased prisoner population, which requires the commensurate increase in the number of custodial staff. The custodial staff to prisoner ratio has worsened from 1:6 to 1:8.

Currently, more than 6,350 new staff are required by UPDF to augment the number of custodial staff from the current 5,548. The committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Finance should find funds amounting to Shs 2.12 billion required for staff recruitment and training to avoid a budget supplementary soon after the 2014/15 Budget has been passed.

Feeding

The committee was informed that feeding of this rapid growth in population of inmates is the main force driver of Vote 145. The challenge further spreads to feeding inmates at court. The committee was informed that a daily average of 1,165 inmates is produced at 213 courts countrywide. Feeding these numbers is in itself a logistical and security challenge and yet, it remains a fundamental right.

An additional Shs 18.9 billion is required to adequately feed inmates both at courts and in cells. Denying these prisoners food causes a gross violation of their fundamental rights. The committee was informed that the authorities are planning to introduce dry ratios such that prisoners can be given lunch at court.

The committee recommends that the budgetary shortfall of Shs 18.9 billion for feeding inmates be provided.

Health of prisoners

The committee was informed that UPS continues to grapple with the management of mobility in prisons and the mortality rate of one in every 1,000 inmates with an average HIV/AIDS prevalence rate of 11.2 per cent in prisons and inadequate health care service delivery of prisoners, the lives of inmates remain at risk. Those with unique health challenges may not be able to cope with the congestion, feeding and resultant sanitation challenges.

The committee strongly believes that the manner in which a society treats its prisoners and the sick is one of the integral indicators of the locus of rights and dignity in the society.

The prisons authorities should bolster disease surveillance, fumigation, provision of ARVs and antenatal care so as to boost their response to disease outbreaks. The committee also recommends that the prisons referral hospital at Murchison Bay and other hospitals in the regional prison centres should be refurbished.

Agricultural production in prisons

Mr Speaker, the committee noted that despite the vast agricultural land the prisons have, they still have challenges with food production. If agricultural production is bolstered, Uganda Prison Service (UPS) will attain greater food self-sufficiency and save up to Shs 16.25 billion per annum. 

Currently, of the total acreage of 60,000 acres, only 4,200 acres is being utilised. An increase in production would have to be matched with an increase in storage and post-harvest handling.

You will note that for the last three years, UPS has been requesting Government to assist them to get enough money to invest in their own production because buying food is very expensive to them and untenable. So, the committee recommends that Government should undertake to capitalise UPS production through appropriate financing options.

Two, given the restructuring of the NAADS programme, the committee recommends that Shs 21 billion from NAADS be earmarked for capitalising UPS agricultural production.

The committee also notes that the prisons farms are strategically located to produce good quality seeds given that they are isolated, which is a scientific requirement for production of seeds. They should, therefore, be allocated funds to enable them produce foundation seeds for the various Government agricultural programmes.

Accesses to justice

The committee notes that while a daily average of 1,491 inmates are produced in 213 courts spread across the country, the misalignment of courts has adversely affected timely delivery of prisoners.

Mr Speaker, I would like to use an example in north-eastern Uganda where the delivery of prisoners from Kaabong to court in Kotido involves covering 84 kilometres while those from Amuru to Gulu is about 70 kilometres.

Transportation of inmates to courts requires about Shs 3.18 billion. Fuel alone requires Shs 2.3 billion and yet in Financial Year 2014/2015, only Shs 500 million has been provided.

This low allocation implies that many inmates will miss their scheduled appearances before court hence depriving them of justice.

While this is still a problem, the creation of new districts implies that many such districts do not have prisons and yet they have courts and police. These include: Kilak, Butambala and the rest as you can see on that page. In addition, the Anti-Corruption Court in Kampala has warranted the transfer of suspects from 111 districts to Kampala, implying a huge cost in terms of fuel, motor vehicle maintenance and personnel. 

Mr Speaker, for transportation purposes, 10 buses are required with each bus costing at least Shs 280 million. There is Shs 3.25 billion shortfall in purchasing transportation vehicles for inmates and an addition Shs 2.5 billion in fuel and vehicle maintenance, which brings a total shortfall of Shs 5.7 billion required to enable inmates access timely justice. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that an additional Shs 5.7 billion be provided in the current budget to UPS to facilitate the efficient and current delivery of inmates to courts. In addition, there is need to roll out the anti-corruption court to other locations other than Kampala alone. 

Infrastructural decay

As I have already indicated, most of our prisons were constructed during colonial times. The committee noted that it is in this vein that UPS requires an annual maintenance budget of Shs 1.5 billion for the 236 prisons countrywide. However, only Shs 407 million has been provided for Financial Year 2014/2015 implying that less than Shs 2 million can be allocated per prison leaving a shortfall of Shs 1.1 billion. 

Mr Speaker, this problem transcends the inmates to the custodial staff as well. About 5,000 of the 5,548 uniformed staff are not properly housed. These staff reside in dilapidated houses, stale uniports, defunct canteens, and others rent at their own cost. Such deplorable living conditions partially explain the high staff attrition rate of 250 per annum. This inevitably compromises the security of prisons and the general public.
 
Mr Speaker, in addition to that, other infrastructure such as sewage, solid waste management installation, roads and schools need urgent renovation and overhaul in some cases. The committee strongly supports the UPS strategy of providing two-bedroomed house for 100 staff per annum, phased across ten years. Each of the housing units will cost Shs 30 million implying that Shs 4 billion is required per annum. 

Hygiene and sanitation in prisons 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chair, I think you need to go to the recommendations. 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Okay. Mr Speaker, I just want to note here that we have prisons in Uganda, which still use the night soil bucket system and this is terribly degrading and absolutely inhuman. So, as a committee, we strongly recommend the phasing out of the night soil bucket system. This will require at least Shs 30 million for each of the 128 prisons totalling Shs 384 billion. 

The committee also recommends that prisons explore other mechanisms of obtaining their own water and present feedback to the committee in the upcoming MTEF. 

Prisoners’ uniforms and beddings

Many of our prisoners do not have uniforms and those who have, yet they are entitled to two pairs, they have one pair. So, the committee recommends that a shortfall of Shs 2.6 billion be provided because the continued deprivation of prisoners’ rights to sleep and be clothed due to deplorable habitation conditions is indictment of the country’s observance of the rights of the people. 

Rights of children and female prisoners

Mr Speaker, as we all know, there are mothers who are imprisoned with very young children and there are also pregnant women who are imprisoned. The committee is concerned about that, especially their welfare and feeding. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that more effort and resources should be availed to rescue mothers from receiving triple punishment especially the children for crimes they never committed. Prisons’ authorities should think of a better strategy other than the current one cow per prison strategy which is wrong because one cow is not enough given the numbers of children. And a cow does not lactate throughout the entire year. And the cost of maintaining only one cow is more than the output. The whole strategy should be improved. 

Rehabilitation facilities 

The committee noted that most of our prisons lack rehabilitation facilities. That is why the level of recidivism is very high. In order to make sure that our prisons are better, the committee recommends that the shortfall of Shs 3.8 billion be availed to UPS to enable it adequately play the role of rehabilitation and reduce the recidivism rate from the current 26.7 percent, which is also a contributing factor to congestion. 

Profiling and documentation of prisoners

Mr Speaker, as a committee we noted that we need to computerise and automate the documentation and profiling of prisoners. Absence of this may be a big problem to the country. The committee recommends that the capturing of biometric data under NSIC project should be rolled out to prisons as well especially after the mass enrolment of the population. Uganda Prisons Service can borrow through an MoU the machines from Ministry of Internal Affairs. The data obtained can be used to monitor the behaviour of past detainees, which can help reduce recidivism and hence prison congestion. 

Prison’s review

Mr Speaker, committee noted that there is need for re-organisation and restructuring of UPS and this is underway. But we are recommending that Government should conduct an institutional review of the UPS to redefine the trajectory of rehabilitation service in Uganda. 

Training and capacity building

Mr Speaker, the committee notes that the transformation of UPS into a vibrant correctional service requires investment in training and capacity enhancement. We, therefore, recommend the establishment of an elaborate and progressive training scheme through the establishment of training colleges and institutions of learning. Such training should be practical and operational.
 
Mr Speaker, vote 144, the table indicates that budget performance for last year and the projections for this financial year. Uganda Police Force (UPF) received a total of Shs 315.3 billion and a supplementary budget of Shs 60 billion – (I request that you correct that) - bringing it to a total budget provision of Shs 375.348 billion. 

The committee was informed that the supplementary budget has been factored in the police budget for next financial year bringing the budget to Shs 412.65 billion. The budget allocations for this financial year, which is Shs 4.125.45 billion against a projected budget of Shs 615.44 billion leave a shortfall of Shs 120.570 billion. 

Mr Speaker, UPF budget priorities – the members will go through that on their own. The cost drivers in policing, members can also go through that.
 
Observations and recommendations

Recruitment and Training

The committee was informed that last year 3,500 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, please, just read the recommendations.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Okay. Mr Speaker, I would like to note that in the financial 2014/15 Shs 10 billion has been provided for training, leaving a shortfall of Shs 8.3 billion. The committee was informed that if this money is not provided police would recruit fewer personnel and that this will have a significant impact on police’s capacity in policing the country.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance finds the necessary resources to enable police recruit the required personnel. The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Finance finds the funds required for salaries in order to avoid issues of supplementary budget as soon as the personnel are passed out.

Pay roll clean–up

Mr Speaker, the police reported to the committee that they have continued to clean up their payroll and that they were able to find 2,995 ghost personnel. The committee recommends that the police should further clean up the payroll to ensure those working are the ones paid to avoid the current situation where some officers have not been paid for a long period when money is being paid to non-existing staff.

Policing the Oil and Gas Sector

Mr Speaker, this is a very important sector but the committee was informed that this sector is not catered for in this budget and that a minimum of Shs 28.8 billion is required to provide the first phase of specialised equipment.

The committee recommends that police should, first of all, not surrender itself to the army and the other private security arms to guard such an important national resource and that the requisite resources must be provided to ensure the police takes on its role.

Capitalisation of the engineering department

The Uganda Police Force has an engineering department but which has not been adequately funded for so long and yet they have started building capacity especially in the areas of procuring hydrofoam machines and trucks to help them to address the issue of inadequate accommodation.

Mr Speaker, the following graph indicates or shows the accommodation status in the UPF and I will ask members to study it during their own time especially the new housing units that are very minimal.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the police explore the possibility of getting more resources through the JLOS working groups and rationalise resource use by empowering this department. With a reduction of public order engagement for now, the realised savings can be put in this area to solve the acute accommodation problems.

The Public Private Partnership (PPP)

Mr Speaker, you will recall that last year, the committee recommended that this be put on hold until the enabling laws have been enacted. Indeed, the police paid heed to this. Now, the police recommend that Parliament expedites that passing of the PPP Bill into law to enable the police address the problems of accommodation shortage.

Domestic Arrears

The table below shows the domestic areas. Last year the committee recommended that UPF should install pre-paid metres for electricity and water in order to manage the efficient and effective use of water. This has been partially done in some areas. The committee continues to recommend that the police still have a big volume of arrears and so, the police should adhere to the new guidelines so that they do not incur any further areas and ensure the clearance of the verified arrears.

The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Finance should find resources to clear the above arrears.

Repair of Vehicles

The committee was informed that this poses a big challenge to UPF because they need a lot of mobility. We were also informed that – and members may have interest in this – every district is given an average amount of fuel. Those districts with low crime rates are given one million shillings per month while those with high crime rates are Shs 1.5 million. And the RPCs are given between Shs 1.2 and 1.6 million. In cases of emergence and special operations, additional fuel allocations are provided.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends further tightening to avoid fuel abuse and that there should be equitable fuel allocation available to all areas done by UPF authorities. Secondly, the committee was concerned with inadequate fuel allocated to districts especially those in the islands and, therefore, recommend that police leadership double fuel allocations to such districts in order to prevent officers from soliciting for fuel from the public when executing police work.

Rent arrears

The rent arrears are shown in the table – it shows arrears for rent, fuel and other utilities. But specifically on rent, the committee recommends that the police should further reduce rent arrears by building their own offices in areas where land has been allocated by local authorities and communities.

Local Community engagement

The committee was informed that individuals, business communities and companies offer land and other facilities to UPF for use. The examples are shown down there. The committee recommends that further dialogue between the police and the communities be carried out such that these initiatives can continue to save the police and Government form colossal sums that are paid in rent.

Production in the UPF

The committee was informed that the UPF   has some big chunk of land in Kabalye and Olirimi in Katakwi. The committee recommends that UPF should emulate the UPS so that they can also become more productive especially in areas where they have land, and that they should also continue to engage with NAADs to ensure they put land to better use.

Police College

Mr Speaker, on this matter, the committee recommends that police should concentrate on professionalising the current police staff through training and skills acquisition before venturing into university studies since these are more academic than practical or professional.

Land Surveying and Titling

Mr Speaker, this was a big concern to the committee that a big chunk of police land is being taken over by unscrupulous individuals hence the need to title that police land. This requires Shs 1.250 billion, yet the provision in this budget is only Shs 0.12 billion.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the police should use all possible avenues to preserve and protect their land from encroachers including senior police officers and other land grabbers. It becomes unfortunate and ironical if police cannot protect its own land yet it has a national duty of protecting life and property of all Ugandans!

Police deployment in foreign missions

The UPF personnel are deployed in UN peacekeeping missions in Liberia and Somalia and the concern here was that there is no approved policy by UPF to this though they do it under a deployment policy approved in May 2010, based on international protocols that Uganda has signed with the United Nations.

The committee recommends that the selection policy should be well laid out to ensure equity and non-discrimination. 

Gender issues in UPF

The committee was concerned about two issues:
    1. The people who appeared before it, all of them were men and the committee was concerned as to why female police officers cannot be promoted to such ranks to appear before the committee.
    2. Members were also concerned about the transfer of female parliamentary police officers who were transferred on account of being pregnant. (Applause)

The committee recommends that police should adhere to the established National Gender Policy and other guidelines relating to transferring of married public officers.

Financing police for public functions

The committee note that police are being funded when they offer services during public functions. Allow me to quote two notable functions here: the Uganda Martyrs Day Celebrations in Namugongo and the national football team engagements in Namboole.

It was also noted that Police are paid when a metal detector is extended to any person or institution, which is organising a public function. Money is paid for the police band and sniffer dogs. The committee recommends that a clear policy guideline should be put in place where police can formerly charge a known fee for providing certain services, which could form part of the NTR that is properly receipted and accounted for.

Recruitment of crime preventers

This is very common in Uganda today. Across the country crime preventers are being recruited and trained but the committee was concerned that this is being done short of a clear legal and institutional framework. For example, if one needs to get people trained as crime preventers in his or her constituency, one does not know where to go, how to do it and who to approach. The committee recommends that the minister should come up with a statutory instrument to formalise the recruitment of crime preventers to avoid any suspicion that Police may be creating a militia.

Ambulatory services and body bus for the dead

The concern here was that police use the patrol vehicles to carry dead bodies, injured people, criminals; they just throw all of them under the seats on the patrol vehicles.

The committee recommends the rationalisation of resource use within police to be able to save money and procure ambulances and body bags so that the dead can be transported in a befitting manner.
 
Police hospital

The committee was concern about the absence of a police hospital yet police have strength of over 40,000 men and women. We feel UPF should have a police hospital just like it is the world over. This will help to reduce the money police are spending on treating the policemen and women.

The committee, therefore, recommends that UPF should consider this as a priority in their sector plan and if possible, integrate it in their PPP arrangement once the law is in place. 

Change of name of UPF to Uganda National Police

The committee was greatly concerned about this recent development where Uganda Police Force illegally changed its name to Uganda National Police in total violation of the Constitution. There was evidence that the name was changed on the police website.

The committee recommends an immediate reversal to the constitutional name until such a time when Constitution has been amended to provide for this change.

Private security firms

Mr Speaker, there are a number of private security firms in the country and we noted that these do not only hold automatic rifles like AK47 but hardly receive any formal regulated training, and we noted that in absence of regulatory framework for these private security firms operating in the country, it puts the lives and property of people at risk. So, the committee recommends that police should establish a clear regulatory framework and licensing regime to streamline the operations of private security companies, and also clearly elaborate on how individuals can acquire the services of serving police officers as personal guards.

D) VOTE 120: DIRECTORATE OF CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL (DCIC)

The table indicates the fiscal performance of Vote 120 and then the budget estimates of financial year 2014/2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chair, please, go to page 36 and read only the recommendations. You have used over - 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee recommends the following: 

That the printing of national IDs should be expedited to enable Ugandans access them. 

The committee recommends that in order to streamline projects of this kind, the mandate of registering citizens which involves data collection, use, access and management require an organised institution and legal framework. The committee, therefore, urges the ministry to fast-track the Bill on registration of persons and bring it to Parliament for enactment.

The committee also recommends that Ministry of Finance should provide Shs 20 billion and Shs 17 billion for procurement of virgin cards and meeting of contractual obligation.

Decentralisation of immigration services

The recommendation on this is that DCIS streamlines matters of accountability and enhances efficiency and effectiveness at all levels, so that the existing malaise in migrations management is not decentralised to the regional offices.

The committee also recommends that Ministry of Finance should find Shs 0.1 billion to address funding gap in Gulu passport centre.

This DCIC is grappling with a problem of inadequate staff and the committee recommends that Ministry of Finance provides an additional Shs 1 billion to enable DCIC recruit, train and deploy enough staff.

DCIC headquarters 

The headquarter is not befitting and the committee recommends that Ministry of Finance grants permission to DCIC to retain part of the NTR generated by DCIC, which is projected to grow from Shs 60 billion to Shs 70 billion and this retention will help finance a more befitting headquarter and hence, deliver better services.

Post entry monitoring of aliens 

The aliens who enter Uganda are not monitored and the committee, therefore, recommends the realignment of the entire immigration system in Uganda to ensure that post entry monitoring is made more effective.

Tightening impromptu and general checks on the immigration status of aliens.
The DCIC should sustain high levels of vigilance checks. 

DCIC should encourage aliens to regularly report to immigration offices on the status of their stay in the country.

DCIC should work on modalities of enhancing of post entry monitoring of aliens through streamlining and institutionalising information sharing with other security and intelligence organs.

Security management at border posts

The committee recommends that the proper chain of command with DCIC taking the lead in the coordination of the work of the security agencies should be established.

Uniforms for personnel at border crossings and immigration service points, these personnel do not have uniforms and those who have, have inadequate uniforms.

The committee, therefore, recommends that to ease identity the DCIC should provide uniforms and clear identification indicating numbers and name tags to the immigration officers.  

Absence of holding space for suspects

We lack this at all immigration points even here at the headquarters. So, it is in this vein that the committee recommend that resources be availed for the construction of these holding facilities. With the on-going project to construct befitting immigration offices at selected border points, it is should be noted that border points should be included as an integral aspect of the design.

Immigration staff welfare

Mr Speaker, we recommend as follows:
First of all, the welfare, especially  accommodation – these staff do not have enough accommodation. I can use only one example in Busia, where a house was designed to host three people but currently, occupied by eight people.

So, we recommend that as the one stop- border post project gets under way, provision for staff accommodation should be made.

Provision of adequate protective gear such as hand gloves, metal detectors, and other equipment to the immigrations officers should be done. DCIC procures and deploys at least one vehicle at each regional office to enhance the monitoring function. The Ministry of Finance should find an additional Shs 1.5 billion for the procurement of these vehicles for their regional offices, marine mobility to enable them meet their Shs 70 billion target in NTR.

Mr Speaker, there is an issue of non-linkage and inter-linkage of ICT systems at various immigration points in the country. The concern was that if someone enters Uganda from Busia and gets to Katuna, the person at Busia will never know. So, we want these immigration points to be inter-linked. So, the committee recommends that inter-linking of all immigration offices across the country be given priority during this era of terrorism. 

Immigration service delivery along marine time borders 

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that immigration service delivery points should be established at strategic locations along the borders of Ugandan waters specifically those bordering neighbouring countries. And also marine surveillance capability should be enhanced, mapping and marking the Ugandan border point.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that Government of Uganda clearly marks out its border points. 

In conclusion, I beg to move that this august House approves the budget estimates for the vote under Defence and Internal Affairs for Financial Year 2014/15 as follows:

Vote 004 – Ministry of Defence
    a) Recurrent Expenditure	 750,663,053,000 
    b) Development Expenditure 	356,638,708,000  
    c) Total Budget            		1,107,301,761,000

Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs
    a) Recurrent Expenditure 	10,028,488,000 
    b) Development Expenditure 	1,039,416,000 
    c) Total Budget 		11,067,904,000

Vote 120, Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control
    a) Recurrent Expenditure	10,719,742,000 
    b) Development Expenditure 	109,860,428,000 
    c) Total Budget 		120,580,170,000

Vote 144, Uganda Police Force
    a) Recurrent Expenditure   	340,881,695,000
    b) Development Expenditure  	71,663,769,000
    c) Total Budget           		 412,545,464,000

Vote 145, Uganda Prisons Service
    a) Recurrent Expenditure   	110,334,506,000
    b) Development Expenditure  	10,469,142,000
    c) Total Budget            		120,803,648,000

Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the Financial Year 2014/2015. That is the motion I propose for your debate.

In the gallery this morning, we have students of MULUSA Academy Wobulenzi, Luweero District represented in Parliament by hon. Edward Kidhu Makubuya MP Katikamu South and hon. Brenda Nabukenya Woman MP Luweero District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I thank you. I rise on a point of procedure. We made a commitment in this House - and today is a Friday - that any business we conduct today shall end at midday to enable us to go and attend Jumah prayers. So, critical is that that was an earlier commitment and you made a commitment to observe that. 

Defence and internal affairs is so critical a sector and requires adequate debate. We cannot even attempt to rush through. So, I would beg your indulgence again to enable us go and do Godly work and maybe postpone this debate to Monday. 

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee but the issues, which have been raised need to be reflected on. I would support the honourable member that we give sufficient treatment to this report.
Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true we made this commitment and so, it is now midday. This House is adjourned to Tuesday 10.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 12.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 9 September 2014 at 10.00 a.m.)
