

Thursday, 26 September 2017

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Leader of the Opposition and Members of Parliament, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to thank you for the work you have been doing in the last few weeks.

Before we proceed, I know that sometimes people enjoy colours, especially those that look bright, but I would like to invite the Members on the left side of the House to remove your bandanas. (Applause) You are in breach of rule 73 of the Rules of Procedure, which requires decorum in this House.

Honourable members, I led a delegation of Members of Parliament to attend the 29th Uganda North America Convention in Miami, USA and later to the 7th Uganda-UK Investment Convention on 15 September 2017. I am glad to report that we registered a milestone. This time, the officials of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the National Identification and Registration Authority travelled to Miami, Boston and London and registered a number of Ugandans living in America for dual citizenship and issued national identity cards to some. 

It was agreed that beginning April 2018, operational centres will be set up to register Ugandans in the diaspora in the USA, the United Kingdom and the Nordic countries and later will be rolled out to the rest of the diaspora. The staff at the embassies will be trained to continue with that work in the absence of the team from the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

Among the issues the diaspora is still interested in, however, is the right to vote because they talk about it each time we meet. Therefore, I would like to ask the Government to take time and respond because this is a recurrent request. I am aware that the Prime Minister was in Boston in June 2016 and the same request was put to him. We hope that it can be addressed.

They also want a one-stop diaspora centre where they can go to seek advice about where to go for employment or services, so that they do not have to run around hunting.

In the House of Lords we also met Lord Popat, the Prime Minister’s Trade Envoy to Uganda and Rwanda. He left here during Amin’s time but Lord Popat is encouraging the former Ugandan Asians to come back and invest in the country. We were informed that we have seven Ugandans in the House of Lords: Hon. Sushil Patel, Lord Dolar Popat, Lord Mohamed Sheikh, hon. Vadera, hon. Verjee, hon. Jitesh, hon. Lakhman and our own, the Most Rev. and the Rt Hon. the Lord Archbishop of York, Dr John Sentamu. We agreed with them that we shall be inviting these Ugandans to come and visit us here in the country so that we can improve our relationship. (Applause)

Honourable members, you may recall that at the 10th Sitting of the First Meeting of the Second Session of this Parliament, hon. Betty Nambooze presented a petition from traders, lock-up owners and special hire operators of Mukono Municipality on their then pending eviction by Uganda National Roads Authority and Mukono Municipality from their area of operation. I directed that Uganda National Roads Authority and Mukono Municipal Council stay the eviction pending disposal of the petition by the parliamentary Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry.

I have received a request from the chairperson of the Committee on Public Service indicating that they would be happier if the Committee on Public Service handled that issue. Let me now direct that that petition be transferred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government and should be handled expeditiously because it is affecting the rights of our people under Article 40 of the Constitution.

Honourable members, in the gallery, we have a number of people and I would like to introduce them. From the Parliament of Sierra Leone, we have Dr Karim Mbawa, the Director for Human Resources; Mr Abdul Rahman Njai, the Director of Finance; Mr Abubaker Cham, Human Resource Manager; Mr Joseph Conteh, ICT Manager; and Mr Augustine Kamara, Internal Auditor. Interestingly, there are no women on the delegation, but you are welcome. (Applause)

We also have hon. Alice Alaso, former Member of Parliament; hon. Denis Namara and hon. Musamali, our representatives to EALA. They are also here to observe the proceedings. There are also other distinguished Ugandans in the gallery. 

Honourable members, I have spent a bit of time trying to rationalise a number of requests for motions for the amendment of the Constitution. Therefore, I will be amending the Order Paper to permit those which are eligible to be presented; I will be talking about that later.

For a long time, we have been demanding that the Government present in this House constitutional amendments. The last time we discussed this was a year ago when we asked them to bring a comprehensive amendment, but they have not done so. I am now constrained; I do not know how long I can continue stopping Members from bringing motions. Now that the Government has failed, Members should proceed and bring the motions so that we do our part. (Applause)

I would like to highlight the steps to be taken within our Rules of Procedure in considering private Members’ Bills: 

“1. 	A private Member’s Bill shall be introduced by way of motion to which shall be attached the proposed draft of the Bill; 
2. 	If the motion carried, the printing and publication of the Bill in the Gazette shall be the responsibility of the Clerk; 
3. 	Following the publication of the Bill in the Gazette, the process of the Bill shall be the same as that followed in respect of a Government Bill.”

It is, therefore, not true, as has been said in the public domain, that Parliament is here to pass proposed amendments. What is being sought for here is a request for permission for Members to prepare the Bills, consult, get a certificate of financial implication, have the Bills gazetted and then bring the Bills to Parliament for first reading. (Applause) A Bill will then be referred to the appropriate committee of Parliament, which will process it in the usual manner and report back to Parliament for debate and consideration. 

The relevant rule in the Rules of Procedure of this House under which these motions come is rule 47 and it reads as follows: “Subject to the provisions of rule 48, no motion shall be moved unless the Member moving it has given written notice of the same to the Speaker and the Clerk not less than three days previous to the sitting at which it is intended to move the motion.” This means that if we are to include any of the motions on today’s Order Paper, the Office of the Speaker should have received that notice by 21 September 2017. 

The following notices for motions for leave to introduce private Members’ Bills have met the test under rule 47 for inclusion in today’s Order Paper:

1. 	A motion for leave of Parliament to introduce a constitutional amendment, to be moved by hon. Raphael Magyezi, to amend the Constitution to provide for the time within which to hold presidential, parliamentary and local government elections under Article 61(2) of the Constitution and amend articles 102(b) and 183(2) (b) to remove the age requirement as qualification for a person who intends to stand for office. This notice was received in the Office of the Deputy Speaker on 21 September 2017. A copy was also received by the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. It also had a draft motion and Bill attached to it.

2. 	Motion for leave of Parliament to introduce a constitutional amendment to be moved by Dr Sam Lyomoki, MP for Workers, to amend the Constitution under Article 98 to provide for a transitional term and arrangements for peaceful, smooth and democratic transition for the first President under the 1995 Constitution while providing immunities, exemptions and privileges to the same individual when they cease to be president; and to amend Article 105(2) to introduce term limits on the tenure of the Office of the President. 

The notice was received by the Office of the Speaker on 21 September 2017. There was a slight amendment on the 25 September 2017 and a copy received by the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. It had a draft motion and Bill attached to it.

3. 	The Speaker’s Office also received a notice of motion submitted by hon. Patrick Nsamba of Kassanda County North for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to urgently constitute a constitutional review commission to comprehensively review the Constitution. This notice was received by the Office of the Speaker on 18 September 2017 and a copy received by the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. It had a draft motion attached to it. This motion therefore also meets the test under rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure for inclusion on today’s Order Paper. 

The following motions are not competent for inclusion on today’s Order Paper due to the reasons highlighted:

1. 	A motion for leave of Parliament to introduce a constitutional amendment to be moved by hon. Mbwatekamwa, representing Kasambya County, to amend the Constitution to remove all academic restrictions imposed in the Constitution –(Laughter)- for all elective offices established under the Constitution. This notice was received by the Office of the Speaker on 22 September 2017. It was not copied to the Clerk to Parliament. It had a draft motion which came on the 25 September 2017.

2. 	A motion for leave of Parliament to introduce a constitutional amendment to be moved by hon. John Nambeshe of Manjiya County, to amend the Constitution to require Members of Parliament, once appointed to ministerial positions, to relinquish their parliamentary seats. This notice was received by the Office of the Speaker on 22 September 2017. It was not copied to the Clerk to Parliament. It did not have a draft motion nor did it have a draft Bill.

3. 	A motion for leave of Parliament to introduce a constitutional amendment to be moved by hon. Mbabaali Muyanja of Bukoto County to amend the Constitution to create a second Chamber  so that Parliament constitutes two Houses - a lower and upper Chamber. This notice was received by the Office of the Speaker on 25 September 2017. It was not copied to the Clerk to Parliament, it did not have a draft motion or draft Bill attached.

4. 	A motion for leave of Parliament to introduce a constitutional amendment to be moved by hon. Muyanja Ssenyonga of Mukono South to make provision for the issue of federal. The Member only asked for permission to allow him to bring back to the Floor of Parliament the issue of federal. This was the proposal received by the Office of the Speaker on 25 September 2017. It was not copied to the Clerk to Parliament. It had no draft motion and no draft Bill.

5. 	A motion for leave of Parliament to introduce a private Member’s Bill to be moved by the honourable Dr Sam Lyomoki entitled, “The Museveni Succession, Transition and Immunities Bill, 2017”, to prescribe transitional arrangements for a peaceful, smooth and democratic transition and to provide for immunities, exemptions and privilege to the first person to cease to be President under the Constitution. This motion was in variance with the provisions of Article 98 of the Constitution and therefore was not competent to be included on today’s Order Paper.

                    
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I am raising on a procedural issue in regard to rule 69 of our Rules of Procedure. I raise this in regard to the dress code in this Parliament. Today, as we entered in this House, some of the Members were putting on red in this House –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amongin, I have already addressed that matter. Order, Members! 

MS AMONGIN: I need to be heard, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, what is the issue, hon. Amongin?

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today as I drove to Parliament, I was stopped by over 10 people who were putting on red clothes and then when I reached Parliament, I do not understand why some Members are also dressed in red. 

Would it not be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, even when my colleagues have decided to put the ribbons aside, for a leader to explain whether there is a different function today? That is the procedural matter I would like to raise. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your protection.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I cannot control what is on the streets; my business is here in this House. 

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to raise this procedural matter. While we sat in this Chamber on the 19th and 20th, the presiding Speaker then kept alluding to the fact that the matter of the pending motion would not come in as a surprise. He said that this matter would be raised prior to the sittings of Parliament for purposes of all Ugandans to know that it would be coming up. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally correct for us to be ambushed? I know the Order Paper and its contents are within your mandate but a ruling had been made by the Chair and these rulings must be taken seriously, honourable colleagues. Time and again, we have had to abide by the rulings of the Speaker whether they are right or wrong. Is it procedurally correct for the motion to come to the Order Paper in a way of ambush today when the Order Paper was brought out early enough without the issue of the amendments?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, are you questioning the powers of the Speaker? (Applause) Let us go to the next item.

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for permitting me to rise on a procedural point. I am alive to the fact that –(Interjection)– I thought Members of Parliament are above that. 

It is within your powers, Madam Speaker, but leaders, especially you, as I have known you for the last six years in this Parliament, are known by their consistency, which you have maintained over time. As you read out the motions and the dates, as you rightly did, I was very keen on the order of presentation. Would it not be procedurally correct that we deal with these motions in their order of dates of presentation? In which case, the motion by hon. Patrick Nsamba would have to come in first, in that order of precedence, for consistency. 

I would appeal especially to the honourable Maj. Gen. Otafiire, who is responsible for this commotion, to give me an ear because he is the very person in the dock for failing to present the constitutional amendments. If I were him, I would be more decent in listening. Is it not procedurally correct that we deal with them in the order of presentation? Actually, if hon. Otafiire knew what he was doing, we would not be embroiled in this. I am sure he does not know and that’s why we are here. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have not yet come to those motions; we are going to item No. 3. 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I have a matter of privilege under rule 69.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item No.3. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF PREPAREDNESS OF THE OIL AND GAS SUBSECTOR FOR THE COUNTRY TO ACHIEVE FIRST OIL IN 2020, STATUS OF PETROLEUM PRODUCTS STOCKS AND THE LAYING OF AGREEMENTS BEFORE THE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament - 

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Sergeant-at-Arms to check what is happening because I cannot see what is behind me.

Honourable members, the Sergeant-at-Arms has assured me that there are no guns, so please take your seats. Honourable members, please take your seats so that I can investigate what is happening. Honourable members, can you please take your seats.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you can see, today the House is full to capacity but some Members here are not safe because guns have been sneaked into the House. The procedural point I would like to raise is that for the safety of Members, I would like to seek your indulgence to let us get out and be checked, one by one, as we enter.

That is the procedural point that I would like to raise because even you, Madam Speaker, you are not safe in that seat where you and Members are not safe. We should get out and be checked. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must confess the difficulty with which I am witnessing this in this Parliament, especially as a Member with some level of seniority. 

An issue touching the safety of Members has been raised, Madam Speaker. We know that across, on your right, are some people that have served diligently in the armed forces. However, an issue of safety with an allegation that guns have been smuggled into the Chamber has been raised. This is not a matter where we would have some experiments without being scientific. 

Would it not be procedurally right, and would it inconvenience anyone other than those carrying guns, that we move out and we be searched as we enter the Chamber? I know some can object because guns are on the other side. I am the last person to work under an atmosphere where my safety is not guaranteed yet I am here to work.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should not work on allegations. Let us work.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was rising on a point of order in respect to that very point that you have just explained - allegations cannot be entertained in this House. If the honourable member has any evidence, can he lay that evidence on the Table? Otherwise, are they in order to allege that we have guns in the House?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewanyana, please sit down. Order! Can I request hon. Ronald Kibuule to exit the Chamber. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, this is a well-orchestrated plan to stifle the business of this House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you take your seats. Order! Members, take your seats. First take your seats. Minister, please proceed.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Members rose_) - and honourable members -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, take your seats. Hon. Ssemujju, take your seat. Honourable members, the word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parle”, which means a place where you speak. Therefore, let us speak with our mouths, not fists. Please, it is part of parliamentary etiquette to listen to each other and I had invited the minister to speak.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The purpose of this statement is, first, to update the House on the current status of the country’s oil and gas subsector, including preparedness to produce oil and gas in 2020; secondly - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Allan Ssewanyana, can you please either take your seat or get out! Honourable members, take your seats.

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, the purpose of this statement is to update the House on the current status of the country’s oil and gas subsector, including preparedness –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to remind you that you are here on behalf of your people. The minister is giving information for your people. Please, take your seats. Substantiate the allegation.

MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, when I entered this Parliament at 2.00 p.m., hon. Kibuule – and the cameras in this Chamber can show that - crossed from the other side to this side and warned me that today, I am going to face death –(Interjections)– The cameras in this Parliament can show hon. Kibuule pointing a finger at me, and if the voices were being recorded we can get that evidence from the cameras. That is the reason they are here.

Madam Speaker, the issue of the security of Members of Parliament in this Chamber takes precedence over anything else including this report she is going to read. Hon. Kibuule came here with a gun. We requested that you allow us to get out and all of us get searched before we resume any business. However, hon. Kibuule was sandwiched by some Members and in the process he came waving his jacket saying that he does not have a gun.  Actually, at the moment we do not know who has the gun. We cannot pretend to listen to a statement from a minister until we have been searched and no one is found with a gun.

Madam Speaker, I am raising this because I have personally been told by hon. Kibuule that I am going to face death, and it is the same hon. Kibuule who has entered the Parliamentary Chambers with a gun. When we requested that hon. Kibuule be searched, you saw how he was sandwiched and in the process, the gun went missing.

Madam Speaker, you have told us that we are here to represent our people. Yes, we are here to represent our people but we are not here to be killed by hon. Kibuule. I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, to find it within your heart that before we proceed with any business today, we should check each Member of Parliament so that we are satisfied that no one has a gun. This is about our lives; if you do not care, I do care about my life and I do not want to persuade you to care about yours because it is your business, but I care about my life. 

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is whether, after threats have been issued and they are on record, it is procedurally correct for us to proceed as if nothing has happened when hon. Kibuule has a gun, which has disappeared - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you are saying that threats were issued here, we have cameras and so I will get the evidence.  I will get the evidence from the cameras. Honourable members, please take your seats.

Honourable members, I have said if there are instances which have been captured on the camera, I will review them and update you. In the meantime, let us proceed. Honourable Minister of Energy -

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker -     

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, take your seats please. Hon. Kyagulanyi, order!

Honourable members, I am going to ask the Sergeant-at-Arms to search you all. Therefore, sit down and be searched. Sergeant-at-Arms, start from the middle and go row by row. Honourable members, sit down. You wanted a search; we are going to do the search. 

(A search of the Members was undertaken) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a search of Members in the suspected areas and in other areas has been completed and there are no guns. Let us proceed. Are you pointing there? Honourable members, this is filibustering. You pointed in that area and indicated the people and all those areas have been searched. Hon. Muloni, present your report.

MS IRENE MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The purpose of this statement is to present to the House the current status -

THE SPEAKER: Please, take your seats. Hon. Nambooze, take your seat.

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, the purpose of this statement is to update the House on the current status of the country’s oil and gas subsector - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwijukye, you are disrupting the proceedings. I am going to eject you from the House.

MS MULONI: Secondly, to update Members on the state of petroleum products stock in the country and finally, to lay two agreements before the House - the Inter-Governmental Agreement (IGA) and the Production Sharing Agreement (PSA).

Madam Speaker, Uganda’s Albertine Graben is now a mature oil and gas province and has nine production licences issued to Total E&P Uganda, CNOOC and Tullow.

The Front End Engineering Designs (FEED) for the nine production licences are being carried out. The FEED for the Kingfisher field development area, together with that of Kaiso-Tonya area, are expected to be completed by the end of this year. The FEED for the other seven production licences located in Buliisa and Nwoya districts are also expected to be concluded in June 2018 after which, the final investment decision will be made.

The field development plans for three discoveries, namely Jobi-East, Mpyo and Lyec, are being discussed between the Government and the licensees for issuance of additional production licences.

In order to realise the timeline for first oil in 2020, my ministry continues to work with other Government ministries, departments and agencies to collaboratively address the different requirements and challenges.

In order to achieve the key milestones leading to oil production, the following critical areas have been adequately financed and effectively managed on time by the appropriate Government ministries, departments and agencies: 

    a) infrastructure and logistics; 
    b) land acquisition; 
    c) Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA); 
    d) Lake Albert water extraction permitting; and 
    e) local content development.

Infrastructure and Logistics

On the roads and bridges, a number of key roads have been identified to support the timely production of oil and gas in the country. Cabinet approved funding amounting to US$ 531 million to be availed over two financial years. Five key roads have been prioritised and their feasibility studies and ESIA have been completed. The tendering process by UNRA for design and build for the roads is ongoing, with a target to award contracts by the end of September 2017 and works to commence by December 2017. This schedule is available if all the funds are availed.

Regarding the petroleum-based industrial parks, part of the 29 square kilometres of land being acquired in Kabaale in Hoima is to be developed into an oil and gas industrial park in pursuit of the Government policy on the establishment of industrial parks across the country to foster industrialisation and job creation. 

The oil and gas industrial park will host the refinery, an international airport, petro-chemical industries and energy based industries, among others. The master plan for the industrial park has been developed, taking into consideration the expected industries to be established in future, shared utilities and common services, management and financing structure of the park. The industrial park will be managed by the Uganda National Oil Company (UNOC).

On the Kabaale Airport and Terminal, the master plan and detailed engineering designs for phase one of the Kabaale airport was completed. Cabinet approved a loan amounting to Shs 1.3 trillion for the airport. The financing will be provided by the UK Export Finance (UKEF). The first phase of the airport is expected to be in place by the third quarter of 2019. The ministry will continue to collaborate with Ministry of Works and Transport and Civil Aviation Authority to ensure that the airport is ready by the target dates.
 
Land Acquisition 

Land is required for the upstream Central Processing Facilities (CPF), oil refinery, refined products pipeline and crude export pipeline. The Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework (LARF) for the upstream facilities was concluded. The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the upstream industrial area is ongoing. However, there are a number of challenges being faced such as valuation of community land, speculators and valuation rates.

Concerning the acquisition of land for the oil refinery development, this is almost complete with 98.8 per cent of the project-affected persons compensated. Relocation of the affected persons that opted for resettlement is ongoing and commissioning of their houses was done in August 2017. This land will include a livelihood restoration programme, to ensure that the affected persons are productive and comfortable in their new location. 

The challenges faced during the acquisition of the refinery land included high expectations of valuation rates by affected persons, continued incitement from Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) and speculation, among others.

Madam Speaker, land acquisition is becoming a big challenge that could potentially affect the timely implementation of the oil and gas projects. Compensating affected persons is becoming an expensive process.

Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 

All the oil and gas projects are required to conduct ESIA in order to identify the potential impacts of the project on the environment and social setting and propose appropriate solutions. The ESIAs are undertaken before the final investment decision of a project. This implies that timely approval of the ESIAs is important to avoid delays in taking the final investment decision, which would ultimately affect the timelines for oil production.

In order to avoid delays, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has taken a participatory approach during the process of conducting the ESIA in order to have efficient and timely approvals. In addition, NEMA has beefed up its human resource by recruiting additional staff to expedite the review process of the ESIAs.

Lake Albert Water Abstraction Permitting 

The oil and gas projects will require substantial water supply both at the construction and operation phases. The water demand at peak time during the construction phase of the key projects is estimated at 75,000 m3 per day. The water is expected to be abstracted from Lake Albert. Water abstraction from Lake Albert requires not only the approval by Ministry of Water and Environment but also a no-objection from the Nile Basin Initiative. My ministry will continue to engage the Ministry of Water and Environment to ensure that the necessary approvals are obtained in a timely manner and that water is supplied to support the construction and operation phases of the projects.

Local Content Development

The ministry is mandated with ensuring the development of national content in the oil and gas industry. The ministry's focus areas include:

    i) Capacity building of Ugandans; 
    ii) Transfer of knowledge and technology; 
    iii) Enterprise development; 
    iv) Employment of Ugandans. 

A draft national content policy was developed and is currently in Cabinet for approval. This policy will provide a framework for effectively implementing Government's national content goals. Regulations on local content to support the upstream and midstream Acts were developed and gazetted. The salient features of the regulations include:

a) 	Maintaining a national supplier’s database, which is the mandate of the Petroleum Authority of Uganda. An initial database has been developed following public advertisement.

b) 	Maintaining a national talent register. This database will capture the different professionals trained in oil and gas. Development of this database will be done by the Petroleum Authority of Uganda. 

c) 	The regulations identified 15 goods and services that are reserved for Ugandan suppliers. These include the areas of security, civil works, hotel accommodation and catering, environment studies and impact assessments, transportation, foods and beverages, human resources management, office supplies, fuel supplies, land surveying, clearing and forwarding, car hire, locally available construction materials, communication and information technology services and waste management where possible.

The ministry will continue to work with the relevant ministries, departments and agencies to ensure that local content targets are achieved.

Progress of the Oil Refinery Project 

Government is taking forward the development of the 60,000 barrels per day Greenfield Oil Refinery in Kabaale, Hoima District. The Government of Uganda, through my ministry, is in the process of identifying an investor who will finance, design, build and operate the refinery.

The ministry has commenced a new search for a refinery lead investor who will design, build, finance 100 per cent and operate this refinery. The Government of Uganda shall participate at the appropriate time through the Uganda Refinery Holding Company, which is a subsidiary of the National Oil Company. It is through the same subsidiary that the confirmed interests of the Republic of Kenya, of 2.5 per cent; the United Republic of Tanzania with 8 per cent; and Total E&P with 10 per cent, shall be held. 

The midstream Act and regulations are now in place and these provide a framework for the licensing of a lead investor. The ministry, therefore, intends to select the lead investor using the midstream Act.

A total of 40 companies expressed interest and out of the 40, the technical team identified eight companies which were invited for further engagement. Four companies were then progressed to the due diligence stage and subsequently, two consortia were recommended for negotiations of the Project Framework Agreement. 

The East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) Project 

Concerning the East African Crude Oil Pipeline Project, a decision was taken at the l3th Northern Corridor Integration Project (NCIP) Summit, which was held on 23 April 2016 in Kampala, to develop a crude oil export pipeline from Kabaale in Hoima District to Tanga Port in Tanzania, as the least costly route for transporting crude oil to the East African Coast. The districts traversed by the pipeline in Uganda are: Hoima, Kakumiro, Kyankwanzi, Mubende, Gomba, Ssembabule, Lwengo and Rakai. The l445km long (of which 288km is in Uganda) 24-inch diameter, heated and buried pipeline is being developed to provide access for Uganda's crude oil to the international market.

Bilateral negotiations between the Government of Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania for the development of an inter-governmental agreement for the East African Crude Oil Pipeline Project commenced in June 2016.

The Government of the United Republic of Tanzania, prior to the selection of the Hoima-Tanga route, offered fiscal incentives for the project, which played a key role in ensuring that this route would be the least costly route for the transportation of crude oil from Uganda to the East African Coast.

Because of the integrated nature of the pipeline system from the starting point in Hoima to the exit point at Tanga Port in terms of ownership, control and development, the Government of Uganda was required to match the fiscal incentives offered by the United Republic of Tanzania to ensure that a harmonised fiscal regime would be applied across the entire pipeline. The fiscal incentives for the project were key factors for the Inter-Governmental Agreement (IGA).

Madam Speaker, some of the other aspects contained in the IGA include the following:

    1. Commitment of each host country to implement the project; 
    2. Third party access to the pipeline; 
    3. Protection of investments in each host country, including provisions concerning expropriation and naturalisation; 
    4. Respective commitments of the host countries to guarantee performance by their state entities and agencies;
    5. Granting of land rights and necessary consents, permits and authorisations;
    6. Commitments to freedom of transit and free movement of project personnel and goods associated with project activities; 
    7. Government role in providing for the safety and security of the project; 
    8. Application of environmental, health and safety standards, which promote integrated pipeline operations in both states;
    9. Facilitation of the financing of the project by multilateral and export credit agencies; 
    10. Stabilisation of the legal regime applicable to the project.

Madam Speaker, upon concluding the bilateral negotiation in May 2017, the Inter-Governmental Agreement was signed in Kampala on 26 May 2017. It was later presented to Cabinet and approved for ratification on 18 August 2017. The Republic of Uganda, through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, ratified the Inter-Governmental Agreement on 15 September 2017. 

The following activities are ongoing as part of the pre-final investment decision, which will lead to the final investment decision in the first quarter of 2018: 

    a) The front end engineering is ongoing and is expected to be completed in October 2017; 
    b) The environmental and social impact assessment studies are ongoing both in Uganda and Tanzania. Studies are expected to be completed in February 2018 and thereafter, a final investment decision will be made. 

I wish to lay on the Table the Inter-Governmental Agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania concerning the pipeline system of the East African Crude Oil Pipeline Project. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, let me turn to the Production Sharing Agreement for the Kanywataba contract area. Following the enactment of the revised legal and regulatory framework for the oil and gas sector in Uganda, the Government implemented the first open, transparent and competitive licensing round as required by the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Act, 2013. The first licensing round for petroleum exploration was intended to:

    i) Attract additional investment in the country’s oil and gas sector; 
    ii) Expand the country’s resource base, which stands currently at 6.5 billion barrels in place, and thus increase the revenue base; and 
    iii) Enhance the country’s sustainability of oil and gas production. 

Given that this was the first competitive licensing round for the country, the ministry undertook a comprehensive process of approval of the blocks for licensing as required by the Petroleum Act, 2013. The selection of the blocks was based on availability of data and prospectivity. 

The first licensing round was implemented in three stages, namely the request for qualifications stage; the request for proposal stage; and the PSA negotiation stage. These three stages took 26 months from the date of announcement in February 2015. The sustained low oil prices affected the process of the licensing round, leading to protracted negotiations. 

In line with section 58 of the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Act, 2013, I granted a petroleum exploration licence to M/s Armour Energy Limited after signature of the Production Sharing Agreement with Government on 14 September 2017. The exploration area is 344 square kilometres in size and the exploration period is four years, split into two exploration periods each of two years. 

Issuance of a petroleum exploration licence to Armour Energy Limited brings in a new player into Uganda’s oil and gas field. This is in response to our objective as a ministry to ensure that the country’s resource base, which currently stands at 6.5 billion barrels, is expanded further by exploration efforts. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table a copy of the Production Sharing Agreement for petroleum exploration development and production in the Republic of Uganda by and between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and Armour Energy Limited for Kanywataba contract area, September 2017. I beg to lay. 

The Status of Petroleum Product Supply in the Country

Madam Speaker, let me turn to the status of petroleum product supply in the country, which has been stable. Loading out of the Kenya terminals of Eldoret, Kisumu, Nakuru, Konza and Mombasa, together with Dar es Salaam in Tanzania is normal with no interruptions. The imports into the country for mid-September was 85 million litres, comprised of about 35 million litres of petrol, about 43 million litres of diesel, 2.7 million litres of kerosene and 5 million litres of Jet A-1 fuel. 

Tendering for supply of products continues to take place monthly in Nairobi, Kenya, and tendering meetings are held for the supply for every month. The cargo received through Mombasa Port amounts to 92 per cent of our monthly requirements while the remainder (8 per cent) is through the Dar es Salaam port of Tanzania. 

The strategies to keep the country well supplied hinge on the effectiveness of the import routes and the in-country storage facilities. In this case, Mombasa and Dar es Salaam ports, together with other terminals in Kenya, are all being utilised by oil marketing companies to import products into Uganda. 

Through promotion of fair competition and effective licensing that has resulted in 43 active importing oil marketing companies in Uganda, the country has remained well supplied at competitive prices. We are also able to support the growing demand for petroleum products at 7 per cent per annum. 

As for the stocks, the country has a combined total cover of 14 days’ supply. Of these, 12 days are provided by the private oil marketing companies and two days by the Government storage facilities at Jinja. In view of the above, therefore, we are prepared and will continue to do everything possible to ensure a steady supply of petroleum products in the country. 

As I conclude, let me take this opportunity to thank you, Madam Speaker, and the Parliament of Uganda for the support you have extended to my ministry over time that has enabled us to achieve our mandate in all the subsectors. My ministry will continue to count on your support and will continue to fulfil our objectives towards achieving a middle income status. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for that information. Let us have some comments. 

4.18
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I am moving a motion without notice under rule 50 of our Rules of Procedure. My motion is to the effect that we defer consideration of this statement because it has been read in bad faith. 

African countries such as Angola, Nigeria, South Sudan, Guinea and Libya are endowed with resources but because they have failed to sort out their internal disagreements, this oil has gone to waste. 

Madam Speaker, the last time you sent us to South Sudan, we arrived -

THE SPEAKER: What is the motion about?

MR SSEMUJJU: The motion, moved under rule 50, is to the effect that we suspend consideration of this statement. If you will allow me, I can justify it. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The point I am raising is that African countries, with all the resources available to them, have remained very poor. I was giving the example of South Sudan. The last time we went to South Sudan as a delegation of this Parliament, with all their oil resources they were unable to run a Government but they run to commercial banks. In fact, we arrived with a delegation of the Public Accounts Committee and they had cancelled all the cheques they had issued through commercial banks.

As I speak to this Parliament, we have the military on the loose. They are beating Kyambogo students as well as people in Mbale, Mukono, Kireka, Lira and Pader. I know that there are MPs who are obsessed with the life presidency and they have forgotten that when they were in Kyankwanzi, they were discussing moving Uganda to a middle class status. They have even forgotten the time they spent in Kyankwanzi –(Interjections)– If you can only listen. Maybe, Madam Speaker, you will have to -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you get to the point? You are wasting our time.

MR SSEMUJJU: Yes, but I am being insulted.

THE SPEAKER: You are insulting Members.

MR SSEMUJJU: I am being insulted by Capt. Guma who was in jail over murder. 

Madam Speaker, because of what I have described that is outside this Parliament, including continued presence of police, military and guns around Parliament, it is important that Members of Parliament discuss the issue of oil when the atmosphere outside is not that of intimidation.

Madam Speaker, last week our plea to the presiding Speaker was to have Parliament adjourn so that we can create an atmosphere of peace. If you noted, those who are in a hurry to have the life presidency were just talking and not listening. Therefore, oil being a very important resource of this country, I think it would be irresponsible on our part if we rushed through a statement of this significance - the status of preparedness of the oil and gas subsector for the country to achieve first oil in 2020, the status of petroleum products stocks and the laying of agreements before the House.

I know there can be excitement but those of us who have lived here have seen all this. I saw hon. Amama Mbabazi and you know where he is –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, please take your seat.

4.24
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, thank you for allowing me to move this as a matter of national importance, which your office has followed to date.
	
Madam Speaker, I raised this as a matter of national importance because I am aware that this country has extended US$ 3.6 billion to discover oil to date without parliamentary approval. In addition, this Government is about to commit this country to another US$ 25 billion without parliamentary approval. Article 159 of the Constitution provides that Government will not commit this country into any future payments without parliamentary approval.

Honourable colleagues, we always get loan requests here of US$ 1 million, US$2 million or US$3 million and we take a lot of time on them. I would like, from the onset, to say that it is wrong for this country to commit - The minister has just told you about the front end engineering. The financial investment decision, when done next year, is going to commit subcontractors and contractors without local content.

Can I, therefore, rephrase for the minister what is on the Hansard - the questions I asked - because this text does not represent what I requested to be brought before the Floor of Parliament. This document is devoid of figures; I hope it is not deliberate. It is devoid of deadlines and a budget. How can we achieve oil in 2020 if we do not have a matrix? Madam Speaker, I asked for a matrix and I have shared this with the Prime Minister. I asked for a matrix on this Floor, giving the role of every ministry as this is an inter-ministerial sector.

I would like to thank the Minister of Lands and Housing who came to Buliisa and who knows the problems that we have. However, she has no budget. The Ministry of Energy and Minerals is only a lead ministry and it is speaking on behalf of the Ministry of Works and Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). 

For God’s sake, UNRA has no contractor on the oil roads! However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. It has no funding. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will not go to Exim Bank, China to secure the US$ 600 million unless UNRA has a memorandum of understanding. I have studied that and I advised the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in 2008, while in the Committee of National Economy, on how Exim Bank operates.

How can you tell Parliament that we have road contractors and that the roads are going to come? There is no road contractor in Buliisa; there is no contract in UNRA; there is no Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development memorandum of understanding with foreign affairs in China. How can we be taken for granted, discussing age limit when things are going wrong! (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, if the minister is not able to speak on behalf of other ministries - I mean well for this country and I say this in good faith; the honourable minister Lokeris came here and gave us this theory. We asked other ministries to give us theirs - Ministry of Works, how many roads are you constructing and at how much? Where is the budget? I raised this matter in the last budget and they said, “10 per cent budget cuts across the board”. Show me where that money is.

As we speak, Ministry of Lands is looking for money to avail land in Buliisa. The Ministry of Local Government is looking for money to put in place a special Albertine planning zone, which the President spoke about in 2010. There is no money for my town councils; there is no money for Hoima City. Do you want another slum in Hoima so that you come with a constitutional amendment to access a pipeline and other developments? That should not be the way to go. 

The Ministry of Water and Environment has a big role to play in the Albertine. It is a sensitive area of ecological biodiversity. We therefore need National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) preparedness. Buliisa does not have NEMA offices. I do not even have an environment officer nor is there one on the other site of Nwoya. Therefore, we need a budget for the environment, a budget for NEMA.

In addition, the amount of water to be used in the refinery is so much that National Water and Sewerage Corporation cannot even handle –

THE SPEAKER: Please, try to wind up.

MR MUKITALE: I am just stating the questions that the minister was supposed to respond to. I would like to request the minister to respond to the questions that we asked.

My other concern is that the minister is explaining how we intend to import. The question was: why have you chosen to go for export of crude pipelines without a refinery so that we import substitute? That was the question. What informed that decision? How far have we gone with the refinery? Is it a problem of state participation so that we are giving it purely to the private sector without Government and neighbours getting involved? 

We would like to hear about local content. Honourable minister, why don’t you give us the US$ 25 billion? Can I help and give you details? You are already committing this country by way of a pipeline to Tanzania, exporting jobs worth over US$ 2.5 billion and yet the industrial park you are talking about in Hoima will only work if we have a refinery. Why would we industrialise when we are exporting jobs to the coast? That does not explain our intentions as a country. 

Honourable minister, I am speaking about this and you know I have been fighting. As people of Buliisa, we do not know whether we have land or not. I would like to thank the Eighth Parliament and the Ninth Parliament for the support rendered to the people of Buliisa. 

When Minister Betty Amongi came to Buliisa, she found that 36 villages, where all the oil wells and pipelines are situated, are already titled in Kampala, not by the Bagungu or the community. As we speak, my people are in prison and are being evicted. Bamugemereire stopped in Hoima and did not go to Buliisa because those titles are being used in courts of law against the legitimate communities that have been living on this land. Can this injustice continue without being addressed? The Ministry of Lands cannot solve this matter because they do not have money. 

Rt Hon. Prime minister, as a way forward, why don’t you request the minister in charge of lands to come and give her story on oil and gas and the minister in charge of works to come and give her part, because it is not only roads –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you have made that point eloquently on three occasions. Please, conclude. I will ask hon. Ogenga to give a supplementary.

MR MUKITALE: I am wondering why the minister continues bringing a different story instead of answering the real questions, which would give us a solution. Can I request the Prime Minister to ensure that we get a matrix giving every ministry its responsibility, activities, budget and timelines? We will then be able to say, oil 2020 and refinery 2022. 

Most important for this Parliament is: of this $ 25 billion, how much will be local content in terms of supplies and subcontractors? This is because with the US$ 3.6 billion, we did not even get 20 per cent local content. I thank you very much.

4.33
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (FDC, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I returned to this Parliament last year, I was chairman of the Acholi Technical Working Committee on Oil and Gas and this position allowed me to know a lot of things about Ugandan oil. 

Listening to the minister, I stand here to ask the country to give it a lot more thought than the statement the minister has made. In the first instance, I see the minister today very nicely tabling production sharing agreements about oil fields that we do not know if we will strike oil in. I wish the minister had taken pride in presenting to this House the production sharing agreements for the oil for which we are building refineries, for the oil for which we are building a pipeline and the oil for which we are committing a lot of resources of this country. 

The country will be absolutely shocked because this oil that we are going to produce is not a lot of oil. Nigeria pumps out one million barrels a day. Those of you who have gone to rural Nigeria will see what that oil has done for rural Nigeria. Ours is going to be just 200,000 barrels. 

See how we are treating agriculture. Not a long time ago, we were crying about drought and shortage of food. We are raising the expectations of Ugandans yet the production sharing agreements mean that the oil companies will have to take back most of the money. They have to recover their money before we even touch it. 

It is very deadly for this country, Madam Speaker, that I would suggest that the relevant committee should scrutinise this statement so that we have a very comprehensive position on oil. There is a desire to rush the process but it will not help us. We have to honestly review what the implications are. 

I beg that you allow Parliament to scrutinise. Some of us will be able to participate in that process because three minutes are not sufficient for me to deliver the point I am making. If we do not treat this thing honestly, we are in trouble. Thank you.

4.36
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have historical memory on the petroleum laws that we put in place, and one of the biggest worries we had was about the capacity of Parliament to closely monitor transactions in the oil sector. Leaving this to the committee without having the experts will be a disservice to the nation. 

Therefore, I would still urge, because it was in our report, that we get that relevant Committee on Natural Resources and beef them up with the required experts so that as Parliament, we can monitor closely. The provision to table all these agreements is there and so, we expect them to be tabled on the Floor of Parliament. We hope that those agreements are available for scrutiny.

Madam Speaker, I have to express a big worry, which I have observed over the years. We have invested a lot of time in politics more than in real development. If you look at the previous elections – (Interjection) – Madam Speaker, these are very fundamental points for this country. Whenever we have elections, the country loses two years and some businesses close. If I take the case of tourism, during the time of elections, there is no tourism and many hotels go dry. After elections, we wait for one year to settle down. 

As we speak, the economy of Uganda is bleeding and this is not a small matter. I do not know what is going on. If you look at the current Gross Domestic Product (GDP), we slid to 3.5 per cent. When you look at Rwanda, they are at 6 per cent and Kenya is at 5.5 per cent. 

Kenya, irrespective of having elections, including having a court ruling against the presidency, have won the confidence of investors because of the stability that we see in Kenya. (Applause) These are fundamental matters. It seems we have invested heavily in politics and left out the real development that should move us to the 2020 commitment. 

Madam Speaker, if you look at this report, it tells you that much of what we do is writing nice things but without action; we are not doing much. I think this culture must change. If we are going to move at this pace for - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude in half a minute.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much. I would like to inform the country that as we speak today, China is doing away with the use of diesel and petrol; they are going electric. The moment we continue slowing down, we will have nowhere to sell our oil and that will be total wastage of all the efforts we have put in. I pray that we prioritise this instead of running with all these Bills that I do not understand.

4.40
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise the voice of the people of Bunyoro in addition to what my colleagues, hon. Mukitale and hon. Ruhunda Alex, have raised. We have seen an industry being hosted by the Banyoro but being driven through back doors. We actually do not know where this industry is. I do not understand – (Interruption) 

MS AKELLO FRANCA: Madam Speaker, I have been in this House since its commencement. Is it in order for the Deputy Attorney-General, hon. Rukutana, to continue sleeping to the extent of snoring?  (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I did not see him sleeping. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, you can see why we are fighting against the removal of this very important clause - the age limit. When you see Members of the House trying to meditate when it is cold like this -  

Madam Speaker, the issue I was raising is that the industry is being driven without the involvement of the host community. I do not understand whether involvement only means calling chairpersons and LCV’s. I cannot remember any activity where Members of Parliament from Bunyoro subregion, who are to the tune of 19, have participated in this sector. I am the chairperson of that caucus. 

I would like to raise a point on land acquisition. The issue of land acquisition was raised in the minister’s statement on page 4 and it took two dimensions- compensating people who were willing to take money and resettlement. I would like to particularly emphasise the issue of the women who were not duly compensated and resettled. This matter has come up before –(Interruption) 

MS KAAHWA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Land acquisition in the oil area is a problem. I heard the minister talk about the refinery and the international airport. However, all the project affected persons are crying. The majority have not received their money. Like my colleague has said, the project is becoming a disaster in the area. Our prayer is that the people of Bunyoro should be involved in the project. Thank you.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, may I request for one minute to wind up because I was disrupted by the sleep of some Members here – (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last month, my colleagues and I visited a place that was set aside to resettle the people who chose to be resettled. There are 96 households, but they have constructed the houses in a town. They bought land for individuals and instead of constructing houses on those pieces of land they have congregated these villagers into a town –(Interjections)– into a camp. 

We managed to find one house occupied but many of them have rejected those houses. Their reason is that it is not conducive to the village setting which they are used to. You find one unit is on a plot of 100 by 50. It is making it difficult for the people to rare their chicken, goats and harvest maize – (Member timed out.)

4.46
MS ADONG LILLY (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for giving this brief report. It is unfortunate because it is becoming difficult to be a leader in this country. Many of our colleagues are privy to information but they keep the information to themselves and leave other leaders in the darkness and yet they raise the expectations of Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, I will focus on the issue of land acquisition. We know that these projects, as the minister has rightly said, require a lot of land and it is stretching not only Bunyoro but also different areas of the country. This leaves room for suspicion, given the fact that we are moving to amend the Constitution to allow compulsory acquisition of land before payment. It leaves a lot of room for suspicion.

Concerning the crude oil pipeline, we travelled to Tanzania, courtesy of the minister, and the President of Tanzania was very clear on this; he informed his people where the pipelines were passing and what people should expect. He went ahead to warn them not to continue with any other development but only the compensation that will fall within whatever law they have.  However, in this country, we do not have a law.

In Nwoya District, we have land but Government’s concentration is only in Bunyoro. In Nwoya District, people are just being chased from their land and very close to the pipeline there is no information. When you look at the oil belt in Nwoya, the next exploration site should be east of the river bank, in Nwoya, but they went straight to Arua, which is a hilly site, and left the area where we suspect there is oil. They have left people struggling. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the people in Government to remember that we all wish this country well. Irrespective of your status, whether you have money or not, Uganda is for all of us. Let us all work to make sure that whatever mandate we have is for the people- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Finally, let us have hon. Niwagaba. After him, I would like to propose that we send the statement to the Committee on Natural Resources to examine in particular the effect of the settlements and agreements on the population there and give us a report. 

4.49
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we passed the upstream and midstream Acts in respect to this sector, there were three major areas we gave due consideration and these were access to information, transparency and environment. The statement that has been given by the minister falls short on all those aspects. 

We would need to know, for example, as of now how much recoverable costs are due and owing to the oil companies. We would need to know how much we would expect as a country to recover from this resource to first settle the recoverable costs, which take a first call on our money. We would also need to know the priority of infrastructure. Why is there a mad rush by Government to construct a pipeline, which will be one of the longest in the world, moreover it is heated? What will the costs incurred be in having that heated pipeline vis-à-vis revenues the country will receive? 

Why should a pipeline take precedence over a refinery? Between a refinery and a pipeline, where would Ugandans benefit most? Could it be true that commissions were discussed in Paris by some members in Government to fast track a pipeline as opposed to a refinery, which would benefit the people? There are those concerns, Madam Speaker, that need to be addressed.

There is the issue of Kabaale airport, where people have been displaced. Of recent, in my district we get buses full of people almost every day being ferried from Rwanda and Congo and allegedly being taken to this area. What is the motive of taking these foreigners to those areas when you have already displaced your own citizens? Where are these people coming from? 

You also know that this particular resource of ours has a very limited timespan. To my knowledge, this oil will be exhausted in 25 to 30 years. Have you considered the cost of decommissioning and whether, ultimately, if you put in recoverable and decommissioning costs, this resource will be of any benefit to us?

These are some of the concerns I would like the committee to first look at, Madam Speaker. I support the honourable members who have recommended that this particular statement –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The statement is committed to the Committee on Natural Resources. They will visit the site and establish what is going on. The minister should bring the matrix and hand it over to the committee.

MR MUNYAGWA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure based on rule 73 of our Rules of Procedure. It clearly states that a Member of Parliament shall dress in a dignified manner. However, the Government Chief Whip dresses in a manner that leaves part of her breasts uncovered. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, she was here and I tried to talk to her. Where she is seated, she is facing me and I am sexually molested. (Laughter) Is it procedurally right for an honourable member to sexually molest another?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I can say that I expect all the Members to dress properly, decently and not to cause undue discomfort to colleagues in this House. (Laughter)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.55
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, this is a brief to Parliament on the development of Kampala Industrial and Business Park, Namanve. This statement is in response to Parliament’s concerns about the state of affairs at the Kampala Industrial and Business Park, Namanve, particularly addressing the issue of sale of plots by private individuals within the park.

The Namanve Industrial Park was degazetted by Statutory Instrument No.1 of 1997 from a forest reserve to an industrial park. However, the actual physical development commenced in 2007 with initial financial development support from the World Bank, which injected $8 million for infrastructural development.

Government of Uganda’s main objective is to create employment for Ugandans, ease investment land accessibility, introduce new research technologies, skills development and finally, increase Uganda’s revenue base.

This 2,200-acre facility, located along Jinja Road, lies in the two districts of Wakiso and Mukono. All its land has been allocated to 296 investors for development in various subsectors such as agro processing- (Interruption)– Can I be listened to?

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MR KASAIJA: This 2,200-acre facility, located along Jinja Road, lies in two districts, Wakiso and Mukono. All its land has been allocated to 296 investors for development in various subsectors such as agro processing, mineral processing, ICT, logistics and freight warehousing, general manufacturing as well as tourism promotion activities.

Madam Speaker, it is anticipated that the completion of this industrial park will greatly boost the agricultural and mineral sectors through adding value to locally available raw materials. Indeed, already, several industries are operating within the park such as Kyagalanyi Coffee, Century Bottling Company and Steel and Tube Industries, to mention but a few.

Current Level of Development

Twenty-one industries are currently in operation, directly employing 11,000 Ugandans. Seventy projects have commenced construction, thus creating an additional 17,000 indirect short-term contract jobs, while 150 companies are still in the prestart stages, and these too will create employment for the various white-collar professionals.

We anticipate full-scale implementation of the industrial park in the next few years, where 200,000 Ugandans will be employed within this facility. This will become Uganda’s largest industrial hub, expected to generate US$ 540 million in taxes per annum from the 296 industries that will be operating therein. To achieve this milestone, Government of Uganda is mobilizing US$ 151 million from Exim Bank of India to complete the infrastructure development in the park.

Land Sale Claims

Madam Speaker, it is not true that there are investors selling land within the industrial park as this out rightly contravenes the land lease covenants that are issued by the Uganda Investment Authority. Once discovered, this forms a very good ground for outright withdrawal of land since it confirms that the allocated investor was a speculator.

The adverts referred to by the honourable member are in reference to land belonging to the neighbours, who include Prof. Minaz Karmali, Mr Frobisher and the Balangira clan members from Daudi Chwa.

The boundaries of the Namanve Industrial Park are very clearly surveyed and labelled with huge boundary border markers, to clearly distinguish them from neighbouring lands and avert encroachment. On that note, Madam Speaker, I would like to lay the plan of the Namanve Industrial Park on the Table before Parliament.

Madam Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have already ruled on that matter. Order, Members!

MR KASAIJA: Secondly, I would like to lay on the Table a copy of the standard lease agreement Uganda Investment Authority signed with various investors. I beg to lay. Thank you very much for listening to me.

5.04
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County Serere): Thank you Madam Speaker. I am the one who raised that question arising from two adverts that were run in the newspapers of December 2016 and January 2017.

I wish the honourable minister had carried that advert here, which I laid at the Table, then he would have been able to see from that map which he is showing here that the block is outside the plan he has put here. However, now that you have not come with that advert and you have not shown us that that block or plot is not part and parcel of the park, I find it very difficult to accept your response.

Madam Speaker, we may have to refer this matter to the committee to verify this information because the minister’s response still leaves a lot to be desired. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) must be able to dig into this and confirm whether what the honourable minister is tabling here is true. I find it very difficult to accept the response because you have not specifically stated that the block and plot is not part of this bigger plan here.

THE SPEAKER: Can we direct the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to take the minister’s statement and map and go and establish what the minister has said and give us a report at the earliest opportunity.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister’s statement was on the sale of plots of land in Namanve Industrial Park by private individuals. The minister has only told us how many investors have been licensed on this land but he has not come to grips with the question about the sale of that land by private individuals. 

I listened throughout the presentation of the report and the minister never came out succinctly to address this House on this issue. Some of us have very serious concerns about the so called investors being allocated prime land and they end up giving it away, putting up private homes in these Namanve plots. We have seen public land constantly being abused, to the extent that private individuals take over this land.

Also, there is conspiracy; they put forward the faces of foreigners and once they acquire land, they withdraw and the sharks take over. A case in point is when His Excellency the President had a very colourful function of ground breaking of the Nakawa-Naguru Satellite City but to date, eight years down the road, nothing is visible. For once, can’t the Government and ministers feel ashamed and stop bringing shame to the President! This is because on most occasions they allocate these plots of land in the name of the President but nothing is on the ground.

When you look at the minister’s shallow statement, which is even worthless-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would like to inform you that there is something on the ground. There are new buildings being constructed in Naguru; bungalows are being constructed there. Whose bungalows? We do not know. Who allowed them? We do not know. However, I have seen them from the air.

MR SEGGONA: May I be guided, and I am sure the minister would love to hear this before he answers, if you permit.

Madam Speaker, I have raised this matter here before, and it is a constitutional issue. Reading Article 237 of our Constitution, you will find that land in Uganda belongs to Ugandans. In Article 237(2) (b), the Government of Uganda or a local government can only own land in trust for the people of Uganda. Those were the words used. 

There is no law or policy guided by law under which Government is permitted to give away our land. Secondly, because of the absence of that law, there are no sanctions placed against those people we give land to do particular investment for the development of Uganda and in the end sell it for a profit.

There has been a petition and there is a decision of this House concerning certain individuals that were given land in Bugolobi. They got it for free, sold it for a profit and never utilized it for the purpose. The reason is because there is lack of a legislative framework. You cannot even draft a policy.

May the minister inform this Parliament who gives them the power to donate our land-(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the Member to Article 238 and 239 of the Constitution. Article 238 establishes the Uganda Land Commission and Article 239 gives the functions of the Uganda Land Commission: “The Uganda Land Commission shall hold and manage any land in Uganda vested in or acquired by the Government of Uganda in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and shall have such other functions as may be prescribed by Parliament”. 

Under this Article, the Land Act gives specific functions to the Uganda Land Commission to manage, lease and do any other things within the law, and it is within that function of vesting land under Uganda Land Commission that leasing of land vested in Government of Uganda is being done by Government. I thank you. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister gave me information and I received it. If only Gen. Moses Ali would respect my professional seniority over him - because we are discussing law. 

I expected the minister to point out a particular provision of the law that allows either Government or its agencies to give away land without a regulatory framework. There is no regulatory framework on what you do with those so called investors that you give free land. The question on the Floor is about those people who were given land for investment and ended up selling it. This is the question that the minister is grappling with. 

The question is: what do you do with those people when you have no regulatory framework? I have read the Land Act more times than the minister has done and I have also taught other people about the Land Act. There is no clause in that Act, which allows Uganda Land Commission to give away land because it is a constitutional requirement to hold it in trust for the people. Therefore, when you are giving it away, it must be for the benefit of the people. 

Therefore, what do the people of Uganda stand to benefit when you, for example, give it to hon. Betty Amongi and she sells it to me for a profit? There is no law on that, and how do you punish them?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I would therefore urge Government and this Parliament to take an audit of all public and strategic land that has been given out to the investors who turn out to be bogus investors. At the end of the day, Ugandans lose these prime properties –(Interjections)- can we have an audit of the Shimoni Demonstration School land, Naguru-Nakawa land, Namanve, Luzira, Butabika, Nsambya and many other pieces of land that we have lost as a country and the investors turn out to be bogus and rip off this country of the valuable and strategic properties?               

THE SPEAKER: I think you will have to formalise it properly.

5.13
MR MICHAEL KABAZIGURUKA (FDC, Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Way back in May, I led a delegation from Nakawa of the former tenants; we came to your office and petitioned you. Unfortunately, due to my condition, I was not able to present the petition myself. I requested my colleague, hon. Roland Kaginda, to present the petition before Parliament on my behalf. I am informed that the Speaker referred the matter to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. 

Madam Speaker, there are quite a number of issues surrounding that project, given the fact that initially the contract was signed by the Ministry of Local Government and OPEC Prime Properties. Thereafter, the Minister for the Presidency came into the picture and extended the contract of OPEC. I image that this would go under the Committee on Presidential Affairs for further management. 

However, Madam Speaker, another point I would like to make - unfortunately, the Minister for KCCA plus her deputy are all not around - is that the two ministers have written to the President advising him that the former tenants be relocated to any other place. These are people who have a valid memorandum of understanding with Government of Uganda signed by Ministry of Local Government with the former tenants. 

However, without consulting them, the minister went ahead to write to the President and said, “Let us relocate these people to any other place”. The President also wrote back and said “I am fully in agreement with that arrangement”, without consulting the tenants. Furthermore, the Minister for Kampala, Mayor of Nakawa and Deputy Resident District Commissioner (RDC) rushed to the Office of the Prime Minister and told the Prime Minister that the mayor was mobilising the former tenants to forcefully re-enter this land. Therefore, it was a matter of urgency.

When they met the Prime Minister, he set up a committee to look into that matter. That committee is headed by the Minister for KCCA. This is the same minister who had already written to the President suggesting that the tenants should be relocated. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to request that the issue of Nakawa-Naguru tenants be handled expeditiously and if possible, it should be referred to the Committee on Presidential Affairs since it is a KCCA related matter. If not, a select committee be set up to look into this matter and the other matters as hon. Ssekikubo suggested. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Clerk to establish what is happening and how far they have gone with that petition. I wrote to the Ministry of Justice about that issue and to the Attorney-General to inform us on what is happening at Naguru and Nakawa because things are ongoing. 

5.18
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Namanve was de-gazetted by an Act of Parliament 20 years ago. The minister has just reported here that so far, we have 21 industries, which means one industry per year, on 2,200 acres of land. However, even the land that was not de-gazetted, under block 12 up to 20, is now occupied. 

We all know what an industry is. Apart from Steel Rolling Mills and Century Bottling Company, the other people are building warehouses at best while others are building residential houses. Madam Speaker, even if you go to Namanve now, you will see billboards advertising land for sale. There are people that have built supermarkets - 

I do propose that we need a bigger investigation into the land that has been encroached on, which was supposed to remain as a forest reserve.  Secondly, we should investigate those people who have constructed residential houses and warehouses instead of industries. Thirdly, those people who have sold off this land and the adverts are still running need to be investigated. 

As a municipality, we have been coming and reporting this matter. Instead of protecting the remaining part of Namanve, the ministry has now gone ahead to encroach on another forest called Namyoya with an average of 35,000 acres. 

Madam Speaker, we, the people of Mukono are sad. We are not aware of the existence of these so called jobs because the fact of the matter is that we do not have industries in Namanve. The minister should therefore not be allowed to come here and tell lies to this honourable House unchallenged.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I beg that you order for an extensive investigation in this matter, especially on the issue of that land that was not de-gazetted under the Act but has also been given away. Thank you very much.

5.22
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the minister said, part of this industrial park is in my constituency because I stay in Bukasa. I think the minister, in preparing this statement, did not read the Auditor-General’s report. I chaired COSASE in the last Parliament and the Auditor-General reported and we considered this matter. 

First of all, between the ministers responsible and the President, they agreed that some companies involved in tourism agro processing and ICT can be given free land in Namanve because an acre of land was being given out at US$ 800,000. What the minister in charge of investment did then was to find some companies, including one that is selling furniture, and gave them free land and said that the furniture is agro processing. All these are part of the report of the Auditor-General. 

I have interacted with the current minister in charge of investment because I have an interest since this is my neighbourhood. At one time, I saw her threatening to cancel titles of those who were not using the land. When I called her, she was doing some work until she got consumed in the promotion of life presidency. I saw her and she even visited the area many times. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I think the specific issue of Namanve has gone the same way many of the public lands in Uganda went. You remember what happened to Shimoni. The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, former UPC Whip, hon. Betty Amongi, who used to sit on our side, read Articles of the Constitution claiming that Uganda Land Commission through its Government can give out land. 

The late Mayanja Nkangi, former Chairperson of Uganda Land Commission, actually wrote protesting the manner in which Shimoni had been seized. He said because the investment by Alwaleed did not take place, that land was supposed to revert back to Government. However, between yourselves - ministers and some scavengers in town - you decided that what was meant to be a hotel is now a shopping mall. 

When we raise these issues - I know those of you who are obsessed with promoting life presidency might not know the implications of what you are promoting. Once you have a leader who is unaccountable, I can tell you even human beings can be sold. Someone who thinks Uganda is an inheritance from his father can apportion it –(Member timed out.)

5.26
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I make a general comment, I would like to say that we visited Namanve Industrial Park as the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. It is therefore very surprising when you look at the brief that the minister has given, which says $8,000,000 was borrowed from the World Bank for infrastructural development of that industrial park. 

One issue that I recall very well is that when we went to Sadolin, they did tell us that all the sewer systems there are not connected to the national sewerage system. Each industry had its own sewer pit and when it rained, they would simply open the sewage system and everything is swept into the running water.

The roads that Government constructed, for example the road from Jokas Hotel going straight to the Namanve Industrial Park, is not complete. The only road they have constructed there is opposite the Coca-Cola plant and then it runs towards Sadolin as if you are heading to a feeder road and it stops in some trading centre there. 

The minister sounds rosy for nothing about Namanve Industrial Park. That is why when she says that this will become Uganda’s largest industrial park expected to generate over 540 million dollars in taxes per annum, she technically dodges the question of when. When will these earnings start coming? This is because the industries you are talking about there are the Namanve Coca-Cola plant and Sadolin which has been sold recently to a Japanese company called Kansai Paint Company. The question we would ask is: where are the shares of Sadolin for which Government spent a lot on development? What is our stake in this investment? This is because they sold it and earned over Shs 313 billion. 

Generally, on the question of land, Madam Speaker, as I thank you, I think we need to do a forensic audit of where the Government and the public land is. In whom are they truly vested and for how long? When will they revert to Uganda? Short of that, we will always sound technically correct –(Member time out.)

5.26
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is just a supplementary issue. I sympathise with the minister because there are issues around Namanve that crisscross a number of other ministries - Lands is an interested party, Ministry of Water, forestry, NEMA and others. When I listen to his statement from the perspective of finance, which basically is Uganda Investment Authority, it totally ignores the other broad areas. 

I just have two issues to raise. First, I would like to ask the minister, now that he has presented that report, is he aware that there is a programme to de-gazette the remaining forest in Namanve and how far has that gone? Was the other piece of land not enough that they are now encroaching on another forest reserve? 

This is coming under urban forest planning where many urban centres are giving away forests including Entebbe, Gulu, Kabarole, Arua and others. However, this is a plan I do not know whether you are aware of and whether what was previously given to Namanve has adequately been covered.

Secondly, I think Parliament needs to take keen interest in the issue of land. Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is in a total quagmire; they are incompetent, corrupt and they actually do not know what they are presiding over. I think there is need for this Parliament to take keen interest in this because land is a big issue. The issue of urban land is at the forefront. The way land is being grabbed and changing hands from institutions to individuals to private entities is shocking.

There is a lot of Government land that has been taken over by private individuals. Land belonging to Ministry of Defence like the one in Kiryandongo was also grabbed by an individual –(Member timed out.)

5.32
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform the honourable minister that we really have a challenge, if he is not aware. I remember in 2014, when H.E the President came to officially open Roofings Ltd, I told him - by that time I was a mayor - that many plots in Namanve were given to individuals. That is why serious developers are leaving Namanve and are going up to Mbalala and Kayanja where land is a bit cheaper.

Madam Speaker, there is a school near Namanve and almost half of its land was taken over with the claim that it is under Uganda Investment Authority. Secondly, at that time hon. Betty Nambooze and I put up resistance when I was a mayor; they transferred the boundaries of Mukono to as far as Coca-Cola. Mukono was almost up to the new SGS factory but they transferred the boundary so that they get rid of the people of Mukono and go to Wakiso where people do not shout a lot.

Madam Speaker, a list must be produced. I am going to request my former town clerk to come up with another list so that we compare notes. You will see that many plots belong to individuals, who are selling them for $1 million and forcing investors to go to the swamps of Mbalala and other surrounding areas. That is the reality. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I understand you did not answer the question.

5.35
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now that we seem to be taking a decision that the matter be referred to the committee, it is my prayer that that be done, then I will come with all my technical information and people so that we can iron it out. 

All I would like to say is that it has not been rosy; I must say that. We had problems and that is why we had to change management, but I cannot give you details in a statement like this. We shall come and give those details to the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item No. 4 (ii), Ministry of Water and Environment. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DISEASE ATTACK ON THE EUCALYPTUS PLANTATIONS IN KYENJOJO AND NEIGHBOURING DISTRICTS

5.35
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Water and Environment requested that he be given time next week to present this statement.

THE SPEAKER: I hope he really comes. This question has been on the Order Paper for a long time.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, this matter has been pending for a long time -(Interjections)- Yes! The point we are making is that you cannot cause the Speaker and the Clerk to arrange the Order Paper and because you want to rush to some other item, therefore, you want the minister to appear not to be around –(Interjections)- No, you cannot raise “order” on this matter. You know it.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I was informed by my minister who requested for time. I have listened to hon. Ssekikubo, who is imputing improper motives on me, that I am using this because I have interest in bringing another matter yet I was communicating an apology from my minister. I wonder whether he is really in order to impute improper motives.

The minister requested for time and I agree with you, Madam Speaker. I have been a tree grower since 2003. I have been planting eucalyptus, mangoes and pine. I am interested in making sure that we get a solution to the disease, which is attacking our forests. I am a tree grower myself. Therefore, I agree with you that we must bring this matter next week so that the people who are in the business of saving our country by planting trees can be settled and that the matter be handled.

THE SPEAKER: This question should therefore be answered without fail next week. It is endangering the economy of the people in Kyenjojo.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DEATH OF A YOUTH IN MARACHA WEST CONSTITUTENCY WHILE IN POLICE CUSTODY

5.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, hon. Jeje Odong is not in the country. Hon. Obiga Kania, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs - (Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I am aware that the Order Paper that is before the House this afternoon came out last evening or at worst this morning. Is the Government Chief Whip in order to encourage her ministers to be lazy and lousy by coming to give excuses on the Floor? I think this is taking the House for granted. Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, whatever it is, the questions need answers. The Members want to know what happened. Item No. 5.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, at the pain of appearing not to be aware of the excuses given by the minister, there is life involved under this item - the death of the youth in Maracha. If this Parliament cannot impress it on Government that on questions regarding life, whatever excuses we have, even if Government was not prepared at this point in time, we needed a preliminary statement - 

Should we gloss over matters that even involve the death of the people we represent in this House and the Government Chief Whip stands up to say for one reason or the other the two ministers holding the docket are not around? In some instances, I have seen Lt Gen. Tumukunde here standing in on matters of security, if it was really security related. The death arose out of security concerns – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, why I am really concerned and must give this information is that as we were entering this Parliament, hon. Mario Obiga Kania, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, was moving out of Parliament and he was aware of what was on the Order Paper. Somebody called the “Government Chief Whip” is whispering to me that he informed her. It is not enough.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs should come tomorrow and answer this question about the death of this young man.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, according to our Constitution, the Government is supposed to protect citizens. If someone died in prison and this was raised and nobody can really come up and talk about it, then it is very dangerous. 

The procedural issue I am raising is that I have seen one of the guys who is the lead person in removing the age limit and he is from Arua, and Maracha is in Arua –(Interruption)

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, in this Parliament we are guided by rules and certain codes of conduct. Is it in order for a senior member of this Parliament, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who has existed for a very long time and has read the rules very clearly and understood how to use parliamentary language, to refer to a member of this honourable House as a “guy”? 

Madam Speaker, I am requesting that after you have made a ruling, hon. Nandala-Mafabi apologises to this House.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know who he was talking about. Who is the “guy”?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you can see when you are in panic, you can raise wrong points of order. I am sorry for –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who is the “guy” you are talking about?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have been told the name. He is hon. Abiriga. I called him a “guy” because he behaves like a guy –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the rules are clear about addressing colleagues with decorum. Can you withdraw “guy”?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I withdraw the “guy” Abiriga. The reason I am raising this is that somebody died in Arua and people of Arua cannot demonstrate. You are aware in our history that the people who have over suffered in this country are the people of West Nile. They have suffered because –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to item No. 5.

LAYING OF PAPERS

5.45
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report entitled, “Report of the Delegation of Parliament of Uganda to the 46th Session of the ACP Assembly and 33rd Session of the ACP–EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly held in St Julian, Malta from 12 to 21 June 2017”.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a date will be appointed for debate of that report. By the way, I thought we had said you were supposed to give a summary. No? Okay.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE MANAGEMENT AND OPERATIONS OF THE CITY ABATTOIR

5.47
THE VICE-CHAIPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTAIL AFFAIRS (Ms Susan Amero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am presenting a report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the management and operations of the city abattoir. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the committee. I also beg to lay on the Table the minutes and other documents that accompany the report.

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 177(e) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, committees are mandated, among others, to monitor the performance of ministries and departments under their ambit. 

In line with this mandate, the Committee on Presidential Affairs commissioned a study into the management and operations of the city abattoir located on plot 1 and 3 Old Port Bell Road, Kampala under Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), following numerous complaints from KCCA that they are collecting less Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) yet the abattoir had been operating and remitting no revenue whatsoever since December 2011. 

To make matters worse, KCCA is supposed to compensate M/s Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins (BHC) Co. Ltd for loss of revenue, yet KCCA is collecting no revenue ever since.

Kampala City Council (KCC) that initially managed plots 1 and 3, Old Port Bell Road, commonly known as the City Abattoir, entered into a management contract with M/s Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Co. Ltd for the management of the above captioned property for a period of five years, commencing on 1 March 2000. One year into the management contract, M/s Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Co. Ltd got a sublease from KCC for a term of 49 years. M/s Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Co. Ltd further subleased the property to Dan Kwatampora Katarihwa. 

It was alleged that Dan Kwatampora Katarihwa wanted to change the land use from an abattoir to a bus terminal, which did not auger well with the vendors. This led the vendors under their umbrella organisation of City Abattoir Traders Development Association Ltd (CATDA) to evict M/s Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Co. Ltd/Dan Kwatampora Katarihwa from the City Abattoir, which to-date is being run by CATDA.

Our terms of reference were to find out why KCCA had poor performance of NTR yet its facilities are being run without remitting NTR to KCCA. We were also to ascertain the true ownership of the City Abattoir and make appropriate recommendations for better management of the abattoir.

The committee held a number of meetings – 

THE SPEAKER: Members can read the methodology.

MS AMERO: I will go to the committee findings 

Kampala City Council, the then lease holder in respect of plots 1 and 3 Old Port Bell Road, also known as the City Abattoir, entered into a management contract with M/s Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Co. Ltd on 1 March 2000, for the management of the abattoir for five years renewable, subject to fulfilment of the conditions in the agreement. The tenderer was to make payment of Shs 20 million monthly excluding taxes (as per appendix A).

Subsequently, on 4 June 2001, one year into the contract, KCC subleased the same property to M/s Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Co. Ltd at a premium of Shs 600 million, a going concern of Shs 900 million and annual rent of Shs 2,975,000 for 49 years starting 1 June 2001. 

Except for the payment of premium and initial ground rent, the sub lessee has not paid the outstanding balance of Shs 450 million going concern and ground rent to date. The failure to pay was attributed to the continued failure by KCCA, the sub lessor, to assure the sub lessee of vacant possession. 

M/s Basajjabalaba was disposed by CATDA, who have since then been allowed by KCCA to operate on the subleased property. Under paragraph 5 of the sublease agreement, M/s Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Co. Ltd was supposed to construct an ultra-modern slaughter and meat handling facility. This is as per appendix B. However, the construction was frustrated by illegal and forceful takeover of the facility by CATDA.

It should be noted that CATDA contested the sublease to M/s Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Co. Ltd. However, M/s Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Co. Ltd is currently the registered proprietor in respect to the sublease and the said sublease is still subsisting. 
The allegations of irregular or secret award of lease have never been a subject of adjudication in any court; CATDA contend that –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you reading everything. Don’t you have an executive summary? 

MS AMERO: Madam Speaker, during the interaction between the committee and CATDA, the latter informed the committee that they are not willing to let go of the facility given the presidential directive.

The committee observed that reconciliation between M/s Basajjabalaba and CATDA is next to impossible because the latter had enjoyed full powers and protection from the state with little or no expense, coupled with the fact that Hassan Basajjabalaba informed the committee that he had lost interest and the zeal to manage the abattoir.

The police also informed the committee that in order to have a win-win situation, the abattoir should be left to the management of traders and Government buys off the residual interest of Basajjabalaba. This is in line with the presidential directive given to the Minister of KCCA that was presented to the committee.

M/s Basajjabalaba Co. Ltd’s inability to comply with the terms and obligations of the lease agreement were caused by the lessor’s (KCCA) failure to guarantee possession. They could not be tasked with the continued payments when it had been dispossessed from the property. 

The conditions imposed by the sublease could only be enforced and implementable if M/s Basajjabalaba Co. Ltd had retained possession. M/s Basajjabalaba was thus denied the right to possession of the leased premises and KCCA, the lessor, took no positive action to cause the eviction of the traders. 

Thus, owing to the dispute between the various conflicting parties, namely M/s Basajjabalaba Co. Ltd, KCCA, CATDA and the police, in respect to the management of the City Abattoir, both KCCA and Basajjabalaba did not realise the anticipated revenue.

On visiting the abattoir, the committee found the abattoir operating in a grossly unhygienic environment that even KCCA accepted that it had become impossible for its public health sanitation officers to supervise. Whereas CATDA allows meat inspectors to visit the area and carry out their duties due to the fact that meat cannot be sold anywhere without KCCA’s approval, the reverse is true when it comes to the issues of public health. Failure by KCCA public officers to supervise the hygiene of the place left the committee wondering whether meat is not contaminated and therefore unfit for human consumption.

In addition, there is a subsisting sublease with Basajjabalaba for 49 years, which made plots 1 and 3 private property, to which KCCA claimed that it prevented them from fixing fees chargeable.

The committee recommends that KCCA revives the memorandum that was entered into between KCCA and BHC Co. Ltd on 13 November 2013. This will place back the ownership of the abattoir in the hands of KCCA, who in turn can tender it out to the sitting tenants, in line with the presidential directive/policy on markets and common user facilities, where thousands of urban poor earn their living.

The committee also recommends that KCCA should, with immediate effect, determine the fees payable by CATDA in accordance with the ordinance highlighted above. Kampala City Council Authority should as well start supervising the abattoir in line with its public health obligations.

It is also recommended that KCCA management should with immediate effect earmark funds to purchase BHS Company Limited’s residual interest in line with Article 26 (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

The committee also recommends that within a month of adopting this report, KCCA management should bring to book its officers who may have reneged on their responsibility of supervising the abattoir and led it to degenerate hygienically.

It is also recommended that the police should maintain its constitutional duty to prevent crimes and ensuring law and order at the abattoir until the issue of management and ownership is settled by KCCA, working with parties it had entrusted to manage the abattoir and sitting tenants.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, it would be unfair for a nation with a policy of promotion of local content to turn around and frustrate her local entrepreneurs. It is incumbent upon Government, therefore, to compensate BHS Company Limited fairly and have the thousands of the vendors’ interests in the facility protected. I beg to report, Madam Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson.

6.01
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. 

I would have loved the minister to also inform this House about - I do not know if the committee looked at the various takeovers by the same company of Basajjabalaba and the court processes that are going to cost taxpayers money because KCCA gave leases. The same impasse is happening with Nakasero Market; the traders took over but the leaseholder is somebody else. Kampala City Council Authority pretends they would like to build an abattoir well knowing they do not have the leases on those particular properties. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to come and update us on this stalemate that does not give the traders authority or the companies that own the leases. Where will this all end? Is it in order for us to continue listening to KCCA proposing plans on properties they well know they signed away for 49 years? Madam Speaker, mine is for the minister to clarify.

6.03
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. One of the terms of reference for this probe was, and I would like to read it verbatim: “to ascertain the true ownership of the City Abattoir”. 

Madam Speaker, you must then look into all the transactions leading to particular claims of ownership. I have had a chance to go through this report and the prime claimant of this city abattoir is Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Company Limited. The very report acknowledges that this land belongs to Buganda Land Board and that KCCA, as a tenant, was a leaseholder. Therefore, what KCCA did was to sublease its own lease while sitting on land owned by Buganda Land Board.

Nowhere in the report where we read about the said transactions of land between KCCA and Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Company Limited do we have evidence of consent of the landlord. I believe it is very important that a mailo landowner has to give consent on any transaction regarding subleasing of his or her land.

Madam Speaker, this makes every transaction between KCCA as a sitting tenant and Basajjabalaba as a sub lessee dubious. I repeat this: transactions between KCCA and Basajjabalaba are only dubious because they fell short of the consent of Buganda Land Board. 

I would also like to argue, Madam Speaker, that the report without this evidence is a shoddy one and Parliament cannot process it at this level. What we can only do is to recommit it. You can imagine that the committee goes on to make a recommendation that KCCA should get money and buy off Basajjabalaba who got this lease under dubious transactions. We, the people of Kampala, cannot afford to allow taxpayers’ money to be used to pay a company that took land under dubious transactions.

In this very report, it says that Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Company Limited failed to pay money to the tune of Shs 600 million to KCCA. Actually, they only paid the premium; they never paid ground rent based on the argument that they never took vacant possession of the same. However, the same company was levying fees where it did not have vacant possession. They went ahead, as stated in the report, to sublease another company called Kwatampora. It is evidenced in the report. All of these were without consent of the owner, Buganda Land Board. Now, after all this, then we recommend that KCCA should get money and buy from a dubious holder of this land.

Madam Speaker, I would like to end by moving that Parliament recommits this kind of shoddy report to the committee for proper processing. Thank you very much.

6.08
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, there are two people I will mention; one is still a Member of Parliament but lost her ministerial position over compensations to Basajjabalaba. At that time, Basajjabalaba had been given Shs 165 billion. The reason for the compensation was that he was prevented from building at the Constitutional Square, running Nakasero and St Balikudembe Market (Owino). This Parliament was very angry and forced the two colleagues, hon. Syda Bbumba and the honourable Prof. Khiddu Makubuya, to resign. 

The recommendations by the Committee on Presidential Affairs, chaired by colleagues who were in the last Parliament reads, “It would be unfair for a nation with a policy of promotion of local content to turn around and frustrate her local entrepreneurs. It is incumbent upon the Government to compensate Basajjabalaba Limited fairly and to have thousands of the vendors’ interests in the facility protected.”

People who will read history here will be shocked that the same Parliament that hunted down Basajjabalaba for taking our money is now very sympathetic and says give him more. The committee clearly explains at what point the vendors took over the market because he had subleased to another person. Therefore, he was not using the lease for the purpose for which he obtained it. However, the committee said you compensate Basajjabalaba, and I am aware he has asked for Shs 80 billion. This committee is to give KCCA clearance.

The Committee on Presidential Affairs must be very careful. You have just made a recommendation here to KCCA to go and buy Usafi Market, which is a structure of eucalyptus and iron sheets, and they paid Shs 40 billion. They were running in the corridors of Parliament before you made a recommendation. Probably, there is something wrong with that Committee on Presidential Affairs. No wonder, nobody came here complaining but they said since they were the ones monitoring the presidential sector - to them this abattoir is more presidential than even State House.

Madam Speaker, we must be very careful. The money that you are asking KCCA to go and compensate with is taxpayers’ money. It is our money. This country has borrowed to the tune of more than $10 billion. We are nearly moving towards a problem. For smaller things in Kampala, you go and borrow from China, for individuals, and you are about to go to money lenders. 

Parliament is saying, “You go give Basajjabalaba money for we cannot frustrate a local entrepreneur” - One who has our Shs 165 billion that cost two honourable Members of Parliament their ministerial appointments and now a committee says, “You give him more; we cannot frustrate him”!

Personally, I can no longer trust that committee that instructed KCCA to go and pay Shs 40 billion to buy eucalyptus and iron sheets. If you gave me less than Shs 1 billion, I would construct for you that market of Usafi for which we paid Shs 40 billion on recommendation by the Committee on Presidential Affairs.

I would like to invite this Parliament to reject and condemn this report of the committee because the committee is supposed to process business for this House. What you have processed is: go and give money because we cannot frustrate a local entrepreneur. Remember this entrepreneur took taxpayers’ money worth Shs 165 billion and he now wants Shs 80 billion, using a committee of Parliament – the same committee that recommended we buy a eucalyptus and iron sheets structure at Shs 40 billion.

I would like to invite this Parliament to condemn this report and reject it. 

6.13
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi Ishaka-Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, allow me to thank the committee for the report that they have presented to us. I would like to comment on the very unhygienic conditions that I found at the abattoir and many of us here eat the meat from there almost every day except for the vegetarians. It is up to us as Parliament to instruct KCCA to make sure that the conditions at the abattoir are very hygienic. That is very important.

Secondly, it is about the businessmen who lost business. We need to understand that anybody who invests in business is supposed to make a profit out of it. However, we see a presidential directive which stopped Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Company Limited from continuing with their business. We see KCCA stopping them. It is imperative that if we continue to –(Interruption) 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Hon. Arinda now on the Floor - with all evidence - was sponsored by hon. Basajjabalaba in the last Parliament. We must be very careful -

THE SPEAKER: What evidence do you have?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I do. Madam Speaker, the honourable member is from Bushenyi and I know a couple of them, and that is where Basajjabalaba comes from. Many of them were officially -(Interjections)- Ishaka, yes. You were sponsored and funded by hon. Basajjabalaba and you are here defending the compensation. Are you in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR ARINDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your protection. If you have KCCA granting a lease to someone and someone loses business, the committee is right to say let us compensate this person. I personally think that it is very fair that Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Company Limited should be compensated for the loss of business. I thank you.

6.15
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is the practice of the House to send out parliamentary committees to do work on our behalf. However, when you find a report signed by the whole committee without a minority report and find very strong views against the report, we need to think about such a report.

I have heard and witnessed one of our colleagues, hon. Kasibante, say that we should condemn the report because according to him, the dealings between Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Company Limited and KCCA were null and void because they did not involve the landlord. That is not legally right. We are not here to discuss the legalities of the dealings between Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Company Limited and KCCA. 

There has been politics in that abattoir. Those of you who live in Kampala know that the Opposition in Kampala had put a base in that abattoir. We know this. It is on record. Therefore, when we hear strong views against the proposed procedure of handing over the market to the people, the users of the market, we have reason to think beyond what is being said.

The committee makes the right recommendation that the market is being given to the users of the market -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, some Members have their persuasions; they do not have to agree with you. Please.

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Recommendation No.1 is that the market be given to the users of the market and secondly, -(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our rules are very clear that in a circumstance where you are debating a matter where you have a conflict of interest, you must declare it. As far as we know, hon. Abbas Agaba is the lawyer of Mr Basajjabalaba as well as a former employee. Would it be procedurally right for the honourable member not to declare his interest and yet we are dealing with a matter that concerns his boss?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, do you have an interest in this matter? What is your relationship with the subject?

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, I am surprised and amazed about the allegations by my colleague that I am a lawyer for Mr Basajjabalaba. That is not true - (Interjections) - I am a Member of Parliament and not an employee of anybody.

Madam Speaker, I do not have any interest in this matter and I would like to deal with the report as it is. To claim that the compensation of Shs 165 billion to Mr Basajjabalaba is related to the committee report is to easily lose the point. The next time you will talk about Kampala International University and you will link them to the same individual. 

As Parliament, we should deal with issues differently, as they are. If the committee has issues, we should deal with them, but to say that the two are related just because there were issues before and this is a matter before court – I, therefore, would like to invite the House to support the recommendation of the committee. I am aware the issue concerning compensation –(Interruption) 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Some of us who represent the people of Kampala talk with a lot of pain. The report recommends use of taxpayers’ money and that is the taxpayer in Kampala. One of the terms of reference was to ascertain true ownership. However, somebody comes to the Floor and says that we are not about ascertaining legality. Can you ascertain true ownership without going into the legality of the issues?

The honourable member who is confusing us is a lawyer and I am a teacher. I wonder whether lawyers are of different types. Is he in order to mislead this august House that we can go to the extent of ascertaining true ownership of a property without going into legal issues of transactions leading to that ownership?

THE SPEAKER: Let him present from his perspective because that is how he understands it.

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I conclude, I think it is right for this Parliament to look into the recommendations of the committee, especially the directive by the President that the market be given to the users because they are the ones who slaughter the animals from within the market. Therefore, it is fair that they take it up. 

The other issues can be followed up legally - who, where, how, lessees or non-lessees, owners or non-owners. The point is that none of the engagements is illegal. If they were illegal, then the committee would have said it. My persuasion is that we should treat the report of the committee as a committee report and look at their prayers and support them.

6.22
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, I was in the Ninth Parliament. As a crusader against corruption, it was very clear that the dealings between Basajjabalaba and Government were full of corruption. I am even shocked to see that after we censured two ministers, the man continues to do business with Government.

Madam Speaker, the standard ways of doing business require that the moment a company is found with dubious engagements, that company should never get business and should be blacklisted. I cannot believe that even up to this stage, we have continued to allow this man to prey on the taxpayers’ money. 

I do not understand this committee. Maybe the committee members are fresh and did not go into the history to dig up and understand the issues. How can we continue perpetuating corruption in this country? This is too much and unacceptable. That is why you are giving the President a headache; he would have a green light with age limit and so on but the problem is corruption. Corruption continuing like this is what is really giving the President a hard time.

We cannot accept this as these are serious matters for the future of the country. We are suffering as a country right now with all this youth unemployment. The youth are almost lynching us because we have allowed a few people to monopolise the taxpayers’ money. For how long will we continue like this? I cannot believe that Members of Parliament sitting in a committee can endorse theft up to this point. 

Madam Speaker, this is unacceptable and I protest on behalf of the Ugandans. As an anticorruption crusader, we cannot allow corruption to eat us up here at Parliament. I know very well how clever these people are; they have learnt to buy Members of Parliament. Everywhere, we sit in the committees, I have seen it. I am presiding over the sugar Bill and they want to compromise Members by bringing money everywhere.

How long are we going to tolerate this as Members of Parliament - getting money and being compromised in our legislation? This is very big theft. Every Ugandan here should condemn this. We should not allow the Members of Parliament to be compromised because the future of this country will be in jeopardy. I am speaking from my heart because I have seen this happen in the – (Member timed out.) 

HON. MEMBERS: Shame!

THE SPEAKER: What do we do with the report?

6.26
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am very surprised. I once worked as deputy mayor of the city and I know what went on when Basajjabalaba was given a management contract to run the abattoir. There were terms and conditions. Even those terms and conditions were never fulfilled. From a management contract to a lease, now for somebody to come and recommend that money be spent to compensate a person who never even fulfilled the terms and conditions of the management contract! 

I beg that this Parliament even looks deeper into the operations of that abattoir. There was supposed to be a treatment plant for the waste that comes out of the slaughtered animals. Pollution of the Nakivubo Channel is too much. If you go to the abattoir and see what is happening, it is disaster.

Madam Speaker, it is our responsibility to think of not debating the report. That report has a lot of loopholes basing on the way it was presented. We need to get rid of the report.

I can see the former Minister of Local Government, hon. Otafiire, looking at me because he knows that we have fought over Nakivubo Market when Basajjabalaba wanted to do all that –(Interruption) 

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank hon. Namayanja for giving way.  The beauty of this House is keeping records. I was a Member of the Ninth Parliament and this matter is not without precedent. I vividly remember when hon. Raphael Magyezi and hon. Florence Kintu forged a committee report. This Parliament took a decision of one, throwing out the report; and two, we investigated our own Members.

Therefore, where the conduct of a committee or members thereof is suspicious as this one appears to be – I would like to take a leaf from the submissions of hon. Alex Ruhunda. When the integrity of this House is being put into question, I think it is us and no one else to take proactive steps. Normally what we do in situations like this is that we move a motion, one to reject the report; two, to investigate our very own; and three, to reinvestigate the matter at hand. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, how did the matter go to the committee? Is it their routine oversight? 

MS AMERO: Madam Speaker, the committee interested itself in investigating this. Kampala Capital City Authority appeared before the committee and said that it does not collect enough revenue. However, we looked at the many properties being managed by KCCA and realised that they have generated revenue for KCCA yet the properties are not being managed well. Therefore, as a committee, we took interest in finding out what was happening. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been encouraging our committees not just to read the budget but to actually make follow up in the sector. I think that is what they were doing. Minister for Kampala, do you have something to say?  

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to give some facts about the abattoir. 

Hon. Florence Namayanja is very right and I would like colleagues to appreciate that in 2001, Basajjabalaba secured a management contract for the abattoir for five years. Before the five years expired, under circumstances we could not verify, he was given a lease of 49 years by the then Kampala City Council.

Madam Speaker, in 2011, KCCA took over this liability. One of the issues was that Basajjabalaba failed to perform on his part because KCC failed to ensure vacant possession of the facility. When we took over office, we found this stand-off, which had been ongoing for a number of years, and we started investigating it. 

First of all, we found in the report that Buganda Land Board was claiming this land. We read all the documents and requested for verification. Buganda Land Board had written a two paragraphed letter to Kampala Capital City Authority claiming the land. They had a meeting with the staff of KCCA and KCCA requested for documentation to that effect, which was never produced. In that regard, the land remained in the hands of KCCA. 

Therefore, this is to respond to hon. Kasibante –(Interjections)- honourable, I will take the information later. 

THE SPEAKER: Let her complete her points. 

MS NAMUGWANYA: At this moment, I will not take information. Allow me to flow and then I will take your information. 

Madam Speaker, after verifying that, we dug down into the documents to find what had happened. We then found out that a series of meetings had happened and at the verification level, the office of the Attorney-General and the Office of the Government Chief Valuer were involved. Whereas Government knows the association of the users of that place, we have equitable interest in that piece of land. Basajjabalaba had legal interest in that land and it was tenable for us as Government to get up one day and tell him to pack his things and go. 

Therefore, at that level, after verifying that he had a legal interest and we had equitable interest, the two parties sat. What they agreed on was to find a way of buying out Basajjabalaba’s interest and he leaves the land. 

At that level, Basajjabalaba was requested to submit what he felt was his claim, which was Shs 85 billion. When that claim came in, the office of the Chief Government Valuer was contacted and requested to value it. The office responded by saying that they did not have the competence to value the loss in business that Basajjabalaba suffered, so they recommended that KCCA contracts an accounts firm to value the lost business. 

They signed an interim memorandum of understanding that was supposed to run for six months. When KCCA tried to procure an accounts firm, the firms they contacted requested for a lot of money, which KCCA did not have. Therefore, they could not fund the activity and the memorandum of understanding which was signed collapsed. 

Madam Speaker, when we came to office, we picked it from there and the advice we got was that the way to proceed was to make sure that we buy out Basajjabalaba’s legal interest. Thereafter, we would get both equity and legal interest. 

In the interest of implementing the directive of H.E the President, the best way to go is to make sure that as Government, we possess the facility and then let the users use it and manage it on our behalf.

Madam Speaker, these are some of the facts I wanted to give. 

6.37
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I followed the debate and I would like to make a brief comment on the debate by hon. Alex Ruhunda. We are all concerned about corruption in the country – (Interjections)– No, please let us have respect for each other. 

I appreciate the honourable member’s contribution but I only disagree with anyone who comes and contributes in this House and brands all Members of Parliament as being compromised without mentioning who in particular were compromised. 

Madam Speaker, our faces are tainted. We are Members of Parliament and this House is known internationally. We are live on air, so whatever we say here is heard. However, for somebody to utter here that Members of Parliament are being compromised, without asking him to substantiate, means we stand compromised, which is not the case. This is not the best way of fighting corruption. You cannot fight corruption by branding everybody corrupt. That will make fighting corruption even more complicated.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not seen any proper evidence of malpractice so, I do not think there is need to investigate. If someone has real information, please bring it and then we shall cause the investigation. But for now, it is just perception. Therefore, I think I will just put the question -

MR NANADALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard the report but I want to look at a few things so that I can move what I want to. 

If the Chief Government Valuer or KCCA is saying that Basajjabalaba should be compensated with Shs 85 billion, assuming Government had Shs 85 billion, how many facilities of that nature can be developed? You should consider that. You may be talking of Shs 85 billion because there are people who may be looking for their kickbacks, but how many can we develop out of Shs 85 billion? I can tell you with Shs 85 billion, we can develop more than 10 abattoirs which are far better than this one.

Therefore, why should a committee which we gave a task recommend Shs 85 billion yet they should have recommended that instead of compensating Basajjabalaba with Shs 85 billion, let him have it and we have other facilities elsewhere and develop them and go ahead?

I will give an example. There was land which was sold by Uganda Telecom Limited at Dairy Corporation. It was a big chunk of land and there is still more land. They sold it at Shs 3 billion and I think it is more than five acres. The facility you are fighting for sits on about two to three acres with old facilities, which are of Obote’s time, and yet there are new ones.

If we are talking about meat, we have a meat factory in Soroti. We could invest more money in that or where the cows come from in Mbarara. Go and put a meat factory in Mbarara so that they just bring meat in coolers.

THE SPEAKER: What do we do?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, what I am trying to raise is that we have committees - (Interruption)

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I would like to give my honourable colleague information. The Soroti Meat Packers he is trying to bring on board was sold at Shs 150 million, including all the pieces of land attached to it, by this Government. That factory is already a carcass for that matter and the people of Teso are aggrieved by the sale of that factory. It was sold to Mzee Omaria and Mzee Ikodet as a reward for accepting to return from exile to serve the NRM government.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, what I want to propose is that as Parliament, we should not accept to pay Shs 85 billion to compensate for an old facility. (Applause) Let him have it, we go look for more land and develop it so that we can even employ more people. I come from the “mountains of the sun”; Tororo Cement goes to Amudat to carry limestone to make cement in Tororo. The damage they are doing to the road is terrible.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, how would your proposal relate to this report? How will they link up? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am amending the report recommendations to say that we shall not compensate Basajjabalaba. With the money we have, if it is there, let Government go and build more facilities, which are up to date, to employ other people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we have written amendments? Can we put it in writing?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, the amendment I would want to add is that KCCA should monitor the expiry of the lease of Basajjabalaba. After 49 years, they should not renew it.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, in this report that we have here, Basajjabalaba was given a management contract. The traders went and took over the market. Where does the recommendation to compensate him come from if the people who took over the abattoir are still there? Why doesn’t he take the people who took over the market to court? Where is the appetite to compensate for a facility which the committee reports is illegal? People went and took it over. 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Listening to the report, I think it leaves a lot to be desired. From the onset, there were loopholes even from the time Basajjabalaba was given the contract. The minister and chairperson have both confessed that they do not know how the lease of 49 years was given to Basajjabalaba. 

Madam Speaker, I would have expected the committee to dig deeper into this; probably, it could have given us better information. We also needed to know who granted the lease. I think that would be helpful.

Also, having said that Basajjabalaba lost interest in this business, I do not find where the relationship comes in. Having not fulfilled the conditions of the contract and not knowing how he got the lease, he suddenly loses interest. Lawyers say that you cannot cease to have legal interest in any matter unless you have acquired it fraudulently.

I want to submit that this is bending the law. We need to get clarification as to how Basajjabalaba got a lease which is different from what was originally given by Kampala City Council.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this issue was a subject for investigation in this House. I do not know whether it was done by the Public Accounts Committee or one of the others. I think we need to check what the findings of the other report were before we take action on this one.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the Ninth Parliament, I happened to be a member of the Public Accounts Committee but I also had the privilege of being the lead counsel in the investigation of the Haba Group of Companies that involved Mr Basajjabalaba.

Madam Speaker, there were several issues involved in that matter. Two issues of particular concern were:
1. 	The forging of a court judgment. It is quite unheard of and uncommon. There are very many mistakes and disturbing issues that are committed in this country but we found the forging of a High Court judgment very unique and dangerous. 

2. 	In the investigation, we found that other than the loss of money that was spent on the company – Indeed, the matter was so sensitive that eventually the Auditor-General had to engage another audit firm. So other than the several millions of shillings spent on that audit firm, we discovered that about Shs 169 billion had been literally shared, because I do not want to imagine that all that money went to one man. 

Madam Speaker, you have been asking us we should move from here with this report. Some issues are very complicated, especially when colleagues are involved. However, sometimes we have to look inside ourselves as a House and say there is an error and we have to correct it. There is a point in life where we make mistakes but there is a point where enough is enough. 

Madam Speaker, it is my humble prayer that for this report, one, this House does not pass it; and two, for purposes of establishing the depth of this issue, a select committee be constituted by your good office to internalise and appreciate the depth of this matter before we commit any further funds of the taxpayers of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us defer the decision on this report but we need the Clerk to get our last report on this matter, we run through it and see how to move. Let us first get that report because we may be taking decisions in a contradictory manner. I want the Clerk to first get the old report, we study it and compare with this and arrange for a committee. Okay, matter deferred. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOSAFETY BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for this matter, the report had been presented. It was actually due for second reading but I do not know whether the minister is ready and whether the Members are also ready for the debate.

6.53
THE MINISTER OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Madam Speaker, the committee gave a report and there was also a minority report. The reports had substantive issues, recommendations and observations. The Government would like to make a response to these recommendations and observations but I beg for more time, possibly next week, when we can come and respond to the issues therein.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I really hope you will come. This matter has been hanging around us for many years. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a high premium this country attaches to the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill. There are a lot of imports in this country that have a bearing on the health of our citizens. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware we went through the discussion of this Bill and views were collected. For hon. Elioda Tumwesigye to come and say he is not ready and we just let him off the hook, shows that he is up to some mischief. He is hurrying to ensure that this item is stood over so that he can rush to other things.

To that extent, whatever reasons he might have, can we have this matter attended to clearly and soberly before we rush into other insidious motions that Members want to bring on this Floor? Madam Speaker, I know it is not that hon. Elioda Tumwesigye is not ready; he is a serious man. In the Ministry of Health, I saw him and even now I know him. For him to just coil his tail and run away is not for good intentions. I, therefore –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Ssekikubo for giving way. Let me put this on record. The reason why the Government requested for the increase of numbers of ministers was for efficiency. It has been disturbing me since I came here that ministers come onto the Floor, including my friend hon. Elioda Tumwesigye, and say that we should give them more time. 

I have seen the Prime Minister, the Leader of Government Business, since we entered this House and he has kept quiet throughout and enjoyed his seat. His ministers are here raising excuses, requesting for more time. This Bill has been on this Floor for a long period and we are wondering why we are taking all this time. However, you wait in a few minutes to come, other issues will come in and they will be ready to table such a motion.

Mr Prime minister, kindly manage your ministers. Some are sleeping and you are the one in charge. (Laughter) However, you wait when the other thing of the age limit comes on the Floor, they are all going to be vigilant and jumping. We must be serious. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo. Two years is quite a long time. Therefore, the minister cannot talk of next week without being specific. Let the honourable minister commit himself; next week on which day exactly? If it is Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, let him be specific. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, may I propose that the minister commits himself that tomorrow, in view of the very critical importance of the Bill and that his work was ready and the committee was ready —

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you come back to us on Tuesday? This back and forth has gone on for a long time and when we were starting this session, I told you that this Bill and two others should be completed.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When this Bill was presented for First Reading, it was the property of the minister. The Bill was then referred to an appropriate committee. The report that was returned was a report of the committee, not the minister’s. The chairperson of the committee has not been asked as to whether he is ready to be part of the debate. 

Isn’t this setting a dangerous procedural precedent that a minister can decide on a Bill, which is no longer a matter in his or her hands but a matter before the House? I would like to seek your guidance on this.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, when this Bill was presented, there was no debate. The minister said there were issues he wanted to crosscheck and then come back to us, but it has taken two years. Also, ultimately, the minister will take responsibility for it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to give you information that the Minister for Science, Technology and Innovation has always been saying, “I want my Bill passed”. However, today, he does not want his Bill passed. 

Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure are very clear. Page 214, Appendix F on rule 76 is about the code of conduct of Members of Parliament and rule 2(1), which is about public duty says, 

“(1) By virtue of the Oath of allegiance taken by all Members, Members have a duty to be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Republic of Uganda and to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and to uphold the law and act on all occasions in accordance with the public trust placed in them. 
(2) Members have a general duty to act in the interests of the nation as a whole; and special duty to their constituents.” 

From the provision of our Rules of Procedure, is the minister acting in the interest of the people of Uganda or his own interest? If he is not acting in the interest of the people of Uganda, why should Parliament approve such a person to be a Cabinet minister, who cannot perform his duties as stipulated?

Madam Speaker, I think today we should disapprove this minister. The other day he found me with Prof. Nyiira and Prof. Nyiira raised this issue and in response, he said that he wanted his Bill passed. If Prof. Nyiira was available, he would bear witness on this. The minister is now here turning against us. These are the people with selfish interests. We approved them but I think for today, we should act.

Madam Speaker, when we say that this issue be handled next week – they know you are fond of saying, “Tomorrow” or “Next week” and then you forget. I would like to request that for today, we should act. If the minister is not ready, then he should remove his Bill from the Order Paper and we do other business. He should also apologise for wasting our time and the committee’s money. You can even see how he is smiling; he is smiling like a sheep. These are dangerous human beings that we have. (Laughter)
	
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter will be on the Order Paper on Tuesday. Honourable minister, with or without your participation, we shall complete that Bill on Tuesday. 

MR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I am actually happy that Members of this House are very eager to consider this Bill and genuinely pass it. However, I wish to state that the last time we considered this Bill, there were very important issues that came out clearly, including asking the sponsor of the Bill –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I have immense respect for my senior colleague and I thought that he had mastered the rules, some of which I find very elementary. 

Madam Speaker, you have made a ruling and instructed the minister on what to do and when. Therefore, is he in order, to derail the business of this House by making further, what I consider unnecessary explanations when he has an opportunity to do the same during the time allocated? 

THE SPEAKER: On Tuesday, you will be on the Order paper without fail.

MR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. On Tuesday, we shall consider the Bill.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT BILL TO AMEND THE CONSTITUTION 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I indicated earlier that these motions are not for substantive debate; they are just seeking leave.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on two points of procedure. The first -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you take off your bandanas.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Earlier on, I rose on a point of procedure and you ruled me – I	agree that my procedural point was premature. 

Madam Speaker, this is the greatest test in our lives as Members of Parliament. Members of this House petitioned you on various dates, seeking for your indulgence to be placed on the Order Paper, and you clearly read out the order of presentation of these motions and the notices. The notice and motion of hon. Nsamba was the first in time. Your office received both the notice and the motion accompanying the notice before the notice presented by hon. Raphael Magyezi. 

Madam Speaker, this is a difficult time for us as a Parliament. Earlier, I asked whether it would not be procedurally correct that you deal with the first motion and we deal with the motions in their order of presentation.

The second procedural question, – and maybe for avoidance of doubt – arises out of rule 26 of our Rules of Procedure. Rule 26(1) states thus: 

“(1) 	The Clerk shall send to each Member a copy of the Order Paper for each sitting - 
(a)	 in the case of the first sitting of a meeting, at least two days before that sitting. 
(b) 	in the case of any other sitting, at least three hours before the sitting without fail.” 

We received the Order Paper without this particular motion and when we appeared here, Madam Speaker, you used your power to amend the Order Paper. My understanding, and this is where I seek your procedural guidance, is that you can only amend and issue an Order Paper a minimum of three hours before the sitting and without fail.

Why am I very insistent on this, Madam Speaker? Apart from my own reputation as a Member of this House and the institution of Parliament, I am more deeply concerned about my Speaker and I insist, my Speaker. You have sailed us so well so far. However, this time, we are concerned that you are being stampeded by Members –(Interjections)- if I am one of them, I apologise – to have their business added onto the Order Paper, contrary to the manner stipulated by the rules. I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when this matter began, I was out of the country. The Speaker presiding then, on the Floor of this House, informed you that I had received these notices and the motions and that a date would be appointed. That was before I came back. So, you received notice. 

MR SSEGGONA: We did not have this motion on the Order Paper, Madam Speaker. Actually, the presiding Speaker was categorical that we would never be ambushed. If we could not be ambushed by anyone else, how about our very own? I think we are moving the wrong way.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you are aware, I am a seconder of the motion by hon. Patrick Nsamba and our motion is for a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to urgently constitute a constitutional review commission. This was moved under rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure. 

Our motion and notice were received on 18 September 2017. You are aware that the motion you are giving space now to come before ours was only submitted on 22 September 2017, four days after our motion and notice were submitted to your office and the office of the Clerk.

Madam Speaker, rule 26(3) provides thus, and I would like you to listen to this, Members: “The Clerk shall keep a book to be called Order Book in which he or she shall enter and number in succession all matters intended for discussion at each meeting.” If that book can be brought here, it will show how our motion was brought in first, four days before hon. Magyezi brought in his notice and motion.

Madam Speaker, we pray for your fairness. We are all backbenchers in this matter and even our motion is ready for debate. We are not even seeking leave but we are ready for debate. Allow us just a few minutes to move our motion -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, you will move your motion. I also want to remind you that under our rules, Bills take priority. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, Madam Speaker. However, at this stage, it is still a motion. There is no Bill yet on the Floor of Parliament. It is a mere motion.

THE SPEAKER: No, all of you will get your time. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: I would not want to appear to challenge you, Madam Speaker. You know this very well; I do not look good challenging your ruling. I feel bad but it is still in your hands. It is not in my interest to challenge the Speaker but all these are still motions and ours came first.

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I am addressing this House particularly on Article 79 –

THE SPEAKER: Can you take your seats. 

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, the Constitution that we promulgated in 1995 – 

THE SPEAKER: What are you submitting, hon. Karuhanga? 

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I am proceeding under the Constitution – 

THE SPEAKER: To do what?

MR KARUHANGA: To raise a point of procedure, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: What point of procedure?

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, my point of procedure – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, can you sit down. You do not have to make a scene. Please, take your seats.

MR KARUHANGA: Under Article 79 of our Constitution, it provides under clause 1 that Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.  Madam Speaker, -

THE SPEAKER: What are you are addressing?

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, my concern is well enshrined in clause 2 of Article 79 of the Constitution - (Interjections) - No person – (Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: House adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.32 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 27 September 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 

