


Wednesday, 19 September 2018

Parliament met at 2.51 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the Vice President, honourable members of the Cabinet and members of the House, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I am sorry for the late start. We have been having several meetings on policy issues but I hope that we shall be able to catch up soon. 

I would like to allow, for 30 minutes, Members to raise matters of national concern. 

2.53
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the leasing of central forest reserves to commercial tree farmers.
 
On 27 March 2018, on the Floor of this House, I also raised a point of national importance concerning the same where the National Forest Authority (NFA) leased central forest reserves, some of which are in Kibaale District, to commercial tree farmers. The neighbouring communities were left out particularly in Kibaale District. 

The presiding Speaker then ruled that reconsideration is made and they are given an opportunity to replant the forest around them. To date, nothing has happened. To the contrary, those who were given the allocations have gone ahead to plant maize in the forest reserves. This is another form of encroachment other than replanting the forest reserves. My prayer is that the central forest reserves are replanted with trees and not maize. 

Secondly, the local people – this is the more reason I get back to the earlier prayer – that the local people are given the opportunity to plant trees.

Madam Speaker, I remember when you came to Bunyoro for the coronation ceremony, all the leaders were urging you for the same. It is a serious concern in Bunyoro sub-region that the forest reserves are getting used by people who are non-local community members. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know why the Minister of water and Environment has not come back to us on this issue because it has been recurrent. There is a serious concern about the lack of equity. If offers are given against the locals, it causes problems. Can we ask the minister this time to come on Tuesday with a full response to the issues raised in March and also today?

2.56
MS LILY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the issuance of driving permits. It is going on from the owners of driving schools who said the traffic director or Ministry of Works and Transport have recentralised issuance of the permit classes that used to be issued at the districts. 

Classes A, B and DL for motorcycles, cars and mini-buses; CM for tippers, H for tractors and graders used to be issued from the districts or the regional offices where the Inspectors of vehicles (IOVs) are. 

As of now, they have recentralised all these except A, B and DL, which means even our local youth or the people who train in driving tippers, lorries, tractors and graders have to join those ones who get classes for coasters, buses and trailers for testing in Kampala. 

This is a great disservice to the people of this country. We know a greater number of poor people who can hardly travel to Kampala to get tested for driving tippers, lorries, tractors and graders. The concern is, why recentralise yet we have IOVs at the districts or the regional centres?

The issue is that some of these traffic officers have got their own schools in Kampala so they fear to compete with these other schools upcountry, which is unfair. I am praying –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Minister of Works and Transport is in position to speak now or can she undertake to give us an answer on that issue?

2.58
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request for time to be able to respond to that concern. Tuesday next week would be adequate. 

2.59
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a situation that is on-going at Makerere University. The University is slowly descending into chaos. There has been a brewing strike by the students regarding the tuition increment, which I had brought earlier to this House. The undoing of the current leadership of the university administration is that students have been arrested and kept in police cells beyond the mandatory 48 hour period.

Secondly, the academic stance is shrinking because even students who express their views about the tuition increment online are being suspended without being subjected to any formal process of hearing. We feel that Makerere University, like other institutions of higher learning, should be a preserve for academic freedom and an arena for prestige. 

Therefore, I think it is important that we ask the Ministry of Education and Sports to take keen concern in what is happening at Makerere University particularly how the administration is managing this scenario of the disagreements among students over the tuition increment. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Minister of Education and Sports to come and update us on the situation at Makerere especially relating to the strike and the handling of students next week.
 
3.00
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Nakaseke District was supplied with a digital X-ray machine by the Ministry of Health, through Dash Technology Company. 

The company was supposed to service the machine but when the contract expired, the ministry did not renew it. At the moment, the machine is down and people are not getting services. We therefore, request the Ministry of Health to either renew the contract or to assign us another company that can service the machine.

Secondly, I request the Ministry of Health to map Nakaseke as an infected area with Hepatitis B. Of recent, we lost a district councillor and we have 12 people in the hospital that have tested positive. People are dying silently. We request the Ministry of Health to provide us with the Hepatitis B Vaccine and the testing equipment. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We shall ask the Ministry of Health to respond to the deficiency in the management of the X-ray equipment and also include Nakaseke as one of the areas which are prone to Hepatitis B as well as make arrangements to support them with vaccines, training and also the drugs. We now invite hon. Ndamira.

3.02
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the matter of national importance, concerning job insecurity among teachers that are serving in private schools. 

During the education sector review this week, the Ministry of Education and Sports established that teachers in private schools face challenges of job security. This is very true, especially in Kabale, a constituency that I represent.

The teachers have kept moving from one school to another, year after year and this has affected the performance of young learners in primary schools. 

This has not only affected the performance of young learners and job security of the workers in the private sector, but also parents that have struggled so hard to pay tuition. They have sold all their property in search of school fees. 

My prayers are:
I would like to know whether the Government, through the Ministry of Education and Sports will address this issue before things go out of hand in our country.
Government should come up with a policy/law to ensure that private school teachers have job security. I rest my case. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the Minister of Education and Sports to address that issue and come back to us during the course of next week. 

3.04
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Yesterday, two Cabinet ministers; hon. Musa Ecweru and hon. Persis Namuganza went to neighbours of Kyangwali Refugee Camp and told them that they wanted to expand boundaries of the refugee camp. They were to squeeze 28 villages of Kasonga Parish into only six square kilometres.

Remember, the neighbours have 17 square kilometres. We are worried. This is because they said that they were not going to compensate them for the developments they have on the land or even pay them a relocation allowance.

The boundaries of Kyangwali Refugee Camp are known. They are 51 square kilometres. However, these people came with a title of 78 square miles. So, we are worried. We do not know if the lands ministry had mandate to reproduce the title.  

On this land are the Kasonga Parish headquarters and Bukinda Primary School. There are also five churches and three other places of worship. People are living in fear and I hear that those two – 

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR MUHEIRWE: My prayers are that a committee of Parliament should take up this matter so that we know the true owner of that land. 

Secondly, that this House halts the on-going activity until the true ownership is established. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are going to require the Prime Minister, who is in charge of all these issues to come here and tell us whether the Government has got to displace Ugandans and expand the refugee camp in Kyangwali before we can send the committee. 

Let the Prime Minster come on Tuesday and explain to us whether these villages have been taken away.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just would like to be guided on how we are going to proceed, particularly on that matter with the Prime Minister. It is his officials in his office that are at the fore front of making sure that this land is grabbed from the people.

Many other Members and I who are concerned over this matter have visited his office. We have interfaced with him. However, he told me, “You man, how many testicles do you have? Are you going to stand in the way of Government?” If he can tell me that – I told him that we are going to raise this matter on the Floor of the House and he asked what order I was going to raise - 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. All of us can draw a distinction between the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda and hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire. 

Is it in order for the honourable member to attribute a language that we all know the Prime Minister cannot use in reference to any person – and he uses it on this Floor in the Prime Minister’s absence to clarify?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the allegation is extremely serious. We shall ask the Prime Minister to confirm to us whether he is going to count the things of –(Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Without us missing what I wish for you to guide us on, literally also, the Prime Minister is bent on giving space to the refugees versus the Ugandans in this matter and that is why I think the honourable member ran very fast to seek Parliament intervention. 

I felt that this needed to come out very clearly. We are here because of the citizens of Uganda, not the refugees. We have the responsibility to protect the refugees, but we have the utmost responsibility towards Ugandans.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was not aware that there has been a confrontation between the honourable members and the Prime Minister. For me, I was looking at him as the Leader of Government Business and the overall Minister in Charge of Disaster Preparedness, Refugees, and etcetera. That is why I want him to come and tell us. 

However, if he is trying to take our land, let him come here and tell us. Let him come here and tell us that he is determined to give land to the refugees against Ugandans.

MR MUHEIRWE: Madam Speaker, the procedural point I am raising is that Tuesday is far. As I talk, bulldozers are on the ground with some officials of the Prime Minister. Yesterday, I was with him in the office for over one hour but he said that I should just monitor and see the bad situations that will come out. But the whole thing is bad, Madam Speaker - grabbing the land; you have been working for over 30 years and then somebody tells you to go to just one hectare -

THE SPEAKER: Okay, what do you propose? You do not want the Prime Minister; what do you want us to do?

MR MUHEIRWE: I propose that we stay the activity awaiting clarification and knowing the true ownership of the land.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The Office of the Prime Minister is directed to halt those operations until the Prime Minister has come here to explain to us how they are taking over land or not taking over land in Kyangwali.

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What my colleague from Buhaguzi has presented is not different from what happened to my constituency. Immediately after we were sworn in, the Office of the Prime Minister came to my constituency waving a gazette and indicated that part of my constituency, which was hitherto known as Kyaka I Refugee Camp was gazetted as a Refugee Camp in 1964.

However, that aside, that land has been occupied by Ugandans; it has a whole sub-county of Rwentuha. As we speak now, we have a town council of Kazinga, with 62,000 Ugandans.

Now, the Office of the Prime Minister indicated that they had wanted to evict them in order to settle Ugandans who had been expelled from Tanzania. I told them that I could not accept to have my people, who had just voted for me, evicted in order to bring in Ugandans who have been expelled from Tanzania. 

Therefore, we held multiple meetings at the district, and then the Prime Minister agreed that he would settle 6,000 Ugandans of Tanzanian origin on this land after which he would commence a degazettement exercise to make sure the 62,000 Ugandans who are on this land own it.

Madam Speaker, I can assure you that since then, I have held not less than 15 meetings in the Office of the Prime Minister - everyone there knows me now; they keep saying, “We are moving.”

Madam Speaker, if we let the same thing happen to Kyangwali - it seems that is how they are luring us into taking our land and then they look away after resettling whoever they want to settle on this land. My people are up in arms and they are ready to fight unless that land is degazetted.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, of course the Prime Minister will have to come here and tell us what he is doing. But in the meantime, the Committee on Presidential Affairs is directed to go and examine what is happening in Kyaka and also in Kyangwali.

3.16
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County South, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue I am raising is related to a palace house, which was promised by H.E, the President, for the king of the Alur kingdom. 

Madam Speaker, Jeremy Bentham, one of the greatest philosophers, said that there are two rulers in the world - pain and pleasure. Madam Speaker, on 27 October this year, we are going to celebrate the anniversary of the coronation of the king –(Interjections)– he is not a chief. He is one of the elites in this country.

Madam Speaker, the pain the Alur people are in - what is now ruling us is the pain that we are going through; that an affordable palace has never been constructed for our king, that His Excellency had talked about. Madam Speaker, even our chiefs in other places have been -

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MR ANYWARACH: Now, why it is a matter of national importance is that I know you will be in attendance for that coronation. If you have not been invited, on behalf of the kingdom of Alur, I am inviting you because the king and all his subjects were there during His Majesty, Nadiope’s coronation - I was there personally.

Therefore, you are coming, but you are coming to a palace without a decent accommodation that was promised by H.E –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR ANYWARACH: My prayer, therefore - as the Alur people right from Pakwach, Nebbi and Zombo, we have been voting for NRM; we have many ministers - hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny is there. Hon. D’Ujanga is from Zombo, where the palace is supposed to be. 

Therefore, my prayer is: Can the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Minister in charge of the Presidency make an arrangement, as urgently as possible, so that one of the mighty kings in this land - the king of Alur can have decent accommodation? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the minister in charge of the Presidency has something to say about the palace of the Alur king.

3.18
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Ms Esther Mbayo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a matter of concern that the honourable member has raised but it squarely falls under the gender ministry. I request that I am allowed to liaise with the gender minister to see to it that that issue is addressed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we also, on behalf of other Ugandan kingdoms, ask that all our kings be given the necessary facilities to enable them do their work?

MS MBAYO: Madam Speaker, as I said before, I will liaise with the gender minister because as per now, I cannot give the details of what has been done. What I know is that everything is catered for under the gender ministry.

THE SPEAKER: We expect a joint feedback from you.

3.20
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, you have just made some very good guidance and directive to the Government. It falls right under the gender ministry as the Minister, Office of the President (Presidency) stated. What my only brother from the Alur kingdom has stated and you rightly observed, is that these cultural institutions need support. I also know that in the Eighth Parliament, this Parliament appropriated about Shs 250 million to most of the cultural institutions to have palaces. For the people of Tororo - Jopadhola, the building has stalled; the Shs 250 million was used and it got used up. 

I believe that the same would be true for other kings, whether for the Basoga, the Bwamba. We need some guidance so that our kings or cultural leaders are not seen as begging for favours all the time. (Interjections) I could take the information from Acholi and Teso. Their vehicles are worn out.

MR OKIN: Thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, I happen to have served in the kingdom of the Acholi as their prime minister. What my colleague has stated is very true. 

When you look at the Act governing the whole functionality of the cultural institutions, there is a provision in the Act which stipulates very clearly that these kingdoms are not allowed to solicit support from their subjects and also from outside. This ties the hands of these kingdoms in terms of resource mobilisation. 

Maybe as a Parliament, we need to revisit this Act and where need be, if there is an amendment that can be made, we amend it to give them freedom to solicit funding and support from outside to make their work more effective. I submit.

MR OBOTH: Thank you very much for the information. For the record, these kingdoms or cultural institutions are given Shs 15 million every quarter and for the Emorimor, it is the same. Madam Speaker, allow me have that proof – 

MR ABALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, when you talk about Shs 200 million being given - Maybe for Tororo, there is a structure, Buganda has a palace and other places also have palaces, but for the Iteso Cultural Union, the Emorimor, including the Karimojong, there is no structure where the king lives. 

The Government should come out and tell us where that money is, because in Teso we have not seen it. Our king actually resides in a rented place. That is why I support the directive you have just made, that all cultural institutions should be supported when it comes to their structures. Thank you very much.

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister for the Presidency because I come from the Kingdom of Obudingya bwa Bwamba. 

What my colleague is talking about - accommodation for the cultural leaders - is not provided for among the privileges as enshrined in the Institution of Traditional Cultural Leaders Act of 2011. - (Interjections) - Accommodation is not one of them. This is simply a presidential pledge and he has pledged to all our kingdoms. 

Up to now, even my king has not received what is provided for, like the vehicles and others, and it is now five years. Accommodation is a presidential pledge that falls under your ministry and not Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Even when we go to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, they will send us back to your ministry. They are not part of what is provided for. I just wanted to give that clarification. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am glad the Vice President is here because this is really a national issue. In Busoga, for instance, the Government is happily using the markets, the Ssaza headquarters, all the sub counties and the landing sites for free yet they belong to the kingdom. I think we shall need the Minister for the Presidency to give us a serious paper on this issue because they are our kings but they live in a very difficult situation yet they must maintain dignity and posture.

3.26
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding a natural disaster which struck one of my subcounties, Lubya Subcounty, on 16 September 2018. 

This subcounty comprises of six islands. On Namiti Island, 48 houses were destroyed; on Kirewe Island, 72 houses were destroyed; 15 houses were destroyed on Laboro Island and 20 houses on Makalaga Island. We have only three primary schools in this area and they were also completely destroyed. Unfortunately, we also lost a life - Kisaka Christine, a one-and-a-half year old girl. Both her parents are admitted in Mayuge District Health Centre in critical condition. 

Our prayers are: Education, which is just one of the very many challenges fishing communities and islands are facing. Children have just reported back to school; if these few education institutions are affected, the situation is appalling.

We also request that there should be urgent intervention from the responsible ministry, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, so that our people can have a better response. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should support the people of the islands. If it is not in the budget, we are aware that the contingency fund is now available. Please, support the people of Buvuma.

3.28
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise an issue of national importance concerning the money paid to senior citizens. 

I was in my constituency one week ago and the report the senior citizens gave me was that they have been receiving this money irregularly. Last year, for instance, from January up to August they were given money for six months instead of eight. They thought it would be recovered later but it was not. From September to December, which was four months, they were given money for two months. It continued up to this year. For the eight months of January up to August, they were still paid for six months. Whenever they try to complain, they are told that the money that is available and whoever wants to complain can go to Kampala and complain from there. 

Therefore, my prayers are:

I would like to get clarification from the concerned ministry about why this is happening. If there are challenges with money, I think the best would be to explain. They came to me and raised this issue, so I request for clarification.

I would like to get some assurance that for those months that they were not paid, they will be paid. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should come and explain the discrepancies in payments in Aringa North and explain whether the arrears will be paid. Could we have an answer next week? 

3.30
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

As a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, I have been receiving several complaints but in particular from two countries, China and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). We have Ugandans who are continually being detained in the UAE and China and they do not even appear in court or get an explanation as to why they are being detained. 

A case in point is the family of Sulaiman Mbuga, which has approached me. This is somebody that was arrested in transit in Dubai as he was going for a medical operation and he had his documents. He was just told that Interpol needed him and he was arrested him in transit and he has been detained in their country from January to-date. He has not seen any court. He was interviewed for three minutes only and detained. 

As a sovereign country like Uganda that has an embassy, why should we continue like this? It is our cardinal principle as Ugandan leaders to protect our citizens. It is their constitutional right. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to you to task the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to make sure that these countries do not abuse us. It is very important that people are given fair treatment. If we all start doing the same to Emiratis who are coming to Uganda, they will also not like it. We can equally do the same but we do not believe in such. We have constitutional rule in Uganda. 

On the issue of Mbuga, the family is concerned. The man is sick and he has never seen any relative, even his own lawyer has been denied access, yet we have the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and there is an embassy there. I request this House to intervene seriously on this matter of Mbuga.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a serious issue. We direct the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to come and explain to us whether they are aware that Mr Mbuga has been there for nine months without going to court and to tell us what they are doing about it because he is a Ugandan who should be protected by his Government. The minister should come and report to us on Tuesday.

3.32
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My issue of urgent national importance is about the recent barrage of rainfall and hailstorms that we have had in my constituency that have left 42 villages hard hit. A total of 32 houses had their roofs blown off. Gardens of beans, maize, cassava and coffee, among others, have been destroyed. A church in a place called Kanywambogo had its roof blown off. A 12-stance pit latrine in Lugalama Primary School was blown off. The situation is dire. I thought it right to appeal for relief items and some iron sheets to able to resettle our people.

Secondly, I also need to raise an alarm to the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness.  We have a hill called Nsinda Hill which has cracked and is giving way. I think the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness needs to hurry to our place to be able to take care of the situation early. It is a very high hill that has been housing masts of telecom companies but it is giving way and the cracks are visible. We would like to interest the ministry in taking it up and coming to our rescue -(Interruption)

MR WOBOYA: I have been standing all along so that I can say something about this matter of disaster, and I thank you for giving way. The issue I would like to bring to the attention of colleagues here is that we have what we call a contingency fund, which I think is in our budget. However, every time we talk about disaster issues and when you go to Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) they tell you there is no money to respond. 

These disasters occur everywhere; even in my constituency, as we talk now, people are being displaced by hailstorms and heavy rains. We would like to know what happened with the implementation of the two per cent requirement of the contingency fund so that we can have these disasters responded to in a meaningful way. That is the information I would like to add.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it was Tuesday last week when the minister said the money is available.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, it is true that we appropriated Shs 66 billion under the contingency fund. I think the minister in charge of disaster preparedness should take advantage of this and address the issues that are emerging in the countryside.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, minister, we gave you money. In the first three years, he had no money but now apart from the budget, we have given him the contingency fund. Please, address the issue raised by hon. Agaba.

BILLS 
FIRST READING 

THE AFRICAN EXPORT-IMPORT BANK AGREEMENT (IMPLEMENTATION) BILL, 2018

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Bill entitled “The African Export-Import Bank Agreement (Implementation) Bill, 2018” for first reading. It is accompanied by the certificate of financial implications.

THE SPEAKER: Members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back within 45 days.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE MISTREATMENT OF FISHERMEN AT VARIOUS LANDING SITES AND ON THE STATE OF SECURITY IN UGADNA

THE SPEAKER: We had asked the Prime Minister to come but I do not know who is standing in for him. Who is responding?

3.37
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister is not available. He is preparing to go and represent His Excellency the President at the UN General Assembly in New York. Therefore, for the time being, he is not going to come to the House because it is impossible.

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Madam Speaker, for the past two years, we have been expressing our concern about the issues of torture and extorting money from fishermen. We even had an opportunity to interact with the President on these issues and he promised that something would be done. You even ordered the Office of the Prime Minister to come and present a statement and probably a strategy on how to deal with this. Is the First Deputy Prime Minister, who has the same powers as the Prime Minister, in order to refer to the Prime Minister who is not in Parliament at the moment?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members of the Cabinet, by the time we demand for action, it is because you have failed to act. This matter has come up time and again. I do not know whether the minster in charge of defence is listening. Is he listening? The issue of mistreatment of the fishermen has been on the Floor of this House for several months. Yesterday, we directed that we want a statement from the Government and we want a statement today. (Applause)

MR MIGGADE: Madam Speaker, we have had very many contentious issues on this Floor of Parliament. Every time, we have tasked Cabinet to respond, we have failed to get an answer. We have decided as Parliament that if possible, we suspend this sitting until we get a response because our people have suffered enough. We have gone everywhere up to the President and there is no response. Madam Speaker, I request that we, please, –(Interruption)

MR GEORGE OUMA: Madam Speaker, when you came to the islands, we thought we were going to be rescued. When you left the islands, over 40 people were arrested. They are removing their engines, leaving them floating on the waters. They are looking for them and they are telling them, “You call Kadaga to help you.” 

Madam Speaker, we cannot sit here when our people are being tortured. In fact, they said they are also going to torture me. Are you waiting for my body to be brought here so that you can bring condolences?

Madam Speaker, I therefore move a motion that the House be suspended.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, you guided the House very well and you informed the minister in charge to come today and present this very important statement on the Floor of Parliament. It is surprising that the minister is not present and willing to present this statement. I think this is undermining the power of Parliament and it is an indication that there is no respect for the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. We need to be very serious and firm. The minister should present the statement right now as you directed yesterday. 

MS EGUNYU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I concur with the Member who proposed that the House sittings be postponed until the minister is ready to present the statement. 

Madam Speaker, if we postpone the sitting now and abide by what you directed yesterday – I feel very bad that we discuss other things here yet our people are dying on the lake because of the brutality of soldiers; people are being killed every day. Just four or five days ago, women were stripped naked and paraded in public on Lubya Island.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, are you going to answer our questions today?

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, I got this information yesterday and I talked to you. I looked for the Member who raised this issue but we never met. We only managed to meet this afternoon.

Madam Speaker, I want to be on the record of this House that Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) is not known anywhere for condoning brutalisation or misconduct against citizens –(Interjections)- Can I explain my point –

THE SPEAKER: Order!

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I have taken this matter up but I beg to be given two weeks -(Interjections)- honourable members, in order to solve a problem, first of all, you have to identify the problem and then cure it. Otherwise, if you want a statement because the matter was raised, you may not get a comprehensive statement, which may not even answer the questions. 

Madam Speaker, we have called the commanders – as you know, UPDF supports the regulation of fisheries - therefore –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Fisheries Act squarely vests the mandate to do any fishing activities on the lake on the Fisheries Department. The UPDF actually took over that function. In fact, in all the districts, the district fisheries officers have been left out of this process. The army deals with the office they created called the Association of Fishers and Lake Users of Uganda (AFALU). They have actually left out the technical people in the districts regarding this matter. 

Therefore, is the honourable minister, in order to lie to this House that the army is helping the fisheries department when the current Commissioner of Fisheries in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries is complaining about the same issue?  We have complained to the commissioner and we have raised issues regarding the takeover by army on the issue of fishing in the communities. Is the minister in order to lie to this House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if this was a new matter, I would understand. However, this is a matter where we have asked for statements from your ministry four times this year and yet you have not come back to us. We want answers today. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, this matter involves the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries and the local leadership. After I talked to you yesterday, I also tried to contact people from different agencies. However, our view –(Interruption)– May I beg for your protection, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, you want to hear from me but again you are shutting me down; where shall we end? I would like to be on record that I should be given two weeks to report to this House. 
	
Madam Speaker, we are going to deal with any undisciplined solider. We are also working with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. We are meeting tomorrow so that we can bring a meaningful statement to this House (Interruption)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Based on the alarming situation we have had for a couple of months and after the directives that you have given, and now that we do not have answers that we can take to our constituencies, won’t it be prudent for you to direct the relevant ministry to stop the operations of the UPDF in the islands which are affected, until the minister is ready to give us some responses? This would harmonise the relationship between the civilians and the enforcement. That is the guidance I am seeking. Thank you.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to give information to hon. Ababiku. I would like to say that as she appeals to the Office of the Speaker to issue a directive to stop the operations of UPDF on water bodies, a colleague seated next to me, hon. Abott Ouma, from Bukooli Island, has just said that 40 people have been arrested, tortured and told that they should call Kadaga. Sincerely, how will the Office of the Speaker stop them when people the other side are saying now that we have arrested you, you call the Speaker.

Madam Speaker, I would like to also use this opportunity to move an oral notice of a motion under rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure. I move that the Office of the Speaker constitutes a committee to investigate –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, colleagues are saying they would like to debate now but yesterday, we debated the matter and you ordered the Office of the Prime Minister to bring an answer.

The Office of the Prime Minister has not brought any answer neither do we have any answers from the Ministry of Security. Everybody has not brought answers. However much we debate, everybody will be giving – maybe somebody will amend this motion - I would like to move a motion that you constitute a committee to thoroughly investigate the conduct of UPDF soldiers deployed on water bodies. 

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Kibalya. I would like to amend your motion to say that Parliament suspends this sitting until we have a statement from the Prime Minister concerning the mistreatment of our people. I beg to move.

3.53
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): I seconded the motion, Madam Speaker, and I would like to speak to it. Thank you very much. My honourable colleague raised a very critical matter. As you noted, this is an emergency where the frontbench is not responding yet we cannot simply abandon our people to a Government that does not act.

Since we have Parliament and he has made a proposal to Parliament to constitute a committee, Parliament can give that committee a timeline to go on the ground. Whereas I sympathise with hon. Migadde who is calling for the suspension of Parliament sitting, tomorrow, there can be other activities which involve UPDF where they brutalise or even kill people when you are away. How are you going to address it?

It is important that this committee goes on the ground for a week or even three days and then report back here particularly on investigating the conduct of the soldiers against the people who have been brutalised.

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr Moses Kizige): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter before the House is very important. It affects people’s lives and livelihoods. However, it is also true that since the UPDF intervened in this sector, we have seen better harvest of fish. 

The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs has asked for two weeks to investigate this matter comprehensively for us to find a lasting solution. I do not see any problem. You see, the message we send to the public is very important. If we stampede this matter, we shall not send the right message to the public.

Therefore, I pray and urge colleagues to allow the minister the two weeks to come back to Parliament with a comprehensive report and the matter is closed once and for all.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I said if it was a new matter, I would understand. We have asked for a statement on this issue on four different occasions. First, it was on the lorries of the fishermen taken to Nakasongola three years ago. For the last three years, they have been parked in Nakasongola but no one seems to care. We have talked about brutality but no one has come up. How much more time should we give Government?

LT. COL RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I am begging for two weeks –(Interjection)– yes, because this thing is not simple. There are allegations. There is a good story and there is a bad story but you do not kill a good story with a bad story. We have to isolate valuables. 

If there are some officers, who have made a mistake in the process of executing duty, they need to be identified –(Interjection)– yes. I can only assure the House that we are taking up the matter and we beg for only two weeks to report to the House.

MR OCHEN: I am raising a procedural matter, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: There is one on the Floor, what order? He wants you to speak? Do you want to take the Floor?

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I stand to raise a procedural matter. The matter being discussed now is a very grave one. I am appealing to this Parliament not to take this matter lightly. This matter exposes the weaknesses within the institutions of Government.

For this country to move well on this matter, Parliament must take a decision. The decision I am calling upon Parliament to make is to constitute a committee to represent it and to go to the affected areas throughout the country within a limited time that we will decide. That committee will then submit a report on the Floor of Parliament, which will then take a decision because the Executive seems to undermine the operations of Parliament.

The Executive seems not to listen to your instructions, Madam Speaker. We cannot continue as an institution of Parliament to operate in this manner. The ministers must respect this arm of Government and bring the answers to the questions that the Parliament of Uganda has asked for. 

The ministers in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Minister of Security, under the coordination of the Prime Minister, must explain why they continue to kill Ugandans over a natural resource called fish given by God. We know people who have rented our lakes. We know the people who have factories and are now using these institutions of Government to make profits, at the expense of Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, I appeal to you to save Ugandans. The only way you can do this is through Parliament approving a committee to go and save the honourable members and bring the report to the House. That is what I stand for and support.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is; you ruled that the ministry gives a statement today. So, I am very worried for a minister to engage in defiance campaign; a campaign they have been against. They have been defying your order. So, are we proceeding well for a whole minister to promote a defiance campaign against our Speaker? (Laughter)

4.02
MR FREDRICK GUME (NRM, Bulamogi North West County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true Members are emotionally charged. However, we should also have some reasons to let the minister get an opportunity to present to us facts with evidence. That does not rule out the fact that even the committee could go on- (Interjection) - I need your protection, Madam Speaker. I think we should be given an opportunity to drive a few points home. 

The minister said he is coming to the House to give a report. We are also saying, as the committee goes down to the field, the report of the minister should be available such that we can be able to compare the two aspects. I would like to submit.

4.03
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people of Bukonzo County West got the honour to receive your dignified and globally adored presence. When you visited us in Bukonzo County West, the cries were clear that the only source of livelihood, which is fishing especially at the border, had been run down by the UPDF. They went ahead to explain that when they get loans from banks to undertake fishing business, their fish, even those that are legally permitted to be on the market are impounded and only to be sold in the barracks.

Not only that, the UPDF have gone ahead to brutalise our own people. As a matter of fact, we have about four women that are nursing wounds, at Bwera Hospital, inflicted on their bodies by the UPDF belts. I also recognise that there is a threat directed at our colleague, hon. Ouma and this is the reason why this becomes a matter of urgency.

Therefore, we cannot allow the minister to go ahead with his two weeks. A threat is already directed at our colleague and I do not know where it is coming from and how much longer we need to wait. 

Madam Speaker, you made a ruling that a statement has to be delivered today and you have the last voice. Secondly, we should go ahead with constituting the select committee. However, in the meantime, this Parliament should direct that the torture, arrest, brutality and threat against our colleagues and those in the fishing industry should be stopped until this House receives a report. I would like to thank you.

4.06  
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I come from an area where many of my voters depend on the lake for their livelihood. My people, on top of the harsh internal conditions, are meeting external conditions from the neighbouring country, Congo. Their boats, nets and engines are taken. There is real piracy and many of them die. 

The issue at hand involves many sectors. It is a national issue. The intervention was meant to bring harmony on the lakes so that we can have good stocks for the economy. Since it involves many- (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to get clarification from the minister. The matter that he is talking about is cross border. I have heard him say this is a national issue. In my own assessment, when a matter involves Uganda and a neighbouring country, it is no longer a national issue. Actually, it is supposed to be an international or a regional issue. 

So, the clarification I would like the minister to make is; are you talking about issues which are within the borders of Uganda or also those outside Uganda?

MR KARUBANGA:  Thank you, hon. William Nzoghu. I was trying to build my point. On top of having problems on the lake due to internal problems, there are other areas which have external problems. It is multi-sectoral; we have the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Security, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and of course the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

We need to get a solution to this issue. If we are to get a solution, we really need to, as Parliament, be part of that solution. We, therefore, need to investigate it and come up with solutions which will give a lasting impact.

We have also the issue of the influx of people from other areas. We have wrong-doers moving from one area to the other. All those issues need to be looked at so that we can have a lasting solution. I beg to submit.

4.10
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of torturing people on the lakes is not a Ugandan matter alone. I am happy the Minister of Defence is looking at me very well. Yesterday, Kenyans watched how the Members of Parliament who had come to Sigulu Island to attend the burial of the mother of hon. Abott Ouma lament to an extent that the President of Kenya gave a comment this morning. 

I, therefore, request that it has been a habit in this Parliament that whenever important issues come, ministers keep on postponing them. I do not know whether the Prime Minister is not presiding over them well, whether it is in the routine of Cabinet that when issues are very important to the citizens of this country, our ministers keep on postponing problems.

How can we say that we should wait for 14 days when the people on waters who are supposed to take their children back to school have no source of income at all? (Interruption)

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, I request you as the head of this House - we are all Ugandans. I am saying that we should take this matter seriously. And I know anytime you will be paying tribute to us here; “Hon. Abott has been a very good colleague.” 

I have papers here and I am saying that if people cannot respect the orders of this House - last year, when I was speaking here, I talked to the major in a cordial manner. I called him and he asked me, “Who are you?” and I told him “I am hon. Abott George Ouma.” He said, “Do not talk to me, who told you Members of Parliament can talk to me? You are getting free money” and I reported here. 

What is going to take place, if you are going with your investigations, let those people on the waters be removed while investigations go on because they are going to kill us. 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, as I summarise, I would like us to agree, we have Uganda Police Marine Force in place, well trained with capacity to handle –(Interruption)

MR NTENDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Part of my constituency is on the waters. I have seven islands. Over the weekend, I visited my constituency the other side of the islands. The fishermen told me they were denying me access to board their boats. In fact, they are going to the extent of stopping the civil servants from using the lake.

Madam Speaker, as political leaders - in fact, on Sunday, they told me, “Honourable, we are giving you one week to produce the Speaker. We hear she was in Sigulu. We want the Speaker to come here next week to pronounce herself on this torture.”

When the Minister of Defence comes here to simply brag around and say, “two weeks” when Ugandans are dying! Political leaders and civil servants cannot move on the waters. Are we going to suffocate service delivery in this country when ministers are seated in their offices without producing reports? Thank you.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, lastly, I would like to give to my colleague to finish up with the information.

MR NOAH MUTEBI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also represent a constituency, which is bordering Lake Kyoga. When you go to Nakasongola, you will find very many vehicles impounded. They are impounded from Jinja, Mukono, Luwero and Kampala and taken to Nakasongola. They are rotting and losing value. Our people are suffering. We need to do something so that those vehicles go back and work for our Ugandans so that they can get money to take children to school and take care of their homes.

Madam Speaker, when you go to Nakasongola, you will find that boats have been cut into pieces, burnt and our people are suffering. I also support the issue of constituting a committee that will go and investigate and come back and give a comprehensive report to this House so that we take a decision. I thank you.

4.16
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need to contextualise what we are dealing with. It is not in issue that there was some improvement ever since the Army started operating on the water bodies. What is an issue is that the Army through the directive of the President took over management of fisheries on the lakes and rivers. As a result, they disrespect even the Commissioner of Fisheries and leaders.

I visited Rwabitooke to see someone. They told me those people threw him in water. I was there with hon. Otto that time. I was shocked. When I raised this matter with the commander in charge, he told me that he could not talk to politicians but only talks to the President. He said I should go to the President.

Madam Speaker, the suffering, which is in Jinja is all over in all these fishing communities. It is on this basis that you see the anger of Members and know that the statement of the minister - of course, if the minister is truthful, he knows that what is taking place will not stop unless the President has intervened and given different instructions to these officers.

That we should strike a balance so that the excesses of the Army, the impunity they are using should stop so that as their lawful operations, they work with the Commissioner of Fisheries and the district fisheries officers. Do not even talk to them.

I went to my place and asked whether the district fisheries officers - he does not know what is taking place on the water bodies. The Army is busy doing its own things, extortion and everything. So, even now, the extortion and the torture of people, which is being attributed to the UPDF is as a result of the UPDF not wanting to work under the Government structures.

Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that as of now, what we can achieve is a directive from this House that as per the Fisheries Act, let the fisheries department take over so that it is only them to ask for support from the Fisheries Marine and the Army when need arises. What is taking place now, the Army is in charge of the water bodies. They do not listen to technical people.

If we would achieve that, Madam Speaker. As of now, as we wait for the investigation of the committee, there will be no solution. My people came to attend a workshop in Lugazi and immediately they went back, they were all arrested. It is even improper that you cannot even report anywhere.

I, therefore, would like to propose that in the interim, let us follow the law, because the Prime Minister knows what the law says about the fishing industry. Let fisheries take charge as we deal with other excesses and correct them.

If we find that the Army is required, then we shall involve them other than them taking over the fish activity on the water bodies. Thank you.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I rise under Rule 86 of the Rules of Procedure, “Decision of the Speaker or Chairperson. (1)The Speaker or the Chairperson of a committee shall be responsible for the observance of the rules or order in the House or committee. (2)The decision of the Speaker or Chairperson on any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House, except upon a substantive motion made after notice.”

Madam Speaker, you are here as the chairperson. You are presiding over this sitting today. You have made a statement and a directive that you ordered the Prime Minister yesterday to come with a statement. Today, you have again ordered that the statement should be made today. 

For us to retain the power of this House, your order should not fall in vain. (Applause)Your order or directive should be listened and adhered to by both the Members of Parliament and the Front Bench. 

From my observation, there seems to be a cold war between Parliament and the Executive. Your orders are never followed, your letters are never responded to in a manner that respects the authority of this House. You have made a serious statement and order to Government and we would like that authority and power to be seen today. 

The minister responsible should quickly and immediately run wherever and come with an interim statement and the full statement will follow thereafter. Therefore, I would like to know whether it is in order for the minister to continuously try to review your order, question it and yet, you are supposed to be listened to in silence. I rest my case.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before you make another pronouncement, allow me to say one or two things. The challenge that I find with the minister Lt Col (Rtd) Rwamirama is not only limited to him but the whole Front Bench. This is not the first time that a matter is raised and Lt Col (Rtd) Rwamirama gets up and asks for time for the answer to come and he does not come back.

I would like to quote the case that I referred to of Brig. Wasswa who went to Kasilo under the umbrella of Operation Wealth Creation and wanted to uproot a maize mill. Another group wanted to take away a generator of a cooling plant from Serere. Lt Col (Rtd) Rwamirama here said that they were going to deal with that brigadier but to date, it is two months and two weeks but there is no action that has been taken.

Yesterday, the matter of UPDF was again raised and you gave a directive that this soldier should be apprehended. Today, we are being told that they are investigating.

We have heard of cases where people have been arrested before investigation. What is special with this officer? I would buy his idea of two weeks if the honourable Minister of Defence was saying that they have suspended the operations of UPDF in the islands in the meantime. 

Given that history that is not only limited to him but to others, we find it very difficult to take him seriously. It is high time the Front Bench listened and respected the Speaker’s ruling as per the Rules of Procedure. Without that, we shall be operating like we are in the market. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we can only say that the Ministry of Defence is notorious for not responding to issues in this House. Hon. Noah Mutebi when did you raise the issue of the cars in Nakasongola? 

MR NOAH MUTEBI: Madam Speaker, it was some time back, about three months ago.

THE SPEAKER: We have not received an answer. Hon. Ouma raised issues again, hon. Migadde raised issues, Nakaseke - but all these have not been responded to.

I find it difficult to grant you the two weeks. You are aware about these issues. If you are not, there are on the Hansard. We want your answer on Tuesday without fail. You do not need more time. You have got the capacity to get information.

Yesterday, I gave you a letter, which I wrote to the President and it had names of those soldiers. Have you acted on them? I am sorry; we shall not give you the two weeks. Bring a statement here on Tuesday. In the meantime, the House is adjourned sine die.

(The House rose at 4.26 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 
