

Wednesday, 23 September 2020

Parliament met at 3.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to begin by drawing your attention to the parliamentary calendar, in particular the fact that we shall be proceeding for the Independence recess on 2 October 2020. This means that all urgent business should be concluded by 1 October, which will be the last sitting day of the session. 

I also wish to report, under Rule 167 of the Rules of Procedure, that the Appointments Committee interacted with and approved members of the Health Service Commission. One of the salient issues we established is the continued absence of services for people with special needs, for instance the blind, the deaf, and the mute. They require medical services but cannot access them because of lack of communication. 

We have recommended that training includes a component of sign language. We hope that the Minister of Education and Sports, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Minister of Health and the Equal Opportunities Commission will address this issue. 

Thirdly, last week, I read in the press that the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) intends to withdraw the Mbulamuti Ferry once the bridge at Isimba Dam is completed. This is a position, in my view, that is unresearched because we, the stakeholders, have not been consulted. The UNRA official who made the statement may not be aware of the geographical and logistical impediments in the area. I urge the Minister of Works and Transport to clarify this situation.

I have also received a number of complaints from suppliers of coffee seedlings, to the effect that the Uganda Coffee Development Authority has not paid them for their seedlings over several seasons. I would like the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to assure this House and the seedling suppliers that they will be paid at the earliest opportunity.  

The last issue has to do with a petition from traders and tailors, which was presented here by hon. Nsereko. I met the traders who are importers of textiles. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had hiked their taxes under the pretext that we needed to protect the local textile industries. 

However, the situation is that this is a blanket tax on textiles; it includes textiles that are not manufactured in Uganda, for instance jeans material. In reality, the textiles importers do not pose a threat to the local industry. The industry is thriving and employs thousands of young people. If we do not address the tax regime, they will be forced out of business. 

Yesterday, I attended a meeting with the traders and officials of the Uganda Revenue Authority. The traders appeal for time to import their items, which were ordered for before the lockdown. Factories in China were, however, closed and there was no production. I will be communicating to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development formally about this situation. Thank you very much. 

There is just one other issue. I have now received a petition from operators of gyms, spas and wellness centres. They have written to His Excellency the President requesting that their situation be reviewed so that they are allowed to operate. They have been out of work for many months and can no longer continue. Again, I will be sending their petition to the national taskforce but I thought I should let the House know that there is that section of our society still under lockdown. 

There are just two matters of national concern. Hon. Chekwel, you have two minutes. 

3.21
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise on an issue of emergency in the health sector. 

Yesterday, we, the people of Sebei, received notice from the Chief Administrative Officer of Kapchorwa District and the Medical Superintendent of Kapchorwa Hospital. The notice stated that due to the COVID-19 pandemic, over 50 staff of the hospital were affected and we have registered three deaths; therefore, they said they are going to close some departments - the female ward, male ward, children’s ward, the chronic section ward and then the outpatients wards. The notice went ahead to state that the laboratory and maternity ward would only be opened for emergencies. 

Madam Speaker, this news has shocked the whole area. People are panicking because Kapchorwa Hospital is a referral hospital for our region. Although we have been asking the ministry to upgrade it to a referral status in vain, it still acts as a referral hospital. Kween District does not have a referral hospital; we only have a health centre IV which does not even have a theatre. This morning, I received information that there was a lady going for her maternity checks and she had moved to Kween right from the border between Bulambuli and Kapchorwa. 

All this, of course, raises lot of questions. From the communication they sent, they said the information is already with the Ministry of Health. We are now asking some questions: One, what is the ministry going to do to intervene? You can now see that all the critical areas are closed with effect from today. What is the ministry going to do? 

The last time we passed the supplementary budget here, the ministry said they were going to recruit some staff. If they have recruited or going to recruit, can we benefit from these staff? Can they come as emergency staff to solve the issues of Kween?

Secondly, we have been asking the ministry and they promised to work on our health centre IV theatre; we have waited but there is nothing happening. If we had an operational theatre in Kween, that would have been a solution.

Thirdly, we do not have a district hospital. Can I still use this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to request the Government to upgrade one of our health centres so that we at least have a district hospital? Otherwise, there is panic.

I also request that we sensitise the people so that we avoid the pandemic from spreading. I see the people of Sebei taking things as usual. When we go for burials, for example, many people attend. Therefore, I think the ministry needs to intervene and have at least a budget for sensitisation -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know whether you are making a submission; you came in with a matter of national concern about the closure of the several wards but now you are going into issues of the budget.

MS CHEKWEL: Yes, Madam Speaker, I was just bringing that up as an intervention; if we actually recruited staff, can we intervene by sending some staff to help us in Kween? Secondly, they can sensitise the people and even encourage them to go to health centres. Now there is fear because they know that most of the staff have been affected, and soon we may have a lot of self-medication. Therefore, sensitisation should also be done and we request for at least a district hospital for Kween District and a theatre for the health centre IV. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague for raising the issue concerning Kapchorwa Hospital. We have received that information. 

I would like to sympathise with the people of Kapchorwa. It was very unfortunate to have over 50 staff from one facility infected with COVID-19 and we lost some of them as well. Indeed, it is true and it is sad to note - we have also received information from other hospitals - that some medical staff are infected and they have to undergo treatment and others have to undergo mandatory isolation.

Madam Speaker, the technical team from the Ministry of Health has received this information. We are working together with the district officials - the medical superintendent, the District Health Officer (DHO) and the Chief Administrative Officer of Kapchorwa.

What is required and what has been planned right now is to fumigate the affected wards. Secondly, what is also needed, which we plan to do, is to see how best the staff can be relocated so that some of the critical services can be offered. Staff within the district facilities from health centres or from outside can be sent to offer services to Kapchorwa Hospital. The other plan that has been put in place is to see how the nearest health facilities can offer services to the people.

Madam Speaker, this information has reached the Ministry of Health. Together with the district local government, we are trying our best to ensure that the facility is not totally closed. After fumigation, services will be offered to the people of Kapchorwa and the neighbouring districts. Thank you

3.29
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker and my colleagues, it is now a year and a half since Busia District was put under quarantine, with no movement of animals. This matter has affected our people very much. As people were under the COVID-19 lockdown, we also had quarantine placed on animals.

I have brought this up as a matter of national importance because since the lockdown has been lifted, our people who were in the business of animal trade have been affected very much. We think that the step that was taken by the veterinary commissioner was very unfair for our people. 

First of all, Busia is not an animal breeding place at all. We were zoned as a district that carries out agro-industry. Secondly, all the animals that are brought in for slaughter are inspected from where they come from and also inspected at the place where they are slaughtered. Therefore, this matter is very important. At a time when we have just reopened for business, our people who are in this business should also be allowed to carry on with their businesses.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, through their commissioner, should tell the people of Busia why it has taken this long - almost a year and a half - yet the districts that neighbour Busia like Tororo and others, which had the same cases, were permitted to trade. 

It is my prayer that the minister should tell Parliament why Busia District has been put under animal quarantine for almost one and a half years. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries to give us an answer on the issue of the quarantine; if they could do so by Tuesday next week. Thank you. 

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to raise an issue that is affecting not only me but may also affect other people unknowingly.

Madam Speaker, within this compound, we have the Marabou stork. If you look right in front of you, these birds are there. They are not edible and their numbers are increasing. The stench is steadily increasing and will affect people like me, who are extremely allergic to strong smell. 

As I speak now, a feather - if Members are observant, you will see some feathers flying around - has just come straight into my hand. So, we may inhale these small feathers unknowingly and it can pose a danger to our health.

Madam Speaker, we all know that we have some zoonotic diseases. It is not known what might come out of the Marabou storks that are here. Therefore, I want to request that your office takes keen interest in these birds that are increasing here and finds a way of dispersing them. Maybe they could go to some other location rather than being within this vicinity. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the concern is noted. It is a new situation; I will ask the Clerk to examine it and advise us. 

3.34
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is about power outages in Gulu. 

Last year, it was promised that by November, power supply would have improved as well as the upgrading of our electricity to serve both domestic and industrial purposes. However, this promise has not yet seen the light. Power in Gulu District keeps “beeping”, yet we have young people who earn their living from operating businesses like salons, restaurants, etcetera. So, this is very frustrating and disappointing, especially now that Gulu is a city.

I pray that the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development explains to us clearly when they will rectify all these problems, especially in Gulu City and the northern region at large. We were told that Aswa Hydro Power Dam and Karuma Dam would help to rectify this problem but we are still faced with this problem from the last one year since they made that promise. 

In addition, power is not being connected to people’s homes. We have been told the equipment is not there. Is that problem affecting Gulu City only? Can the minister explain to us clearly? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. The issue of intermittent power supply to Gulu has been on the Floor of this House many times. I think the people of Gulu deserve a proper answer. Can the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development come and give us a response not later than Tuesday next week.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ALLEGED CONSIDERATION BY THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION NOT TO NOMINATE PERSONS WHOSE NAMES ON THEIR NATIONAL IDS DIFFER FROM THOSE ON THEIR ACADEMIC TRANSCRIPTS

3.37
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a statement on the alleged consideration by the Electoral Commission not to nominate persons whose names on their national identification cards differ from those on the academic transcripts. I am making this statement in response to a question on a matter of national importance raised to this House by hon. Angelline Osegge, Woman Representative, Soroti, on 15 September 2020. 

Background
Before 26 March 20l5, when the Registration of Persons Act, 2015 commenced, if aspirants for elective political positions had changed their names by reason of marriage, they would only be required to present a sworn statutory declaration/an affidavit and a marriage certificate to the Electoral Commission if the names in the national voters register were different from the names on their academic papers. However, adult persons who changed their names completely would go through the deed poll, which is a legal process of changing a person’s name provided for under section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act, 2015.

The Legal Requirement for Changing the Name of an Adult 

Madam Speaker, when the Registration of Persons Act, 2015 came into force on 26 March 2015, the legal position now is that every adult person who wishes to change his or her name must comply with the provisions of section 36 of the Act. 

Section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act, 2015 under the title, “Change of name of an adult” provides thus: 

“(1) Any person, being over the age of eighteen years or a widower, widow, divorced person or a married person, who wishes to change his or her name, shall cause to be published in the Gazette a notice in the prescribed form of his or her intention to do so.

(2) Not less than seven days after the publication of the notice, the person intending to change his or her name may apply in the prescribed form to the registration office of the registration centre in which his or her birth is registered.

(3) The registration officer shall, upon being satisfied that the requirements of this section have been carried out and upon payment of the prescribed fee, amend the register accordingly and shall sign and date the amendment.” 

Section 3 of the Act defines registration centres to mean “centres that are designated as such by the National Identification and Registration Authority in accordance with section 58 of this Act” and registration officer to mean “any officer appointed by the National Identification and Registration Authority with responsibility for registering of citizens under this Act.” The Registration of Persons Act, 2015 is implemented by the National Identification and Registration Authority.

What the Electoral Commission is simply saying is that an aspiring candidate, who presents documents with different or varying names for nomination and alleges that he or she changed his or her name at some point for some reason after 26 March 2015 when the Registration of Persons Act came into force, must provide evidence that they changed their name or names in accordance with the requirements of section 36 of the Act cited above. However, when an aspiring candidate changed their names before 26 March 2015 through a statutory declaration/affidavit, the presentation of a sworn statutory declaration or affidavit shall be valid and considered for nominations by the Electoral Commission.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, what the Electoral Commission is saying is that they want to follow the law to avoid any legal challenges that may come up both for the candidate or elected leader that may be affected and the Electoral Commission after nominations or the general elections. 

The deed poll, which is provided for under section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act, 2015, applies from the 25th day of March 2015 when the Act came into force. Any aspiring candidate who changed the name before 25 March 2015 through a statutory declaration shall not be affected upon nomination. I so submit.

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Basalirwa had an issue on that.

3.44
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, learned Deputy Attorney-General. 

I think what the learned Deputy Attorney-General should be informing the country about is actually what constitutes a change of name. The provisions of the law that you are citing relate to change of names and those provisions, in any case, are not new. The Registration of Persons Act amended the Births and Deaths Registration Act, which was the position of the law concerning change of names. 

When you look at the provisions of the Registration of Persons Act, they are similar with the provisions of the Registration of the Births and Deaths Act – a law which was in existence before. Therefore, the coming into force of the Registration of Persons Act did not in any way provide a new method of changing names. That provision was maintained word by word.

The concern here is: what constitutes a change of name? If somebody is married and they adopt the names of their spouse, is that change of name? Do you have to go through the process of a deed poll and the Gazette as it were? Can’t the Electoral Commission take judicial notice of the fact that - In the Commonwealth, when a lady gets married, they adopt the names of their husband; if somebody presents a marriage certificate to authenticate a marriage, do they still have to go through the process of a statutory declaration or gazetting as the law requires? That was the major concern.

Secondly, the Electoral Commission should clarify the clear position in regard to change of names. The issue the learned Deputy Attorney-General is talking about has been adjudicated upon. The Supreme Court, in the case of Serunjogi Mukibi vs Lule Mawiya, did clarify on what constitutes change of name. In the case of Cissy Namujju, which I argued, the court did mention what constitutes change of name. That is where the position should be, and that was the concern of hon. Osegge.

If somebody is adopting the name of a husband, is that a change of name? Do they have to go through that process? That is the clarification you need to give. That is the concern the Rt Hon. Speaker was raising, that the biggest culprits are likely to be women who actually adopt names of their husbands. If that position is not clarified, I think there is going to be a very big problem. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, you know that we studied long ago. One had a particular name in school and then when one gets married, they add another name or two. That is my concern. If one paper says “Jane Akello” and another says “Jane Akello Kiwanuka”, I will not be nominated.

3.48
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I believe the Attorney-General did not get the gist of hon. Osegge’s complaint. The complaint was the discrepancy between the names appearing on the national identity card vis-à-vis the names appearing on the academic documents. Quoting the Registration of Persons Act on change of names is in respect to the name you have registered under that Act and you are changing that name during the subsistence of that Act. 

Here, you have Members who obtained academic documents before marriage and subsequent to the marriage – You know what it means if you do not adopt your husband’s name; you may end up losing on the bequest. So, subsequent to the marriage, you adopt the husband’s name. Does that constitute a change of name? Definitely, it is not, under the Act.

Therefore, it is better you advise the Electoral Commission not to subject itself and Government to unnecessary litigation. The change of name envisaged and talked about is the name you have registered under the Act and you subsequently change it. 

In the case of adopting a name and you get registered under the NIRA Act and these names do not tally with the names you have in your academic documents, what is needed is not a deed poll. The only thing you would need is a statutory declaration, as it was then, to clarify that the names Veronica Bichetero and the names Veronica Eragu refer to the same person but Bichetero came in because she got married to Bichetero – I am sorry to use my sister-in-law’s names. 

I believe you need to revisit your paper, learned Attorney-General, and advise the Electoral Commission to comply with the law. (Applause)

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I appreciate my learned colleague’s presentation and your particular observation that this may affect particularly married couples. However, my understanding of section 36, when elaborated, is that the Electoral Commission simply wants evidence - present a marriage certificate. 

The intention is that you prove that you are not simply using someone else’s documents but that the documents you have are yours and that you adopted this other name as a result of marriage. That is the position envisaged in this section.

THE SPEAKER: Is that embedded in the electoral laws? 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, it is not in the electoral laws but the reason the Electoral Commission is enforcing this in particular is to avoid litigation. The leader will be challenged later that they used X, Y and Z’s academic documents because evidence was not presented at the start, during nomination, that the papers they have are actually theirs and that the documents they attached with the additional names arose as a result of marriage. 

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, we know that when you undergo cultural or traditional marriage, it is marriage and yet it does not have a marriage certificate. What do you say to a person like that without a marriage certificate?

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, I think you will have to be very clear on this issue because Members will not be in Kampala to look for you when they are getting nominated or not being nominated. This is a matter to be clarified before the nominations because the registrars in our districts may take different decisions. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, we shall maybe present a more fluid paper and make it more understandable to our colleagues. Thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, this matter is likely to evoke a lot of controversy. I would like to seek for your indulgence so that the Attorney-General and the Electoral Commission interface with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and this matter is exhausted. I do not see any amount of explanation, back and forth on the Floor, at this point in time, that is going to clarify this matter.

As I have already said, Madam Speaker, there is a lot of jurisprudence on this aspect that cannot easily be concluded on the Floor in this short period of time and yet nominations are right around the corner. Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, if the Attorney-General and the Electoral Commission can interface with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, then we could get consensus there and brief this House as soon as possible. I so pray, Madam Speaker.

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am just wondering why the Electoral Commission brought up this issue. By bringing it up, it has raised a lot of confusion and yet there has been a normal practice.

I joined politics when I was at university in my second year. I just went to test the ground and I adopted my father’s name, Opendi. When we went for nomination, I had to present an affidavit because my academic documents then did not have the name Opendi. I have been using the name Opendi since then - Achieng Sarah Opendi - and in addition to my academic documents, I always attach an affidavit.

I am therefore wondering why they have had to raise it now because it has been the practice. If your academic documents do not have a third name which you could have picked from maybe your father or husband, then you present an affidavit. I am wondering why it has become an issue now and yet that has been the practice. In bringing it up now, it is actually raising - As hon. Asuman Basalirwa has said, I think there is need for clarification, otherwise the registrars may create a difficult situation for some of the candidates in our districts. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

(Ms Cecilia Ogwal rose_)

THE SPEAKER: On the same issue? Yes; hon. Ogwal? 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, as we are speaking now, nomination for lower councils started on Monday and the issue of names is already coming up. Also, not everybody goes to church or the mosque for marriage; some of them just pay dowry and the gombolola chief gives them some kind of certification. 

These issues are coming up in our respective constituencies. I have been approached by so many women who have told me that they are being rejected. I do not know what to do; I am not a lawyer. 

I would have expected the Attorney-General to come here and explain to us why the Electoral Commission is not sensitising the public about the elections. Nobody is being told anything. All these women who are being sent away are now blaming Members of Parliament. They think it is Members of Parliament who are actually managing the electoral processes.

Madam Speaker, I am extremely concerned that the Electoral Commission is not giving adequate information to the public concerning the process which is going on. I think it is very important that the Attorney-General comes to this Parliament and gives us the detailed requirements and procedures that they need to follow.

I have been standing for elections for years; do I have to go through all this legal certification, when you know that I have been Mrs Ogwal for all these years and you know me as Mrs Ogwal? Do I need an endorsement from my lawyer saying that I am Mrs Ogwal? (Laughter) 

You need to tell me that if I have already been nominated before using the same certificates, I do not need to go through the process again. The general public does not know this. Even we, Members of Parliament seated here, do not know some of the procedures. Why are you keeping all those details in your pockets? Can we be told what is going on? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, I think you can see the seriousness of the issue. Actually, it boils down to discrimination - if it continues to be discrimination of some sections of the society. I would urge you to expeditiously handle it with the committee and the Electoral Commission and come out with a statement.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, before the Attorney-General comes up, I would like to say that this matter is of great national importance, following what hon. Cecilia Ogwal has stated, that the nominations started on Monday. 

Given the magnitude of the matter, would it not be procedurally right for you, Madam Speaker, to direct that the Attorney-General and the Electoral Commission tomorrow morning meet with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and then in the afternoon, a report is presented here? This is because nominations are going on and they are about to close for the local governments. 

However, since nominations are going on up to next week, those who have missed out as a result of these new developments from the Electoral Commission can be able to re-tender or re-submit their papers for nomination on Friday, or Monday and Tuesday next week. 

If we push this response to next week, Madam Speaker, then the affected people will miss out and they will never get nominated. I would like to appeal that instructions be given to the Attorney-General, the Electoral Commission and the committee to meet in the morning, as a matter of urgency, and in the afternoon, they can be able to present a report here, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, the matter is now an emergency, so we urge you to have a quick meeting and report tomorrow afternoon.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I appreciate that, but allow me to make a small clarification. The Leader of the Opposition made mention of the fact that there are people who are customarily married and do not hold certificates of registration. 

Madam Speaker, other than sensitisation, the law is very clear that those marriages ought to have been registered. So, it should not be incumbent upon the Electoral Commission to insist that you should have registered your marriage. The obligation is upon you to present your certificate of registration.

Be that as it may, I take the Speaker’s advice and observation and tomorrow, we shall appear before the committee. Much obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I just wanted to respond to the issue raised by hon. Opendi concerning the storks. Apparently, the Clerk had already identified the problem. On Monday, she wrote to the Executive Director of the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) to help us to relocate the birds because of the danger they are causing. So, something is happening already. Thank you.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, I wanted to add something very important before we continue. We amended the Local Governments Act here and we made changes to the polling procedures and also to the qualifications for councillors. Key among them was the removal of the age limit to align it with the changes we made to the Constitution. To date, we do not know the fate of the Local Governments (Amendment) Act. 

Nominations have started. The young people who are below the age of 35 and the old people who are above 75 years old have been denied nominations as chairpersons of Local Councils III, sub-counties and town councils.

The Electoral Commission has issued a statement and said that what Parliament did was unconstitutional. They have not gone to the Constitutional Court but we saw a press release saying that that amendment by Parliament was unconstitutional. Therefore, I thought, in order for those aspirants to be taken care of, it would be important that the Attorney-General also clarifies on the fate of that law. When they came here, they told us it was very important for us to amend it before we begin the election cycle. Up to now, however, we do not know their fate. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to also confirm that that matter has come up. I received a call today from a 28-year-old young man from Iganga who says he has been denied the opportunity to register for LC III.

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I appreciate you for raising a good matter. As Parliament, I believe there was an oversight. Following the age limit amendment, we effected the amendment in the Presidential Election Act and the Local Government Election Act but only to the extent of LC V chairpersons. We did not effect it as far as LC III, municipal councils, municipal mayors and the lower levels are concerned. 

Yesterday, we had a special Cabinet meeting, and we presented a memorandum, which was approved together with a Bill that we are about to present to you. This was done by my office and the Minister of Local Government, on the understanding that we would cause an amendment to the Local Government Act. We intend to present a Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2020 to clarify that position so that the lower age limit is also considered to the age of 18. 

THE SPEAKER: The matter was amended by the Constitution; wasn’t it? The Constitution is supreme. 

MR KAFUUZI: We amended the Constitution and I think whoever is denying people nomination on the basis of that, is wrong. Although there was an oversight in the amendment we presented in the Local Governments Act, the Constitution is the supreme law and it is binding.

Therefore, what we are doing is to formalise this amendment by presenting the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2020.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister. The law is already in the Constitution. Your responsibility is to inform the Electoral Commission that the law is in the Constitution but not to say that we wait until we have amended another law. It is not right. 

4.06
MS SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Madam Speaker, as the minister comes to explain these matters, the issue of the women councillors is also pending. They are still representing more than one sub county and yet, this House passed that it should – Let the minister clarify this so that we are able to know what is going on. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is very important. Let us finish with this issue. 

4.07
MR JOHN NGOBI-BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka North County, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We requested the Attorney-General to discuss with the Electoral Commission. I would like to remind this House that in the previous budget, we budgeted for a functional biometric machine that would eliminate ballot stuffing. We are in the process of electioneering. 

Honourable Attorney-General, please, as you are discussing with the Electoral Commission, remind them that before we go for elections, that functional biometric machine should be provided such that we avoid the mess that is looming in the next election. Thank you very much. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, on page 6 of the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs that the learned Deputy Attorney-General argued here, it is stated clearly that we amended the qualifications. We dealt with that matter. 

What the Deputy Attorney-General is saying here cannot be correct. It is very clear in the report and even in the amendment, where we amended the qualifications by removing the age restrictions for district chairpersons, city mayors, sub county chairpersons and town council mayors. This House did its part. Therefore, I urge you to revisit the record we corrected.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, allow me clarify this. The amendment was done to the Constitution, and the Constitution is supreme. The oversight was in as far as we amended the Local Government Act but that should not stop the Electoral Commission from nominating people above the age of 18. 

Secondly, in response to hon. Amero’s submission, we amended the Local Government Act to provide that every sub county presents a female councillor. However, this was another oversight because the provision in Article 183 of the Constitution is that the composition of any council of local Government should have a membership of at least one-third being women. 

Therefore, our amendment of the Local Government Act providing for every sub county to present a female councillor was contrary to the provision of the Constitution. 

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, the Constitution says, “at least one-third”.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, allow me finish. Because of that, we have presented a memo to Cabinet and we are presenting a Bill to amend the Local Government Act and repeal that provision that every sub county presents a female councillor. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know who is advising you because if we say we now have 50 per cent, I do not know why that would contradict with the one-third. 

Mr Attorney-General, that provision was to ensure that at least, some women are in council. That is all. Please, go and meet the committee tomorrow because it seems people are misadvising you. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, the Constitution does not say, “at least”. It says, “one-third”. So, we are restricted. 

THE SPEAKER: What does it say? Read it again. 

MR KAFUUZI: It says “one-third”. 

THE SPEAKER: Read the sentence again. 

MR KAFUUZI: No, it does not say, “at least”. It says, “one-third”. It does not say, “at least”.

THE SPEAKER: Read the sentence. 

MR KAFUUZI: Article 180, clause (2): “Parliament shall by law prescribe the composition, qualification, functions and electoral procedures in respect of local government councils, except that -
(a) the person elected as district chairperson of a local government shall be a member of the council;
(b) one-third of the membership of each local government council shall be reserved for women.”

It says, “one-third”; it does not say, “at least”. That is Article 180 (2)(b).

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, I would like to quote the provision of the Bill that the Attorney-General brought to this House. (Interjections) I would like to quote from the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill that your office brought to this Parliament. It reads, “The Bill, in clause 3, 6 and 7 of the Local Governments Act makes proposals to amend the Local Governments Act to make changes to the qualifications of office bearers in Local Government and administrative unit.” 

The position of the committee that was adopted here states that, “The Bill proposes to –

(a) Amend section 12 of the Local Government Act to remove the age restrictions imposed on the district, municipality, town, division and sub county chairpersons.
(b) Amend section 3 of the Local Government Act to require the chairperson of a district, municipality …. to be a resident.
It is the opinion of the committee that the proposed amendments to the Local Government Act be supported.” 

The proposed amendments are, especially, to section 12 and 111 of the Local Government Act, which are intended to bring the provisions in line with the amendment made to Article 183 of the Constitution.

It was adopted here, so you cannot blame Parliament that we did not amend it to remove the age restrictions of those office bearers. You should take responsibility.

MR MOSES KAHIMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to learn from the Deputy Attorney-General. He has indicated that women in the council must compose one-third. However, we have seen a number of women vying for directly elected councillorship in various districts.

I would like to bring a scenario where these women succeed in their elections and become part of the council. Does that mean that they have to be removed from the council to compose one-third of the council?

Secondly, you have indicated that Parliament has the mandate to prescribe how the composition is supposed to be constituted. Indeed, Parliament made that prescription. Why are you then saying that we need to amend the Constitution?

In my opinion, Parliament did her part. Our resolution should be operationalised without any hesitation. I beg to move.

MR CHARLES ABACACON: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. What I would like to seek clarification from the learned Attorney-General - when the National Resistance Movement (NRM) allowed their candidates to contest for positions of LCIII chairpersons, what were you doing to stop them? You come up when they have already spent money. Who is going to meet the cost?

That is a very important issue that you should have clarified before people took nominations to contest. You are now coming after they have done that. Some of them lost and others won the election. Thank you. 

4.17
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We passed the Local Governments (Amendment) Act. The President declined to assent to it and sent his concerns to this House. We considered, passed the same and sent it to him for assent. Time has since expired and he has not taken action.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I invite you to invoke the provisions of Article 91(7) of the Constitution, lay the copy on the Table and the Bill becomes law. Those who think that it is unconstitutional will go to the Constitutional Court.

For that matter, I invite you to direct the Election Commission to:
    1. Ensure that all those who qualify under the law we passed for positions of LCV Chairperson and LCIII division mayors be nominated.

    2. The women councillors to represent their respective sub counties also be elected. 

I so invite you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know where the confusion is because I understand that the law was assented to. It is law. Wasn’t it assented to? (Interjections) Not yet? Then, I will lay it tomorrow and it becomes a law. 

MR GEORGE OUMA: Madam Speaker, I am really perturbed by the Attorney-General. You represent Government here and also the party.

For the primary elections that were recently concluded, almost all districts elected women to represent every sub county. There is already confusion.

I would like to get clarification. What will happen since people have already gone through primaries? What are you going to tell them? It is causing confusion on the ground.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, there are those who have made reference to the fact that in the (NRM) primaries, there are women who contested for every sub county. That question is not within my ambit. I would like to reserve that for the party spokesperson to clarify.

As far as the law stands, Parliament made an amendment to the Local Government Act through which we provided that every sub county presents a female councillor.

However, as it turns out, the supreme law of the country, under Article 180(2)(b) of the Constitution still provides that females should constitute one-third.

Hon. Kahima has brought up a different scenario of those who are directly elected. I believe the provision under Article 180 is in tandem with the affirmative action clauses in the Constitution.

Other than that, women are free to contest directly just like any other councillor. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, I do not think that you can distance yourself from what was done by one of the parties because it was a step towards the elections.

What one of the parties did to nominate women for the sub counties was in the process of getting ready for the general elections. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I am not distancing myself. I am a member of NRM but I do not want to take responsibility or say anything as to why they nominated people the way they did. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, please, go to the committee tomorrow and give us an update.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PLANNED RE-OPENING OF ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement on the planned reopening of academic institutions, primary, secondary schools, universities and other tertiary education institutions.

As you are all aware, on 20 September 2020, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda announced the phased reopening of education institutions that have been closed since 20 March 2020 to control the COVID-19 pandemic. While the reopening is only for candidate classes and final year students, it is a very important step forward for the education sector. 

The ministry appreciates the direction Government has taken to reopen the education institutions. However, we are also keenly aware of the challenges we have ahead of us to ensure that our children are not only effectively learning but are also safe in the schools. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that, since March, when education institutions were closed, my ministry has been working hard to make sure that the education sector responds effectively to the situation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports developed the Education and Sports Sector COVID-19 Response Plan focusing on three main objectives; 

    1. To ensure continuity of learning during the closure of education institutions; 
    2. To prepare the sector for resumption and management of schooling once the closure of education institutions is lifted and; 
    3. To build the sector’s capacity for resilience and response to the emergencies in the post COVID-19 period.

In order to facilitate continuity of learning and ensure that all learners across the country are reached, my ministry developed a continuity of learning framework with three complimentary modes and these modes include:

    i. Delivery of live and recorded radio and television lesson broadcasts by teachers;
    ii. Printing and distribution of home study materials; 
    iii. Online uploads of recorded lessons and home study materials.

The materials were also uploaded on the National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC) website for learners who are able to access them online. 

On the reopening of education institutions, my ministry has worked very closely with the Ministry of Health and senior scientists on COVID-19 to make the necessary preparations. The Ministry of Health developed Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) to guide operations of education institutions during the COVID-19. 

Based on the SOPs, my ministry consulted extensively with key stakeholders and developed guidelines for phased reopening of education institutions and a strategy for the implementation. 

My ministry is currently implementing a roadmap of preparatory activities that should be undertaken to ensure readiness of institutions for reopening. 

I would like to give you a brief overview of our strategy for safe reopening of education institutions for candidate classes and final year students. 

Education institutions will reopen on 15 October 2020 beginning with candidate classes and final year students, while the rest continue with enhanced home learning programmes. With the enhanced home schooling, it is anticipated that the learners in the rest of the classes can reach a level of learning achievement for promotion to the next class, even if they do not go back to school before the end of the year.

However, progression shall be based on our evaluation of how effectively home schooling has been implemented. An assessment will be made after a month to determine how well institutions are implementing the SOPs to inform a decision on whether all learners can be allowed to return to school. 

All schools opening for classes shall operate either as day or boarding but not both. The NCDC shall adopt the curriculum to focus on essential skills and knowledge that must be achieved at each level. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports shall distribute COVID-19 prevention and control messages to education institutions. The ministry will work with education institutions to strengthen psycho-social support mechanisms for both learners and workers in these institutions.

Schools that do not employ qualified health workers shall establish a formal collaboration with the health facility within easy reach for quick response and management of emerging health issues. 

School programmes shall be re-organised to focus on core curriculum delivery or earned to minimise co-curricular activities.

Morning and afternoon shifts or alternate day attendance shall be adopted in day schools with big numbers of candidates. My ministry, through capitation grants and Global Partnership for Education (GPE) grants, shall provide the following basic facilities to Government grant aided schools; washing facilities, temperature guns, spray pumps and disinfectant liquids for disinfection. 

Proprietors of private schools shall be required to provide the matching quantities of the facilities before the schools are allowed to reopen. 

To ensure readiness for safe phased reopening of education institutions, the following preparations are being undertaken: 

    a. Sensitisation of district education officers and managers of education institutions on implementation of SOPs; 
    b. Release of capitation grants to education institutions to enable schools acquire facilities for implementing the SOPs;
    c. Distribution of two standard face masks to each learner, candidates and final year students in both private and public education institutions; 
    d. Inspection of education institutions for readiness to implement the SOPs.

Madam Speaker, universities and other tertiary educational institutions will also open on 15 October 2020. 

National Council for Higher Education has also issued guidelines for adoption of an emergency Open Distance e-learning (ODeL System) of higher education institutions during the COVID-19 lockdown. 

All eligible high education institutions may now apply to National Council for Higher Education consideration to roll out the ODeL during the current lockdown. National Council for Higher Education will then conduct quality assurance checks. If satisfied, clearance will be given to qualifying institutions to proceed with their programmes. 

Madam Speaker, education is a responsibility for all of us. I would like to appeal to you, dear honourable colleagues, that all of us should support the Government programme of phased reopening of educational institutions. Each one of us is a stakeholder and we should play our roles effectively. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, I have another statement on Makerere University. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you want us to receive them both? 

DR MUYINGO: With your permission, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us separate them. Let us listen to a few comments on the schools opening.

4.32
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement relating to the phased reopening of schools. 

I do not know what an ordinary parent listening to the minister made interpretation of this statement. We appreciate that parents and all stakeholders are anxious as to what would become of our children since schools were closed on 20 March 2020.

We do appreciate the challenges and procedures adopted by the ministry and all concerns and invitations to stakeholders to support the approach.

However, I would like to raise the following issues for the minister’s consideration. For instance, the minister talked about the continuity of learning framework, which he says is going to continue to be implemented in its threesome arrangement- radio and television, online and distribution of learning materials.

Madam Speaker, in this Parliament, at every interval, Members have been questioning this framework. For example, online learning has been totally defective. I would like to receive testimonies from Members here whether wherever they come from children have received online materials.

Secondly, the radios and the televisions - whatever happened to the supplier or the factory, the minister insists that it is going to continue. Continue productions of radios, televisions or their distribution, honourable minister!

Madam Speaker, almost weekly, Members come here on the Floor to complain about the failure of learning material to reach children up-country. In some districts, a single material was distributed to an entire sub county where there is no power and photocopier. I think the ministry wants to drive the country to a reality as to whether at the end of this arrangement, our children would be ready for promotion because that is where the challenge is. Are we promoting half-baked children to classes where learning has been largely impaired? Isn’t it time for us to reflect on whether, actually, during the lockdown learning has taken place?

I am yet to access a document of evaluation of any of these frameworks. Is there a document detailing how learning materials have been distributed and how effective they were? How about online learning, is there any report in as far as promoting e-learning is concerned? 

Madam Speaker, the ministry needs to reflect on the guidelines for re-opening. The promise to support Government-sponsored schools is, of course, obvious. However, the ministry insists that private schools should match with the same provisions. Does the ministry reflect on the capacity of private schools to undertake the same measures like Government aided schools?

I thought we would hear Government saying that they are going to provide basic support to private schools. Private schools have more children than Government schools. Therefore, aren’t we going to leave out some schools without capacity to open because of these requirements?

We are aware that at the closure of schools in March 2020, the term had hardly run for about one and half months. Schools had received only part of school fees. I expected the minister to advise us as to what this term is and what nature of fees parents are going to dispense with to be able to facilitate private schools to make up for these requirements. What is the fate of school fees and how will schools be able to cope with the funding gap?

Madam Speaker, schools had planned and they had budgets for the whole year. Therefore, are we now asking them to run on a budget of a quarter year, half year or full year? That leaves us confused and it is going to cause anarchy and conflicts between parents and schools. The ministry needs to come out and guide schools and parents on the issue of school fees.

We shall be very glad if the ministry will surpass its sister Ministry of Health and make standard masks available and enough for children to leave home and school every day with a mask. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, some of the schools are quarantine centres. What are you going to do about that?

4.38
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have some questions for which I seek clarifications from the minister. I will then make some comments on the statement he has presented to the House.

I would like to know from the honourable minister if Government is going to test the 1.2 million pupils and students for COVID-19.

Secondly, from the information that was made yesterday, senior four is going to be sitting for their examination in April or May next year. When will term one for the new senior five start? If they sit examinations in April, marking will probably take up to June or July.

Madam Speaker, the minister has talked about enhanced home schooling. I think this Government should have done some survey to get information on what is happening to the children in homes. You recall that Government made a commitment to make available radios and even televisions to the children. Where are these radios and televisions? The Government has failed to provide them the same way it failed to provide food and masks. If you are talking about enhanced home schooling, when is it going to be done?

Where a day and boarding school opts to take all children as boarders, a parent whose child has been a day scholar will be forced to take the child to boarding school and yet, many of these people are not working. We are aware that many have been put out of business. Therefore, what is Government going to do in such a situation where we have parents whose children circumstantially are being forced to go into boarding school but the parents cannot afford?

I would like to conclude that the statement of the Minister of Education and Sports is just a pretence that Government has stubbornly decided that they are not going to declare a dead year while aware that we have just two months to the end of the year. I wonder why Government cannot make a solid decision and decide that first term will be studied afresh and we count a dead year.

Finally, I understand from the information available that Uganda has entered into another phase because COVID-19 is more prevalent than it has been before. It has even been detected in Kaliro District where people are freely mixing up. It has now become hard to detect who the contact person is for these people and yet, this is the time that Government is saying that children should go back to school. Aren’t you subjecting the children to danger?

Government should be considerate and let the parents and the children know that we cannot proceed with this academic year. Let us start a new year next term and I am sure this will be better for the entire country. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.42
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Central): Madam Speaker, mine is a very brief and specific question. Sometimes, we decide not to admit nullities. We have been told that during the period of the lockdown, we experienced a high rate of teenage pregnancies. Some of our daughters were students and they are supposed to go back to school but have experienced this situation and some are already mothers. I am wondering what steps the minister has in place to ensure that the reopening of the schools takes into account the very painful situation of our daughters. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.44
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of Education and Sports for his good submission. I have some questions before I make my observations about the report of reopening of schools.

The minister said that the Ministry of Health together with Ministry of Education and Sports agreed on a strategy on how the institutions should operate during the COVID-19 time. My question is, in which phase of COVID-19 is Uganda? (Interjections)

I am happy the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is answering that we are in the fourth stage whereby we have community infections. Therefore, if we have community infections, are all teachers who are going to teach our children going to be tested of COVID-19?

Secondly, are we going to test all the candidate students, including pupils, who are going to sit their final examinations so that we are sure about their status?

The minister has also given submission on the learning framework mode of radios, internet and learning materials. The Committee on Education and Sports noted that this is a very big challenge to an extent that children who are in rural areas, where they cannot access internet, areas like Kapchorwa, where they access strictly television from Kenya, are not learning at all. Such cases are affecting the children’s learning since they cannot move together as per the syllabus. 

Mr Minister, you also gave a burden to private schools to hire health workers and advised Government schools that are near health centres to devise means of using the ones at the nearby health centres. What do we do in a situation where we have understaffed health workers? At the same time, what do we give to a reference like Kapchorwa, where we have schools nearby and the hospital departments have been closed? All these as challenges.

I do not know whether Uganda and we legislatures can benefit from your guided strategy of the COVID-19 that you are going to give to educational institutions so that our people get to know how to behave during the time when the learning will be taking place in this short time.

Madam Speaker, as I summarise, we have given a burden to private schools. Does the Government have any welfare strategy for the private teachers, who are going to teach candidate classes, yet they have not been earning salaries for more than seven months? At the same time, we have some Government and private schools but their infrastructure or classes have been affected. Does Government have a plan towards financing or making sure that there is a conducive learning environment for our students, who are going to sit their final examines? A clean environment determines student’s performance.

Lastly, Mr Minister, I came today, purposely to ask you questions. You said that we shall not have boarding schools mixed with day schools. What are the operational accommodation standards for the children in the boarding schools? We have double-deckers. Will double-deckers work as double taxi seats, where a child sleeps up and another one down? What is the ministry’s plan? We also have schools that do not have dining halls. Children just sit together in class and take their meals. How many children will sit per class; what is the distance? I thought you would come out with those guidelines before we discuss the details of how we would open the candidate classes. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.49
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I wonder whether the minister is aware that both private and Government aided schools charge school fees. When they charge school fees, the Government aided schools retain the money collected from the students. In addition, Government funds these schools and yet, after collecting fees, private schools use the money for all the expenses, which include feeding, payment of salaries, including laboratory equipment. 

The two different types of schools both help the children of Uganda. Why should the Government only focus on students who go to Government aided schools? Is this really fair?  By the time the schools closed, the first term had already been exhausted two thirds. The remaining one third is a little complicated because some students had already fully paid their school fees but others had not yet paid.

What is going to happen with the remaining two months from 15 October up to the end of the year? Is the Government going to help the parents of the private schools or Government aided schools will go ahead charging school fees for the remaining period? I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.51
MR NATHAN ITUNGO (NRM, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek for clarification from the minister on the candidate classes. Honourable minister, you talked about a school being strictly either day or boarding. Can you come out clearly about these candidate classes, which are about to begin? Are they going to be boarding or day? 

Secondly, honourable minister, the Education Act clearly spells out the stakeholders in schools. It talks about the Government and its roles, the buildings, the curriculum, the salaries for the teachers and the foundation bodies such as the churches and mosques and their roles. The Act also spells out the roles of the parents such as feeding, transportation, treatment and so on. Finally, it talks about teachers and other administrators; the Act spells out those different roles.

From your statement and how you are proceeding as a ministry, it seems you are not considering the other stakeholders. It is as if you are moving alone and that the parents are not involved. The other stakeholders are not involved too.

When the President addressed the nation, he said that apart from the candidate classes, the rest of the classes’ fate would be determined in January 2021. However, from this statement, you are saying that you will establish whether the rest of the classes will be able to resume after making an assessment, a month after. In his speech, the President made reference to January 2021 yet you are talking about doing an assessment after one month, and that will be February 2021. 

Considering that schools were closed in March this year, it means they will have taken a year while closed and if you consider that as a whole year, why are you shy as a ministry? Why don’t you want to use the words “dead year”? This is because based on the calculations, it is clearly a dead year. So, why don’t you help us and involve those stakeholders in order to move as a team because we are all concerned? These are our children; they are not only children of the ministry but they are children of the whole nation. Thank you.

4.54
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving us this opportunity to ask the minister these questions. It is good that yesterday, the Committee on Education and Sports met the minister together with the permanent secretary and somebody else from the ministry.

It is very painful that what we observed yesterday is not reflected anywhere in their presentation here today. 

I asked the minister yesterday, and I want to repeat the question in front of you, Madam Speaker, “Who advised the Government to begin the term on 15 October 2020, which is a Thursday, which has financial implications and a lot of disadvantages? Their answer was that the taskforce determined this date.

Now, in the taskforce, we have people like ‘Full Figure, Bad Black and others - (Laughter) – yet we expected the Ministry of Education and Sports to make this decision. The other question was, did you advise the President before he gave the date?

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I have a lot of respect for my colleague in the profession but I rise on a point of order. Please help me to help my brother. 

The National Taskforce is composed of ladies and gentlemen of good repute. Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that Full Figure –(Laughter)– is a member of this taskforce when I know that of all the members on that committee, no one is known by the name ‘Full Figure’? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: My difficulty is that I do not know all the names of the people on the taskforce. I am not sure that I know all those names.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate and painful to learn that the minister does not know the names of the presidential advisors in this country yet indeed, they are there. That is why in his report to Parliament, he still forgot to use what we gave him yesterday as a committee. He is a doctor and I respect him so much because he is a professional. 

However, when I go to Rubaga Cathedral, I will pray for him to remember whatever we say and to also know the names of the presidential advisors. 

Madam Speaker, yesterday, we pointed out several issues from the statement they presented on behalf of the senior education minister, who is also the First Lady. I can see members of the Committee on Education present here and they can bear me witness that we pointed out many things, which are reflected in the minister’s statement as presented. Fortunately, we can give you a copy for you to look at all those issues we pointed out to him.

A serious Government that has had children out of school for the last six months should have sent its minister to the House to say something – for example, as we talk, the teachers are expected to report back to their respective schools next Monday to prepare for the time lost as they wait for the children. 

What is happening, as we speak, is that when you go to Kampala Parents School, Greenhill Academy, Kabojja Primary School and the posh schools around Kampala, you will get to know that teachers have been teaching the children online during the COVID-19 time. 

Now, the Ministry of Education and Sports is very comfortable telling this House that children will learn online, forgetting that the hon. Dr Muyingo is from a district called Luweero, where children have never even accessed a “kabiriti” phone in their home.

The excitement we see here is about radios. The radios have been expressed by the Minister for Presidency as well as the Resident District Commissioners that they will be used as campaign tools. These people think that a parent who has never had a radio in his home will allow children to use it for class time when people are talking politics and music is being played on the airwaves. I do not know where this excitement is coming from.

Madam Speaker, yesterday we told the Minister of education and Sports that during the COVID-19 times, UPE schools that had received capitation grants were directed to take it back to the Ministry of Finance. I gave them examples of schools, which I can mention now - Buganda Road Primary School was given Shs 6.7 million but it was taken back because it was not used as the rules stipulate. We asked them whether they have sent such money back to these schools.

For secondary schools, they have directed that every classroom must have a water tap and that every school must procure a foot-pedal water tap for each class. This system costs about Shs 300,000 per unit. Can our schools afford that, Madam Speaker? 

What about the temperature guns – these are being sold from the Ministry of Education and Sports offices to the secondary schools. Each temperature gun costs Shs 400,000. Can schools afford that when their money was taken back to the finance ministry?

They said that all the schools must be fenced by the beginning of the term but without funding. Where is a school in Namwendwa, in Kamuli or in Kalungu where I come from, going to get the money to do that? These are the things we asked them but nothing has been responded to. 

We asked that there must be counsellors in place before the term begins. Several girls have gotten pregnant during this lockdown and others have left schools. Teachers have resorted to roasting maize. How are you going to get all these people back into the system to teach, in a good mood? All these answers were not given by the minister. 

They talked about guidelines - and let me conclude with this. Whatever they are saying, some of us on the Committee on Education and Sports are professional teachers. When you talk about teaching aids, have you prepared the materials and the audio files? We asked them to give them to us to internalise them as a committee to but nothing was given to us yet today, the minister states that they have prepared audio files and documents. Why haven’t they been tabled in Parliament for the relevant committee and the educated people here and the members of Parliament to look at them?

Madam Speaker, I remember tabling newspapers here last time in which they had published work for Primary One but having used the New Vision font. The materials they prepared were not commensurate to the teaching of nursery and primary children. 

The ministry is only excited about procuring radios; radios for what? I do not know. I think we need to sit as Parliament and internalise everything that is coming out of the Ministry of Education and Sports.

Yesterday, I followed the First Lady in State House and still, the minister was there with the Permanent Secretary. What she gave still does not matching what the minister has given here. So, who is telling the truth about what is going to happen in schools?

As I conclude, are we taking children back to school for the sake of going back or are we taking children back to school for learning? Going to school and learning are two different things. Are we taking children to pass exams or are we taking them to play? 

When you send children to schools on Thursday, it means you are taking them back to first do cleaning of the school on Thursday and Friday but they have taken six months out of school. Hon. Muyingo, as a doctor, knows the implications of spending six months - even anybody in this House – of children staying out of school for six months. How do you prepare them? 

Hon. Muyingo, tell this House; you own schools. I am a teacher and you are a teacher. How do you prepare children? How do you prepare a school that has spent six months without having studies and yet when a school takes only a three-weeks holiday, you prepare children to come back ready for the school? 

Tell this House, other than playing politics and leaving around nothing because you are going to be cursed out of your God-blessed knowledge you have about education. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

5.04
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me begin by congratulating you and the honourable members who were successful in the last primary elections. I congratulate you, honourable members.

Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to start by responding to these very important concerns. Honourable minister, what is the problem when we declare this year a dead year, since we are left with only two months to complete this academic year? Why is the Government in a hurry? 

Can the pupils stay at home for these two months and next year, we start normally in February, as the education system moves on? Is there any problem to declare this year a dead year, considering that at this time, the COVID-19 pandemic is at its highest level?

In Northern Uganda, currently, we have so many cases. The Gulu Regional Referral Hospital is full to capacity. We have nowhere to admit the positive patients. Kitgum Hospital is full. In my district Amuru, the medical personnel who are positive are now being kept within the hospital premises because they cannot take them anywhere. 

Don’t you think we are going to risk the lives of our children more than ever before? Madam Speaker, we need to look at the lives of our children and the education system.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, on the issue of private schools, I remember Government promised to give some money to the private school teachers. Some few weeks ago, we were told that the money was stolen. It means Government is not ready to support private school teachers yet private schools have no money completely to open the term.

Honourable minister, other schools may fail to register the candidates. More so, when Ugandans went into the lockdown, our businesses were disorganised. Parents have no money to pay for the registration fees and parents of more than 80 per cent of the candidates have never paid the registration fees for UNEB.

Madam Speaker, let us try to be serious as a country; there is no need to hurry. Let us wait for these two months. Let the pupils stay at home and next year, all the students should go back to schools at once than candidates and other classes. Thank you very much.

5.07
MS PROSSY AKAMPULIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Minister of Education and Sports to maybe help us and inform Government because we are talking. I know that you are listening but I would like to emphasise it. 

Please help us inform Government that private schools need assistance from Government. The issue of you getting things and distributing them to Government schools and you leave private schools out, you are affecting the whole education system.

Honourable minister, you have schools and I am proud to say that I am one of your students who has gone through your hands. You know how our schools are operating in Kampala. Please stop looking at Kampala schools the way you look at the village schools - let me call the local schools. I do not know how to term them. However, stop putting them at the same level.

In Kampala, maybe a parent will be able to buy whatever you require but our village parents will not be able to. The private schools that are in the villages are still struggling. I, therefore, request Government that whatever you are going to give to Government schools, let it also be given to private schools.

Once you ask private schools to look for all those requirements, they will force it on the parents and the parents will be the ones now to suffer. Therefore, I request you to please also work with private schools because they are helping our children.

Lastly, honourable minister, I would also request that as you talk about masks and you want to distribute them, I do not know whether you are going to do it. In Rubanda, we did not get them. I do not know whether they were only distributed in Kampala. So, we request that even as you request our children to look for masks, first give them the Government masks. They did not get them. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you will tell us what informed your decision to open schools at the end of the year. I think we need to understand why you did it.

5.10
MR CHARLES ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the report from the honourable Minister of Education and Sports. I am not worried because I think what he has presented on the Order Paper is planned reopening of academic institutions.

I hope they have not yet spent money in buying a, b, c and d up to maybe z. When you plan without other stakeholders, then you know that Parliament is one of the most important stakeholders in education. We have the Committee on Education and Sports and the report we have just heard. I really wonder how many schools have you now put in place and then how many candidates are there? Some of them are going to boarding and others are day scholars. Now, how are you going to succeed?

Otherwise, I look at this one as a very big disaster if not well planned and implemented. We would really appreciate, Madam Speaker, if this plan was presented to the House and then we analyse or to the Committee on Education and Sports to know how many students and then those who are going for the finals at the university and other tertiary institutions are involved. However, minus this, I do not believe what you are saying. 

The additional information I would like to give you, honourable minister, is that you have not done your research well. Down in the community where there are farmers, I think you are not aware that they have lost so much this year. They have no money to pay school fees until the end of the year; next year is possible. 

I think you know the meaning of a dead year and it is a policy of the Ministry of Education and Sports. Why are you ignoring the Uganda’s plea? Why are you in a hurry? In the background, you are aware of COVID-19. When Coronavirus was not serious, we closed schools but now that the cases are increasing, we are reopening them. I really wonder what you seek. In any case, if something goes wrong in a school and perhaps a pupil or student gets COVID-19, I think all the schools will automatically close.

As you did last time, the parents demand the fees balance for first term. Is Government going to meet that? That is something that you should clarify to this country. It is because when we paid fees, we expected them to complete that term but unfortunately, this disease struck. So, what is going to happen?

How can you assure the country that the schools will not close under any circumstances? How sure are you? You never know the direction which COVID-19 is going; so, we want that assurance. 

At the moment, I would like to inform you, honourable minister, that there has been no learning in the rural communities. Nobody was learning because of this technical challenge of poverty. Some of them have no radio, television set or network. How are you going to manage this situation where some parents and children –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please close.

MR ABACACON: Many of these girls, including candidates, got pregnant. In Apac, over 2,000 girls got pregnant. In Oyam, almost 2,000 girls got pregnant. I am very sorry about this plan. Let us plan together in order to develop this country. Thank you.

5.15
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to associate myself with the issues that have been raised by colleagues. I would like clarification from the minister on the issue that – actually, I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports. There were issues we raised, as hon. Ssewungu said, but we received no response. 

I still would like to ask; you said that we are reopening schools but the examinations will come later when you think it is appropriate. I have been wondering as to how the ministry is working. Don’t you have a plan? When are the students going to do the exams? When is this academic year ending?

Secondly, you said that you are going to enhance home schooling. I asked the same question as did my colleagues. Have you done an evaluation of what you have done so far? We do not listen to radios in our areas as a result of no network. There was no work done by the pupils who received the materials that were supplied. I give this example as a teacher. When children are given materials unsupervised, no learning goes on. There were teachers who were identified from particular villages one time. I thought maybe the ministry was going to use these teachers to guide the learners within their areas. I have, however, not seen anything.

Honourable minister, what happened to the analysis you did? Can’t we use those teachers to guide in home learning if we really want to progress? 

Finally, I would like to inform the Ministry of Education and Sports that before we even go into the radio programmes which you are talking about, that there are many areas that do not listen to radios. Some of our areas completely have no network coverage. So, maybe you should start with providing network first before you go ahead to procure the radios so that we do not leave anyone behind, as you have always said. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.18
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the effect of COVID-19 on education, as a teacher, I feel that everything has been politicised to the extent that when there was distribution of learning materials, it was the RDCs who were doing it. Why do we leave out the technical people? 

Mr Minister, you are so technical in education. What preparations have you put in place to reopen these schools? There are a number of things that are wrong. They talked about distribution of TVs to help the learners. The TVs, however, were never there. Even if they were distributed, wouldn’t it promote the spread of COVID-19 if you give one TV set and one radio to a village for the pupils and students?

We feel so bad. We have been talking about private schools but you must know that there are also private teachers in Government schools. I do not know if you know about that. I do not know if you are putting to the best use the capitation grants that you have to motivate these teachers in Government schools who depend entirely on parents’ contributions. 

Why don’t you allow technical people to advise on these issues instead of just taking the political direction only? You will find that the President is the head and at the district level, it is the RDCs who are in charge of everything. Who are the RDCs? They are the images of the President at the district level. It is also the RDCs who implement education projects, which is wrong. 

Let us take care of education. It is the key to development. Human resources that are not properly developed can be a big problem to the country. If we have a quality population, then the country can move on. 

Therefore, let there be proper planning, investigation and preparation before you can make that pronouncement to reopen schools. You do not know what you will get stuck with next year. Maybe there will be no candidates next year. Maybe you will have two lots of learners in First Year, Second Year and P6 and this will be a problem to the education sector. 

Sit down with the technical people so that you plan properly for the country. Thank you.

5.21
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the report he has given. Let me take this opportunity to thank Ugandans for the way they handled COVID-19 when we had a total lockdown.

Since we relaxed the restrictions, COVID-19 has continued to spread. When I heard from the honourable member from Kapchorwa and another from Gulu, the numbers are worrying. We have examples of countries which have relaxed, and things have gone worse and they have resorted to going back into a lockdown.

The last speech by the President on this subject matter hinted on opening up sports activities. He said that we shall need a test every two weeks. I do not see any difference between opening up these schools and those sports activities. Who is going to pay for this testing? Is it the ministry, parents or school owners?

We cannot have our children there close to each other, playing and moving around and they are not tested every two weeks. The minister said that the standard operating procedures (SOPs) are going to be followed. If you asked the minister today if they have made an assessment about the social distancing, he will stand up and say that there will be many classrooms. That is not a problem but teaching these children is not only about the classrooms but also the teachers. Do you have enough teachers to go to the three different classes?

Nobody can teach in the morning, afternoon and maybe night. Most of these classes have 100 or 200 students. Where are you going to get the teachers so that they are paid? We have to think through all this.

This e-learning thing is just a joke; it is not there. All of you have children. When they are in a classroom with a teacher and a prefect, they just joke around. How do you expect them to be on the television watching when there is nobody supervising? Besides, they cannot ask questions.

Therefore, we should not think that anybody is learning out of this thing. Let me ask my colleague from Luweero if he can tell me about 10 schools in the district, which have received a full supply of these printed material. He may fail to give you even one.

They come here to tell us about printed material –(Laughter)– it is not there and you know but you are shy to talk about it. Do not be so aggressive in supplying radios. In the ministry, everybody is talking about radios. Why do you risk our children because you want to supply radios? I think this project of radios should be stopped because in the ministry, everybody is looking at them. They would like to supply radios and get money without caring about our children. 

No child will sit to learn from those radios. You will get the money but our children will be – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable minister, concerning the tests, I received complaints from the public about the cost of the COVID-19 test of Shs 300,000 per test. I do not know how many people will afford testing twice a month. That is about Shs 700,000 per individual.

5.26
Mr Kenneth eitunganane (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The children were at school for only three months before COVID-19 struck. We have moved to almost October now – (Interjection) - actually they were less than three months; two months to be exact.

Our school calendar has been yearly; I do not know what informed the ministry to change this. We are only remaining with two months to end the school calendar. Now, the ministry has become irrational and changed this. I would like to know what informed this decision from the ministry. 

Now that they are changing for the remaining two months – moreover, the cases were only 50 by then and we closed the schools. Now, we are over 4,000 and we are opening the schools. Are we doing things in reverse? We need to be very careful. 

As we plan, most of the hospitals are experiencing shortage of personal protective equipment (PPEs). That is why we see hospital staff being infected. Less is being done about that. This is going to spill into community infections yet we are talking about opening schools. We have private schools that have less than 20 students and these are going to be run on the money paid. Where are they going to get money from to sustain the school with 20 students? 

Even if we are planning, we should plan for the entire education sector, including the private schools because they have made a lot of contributions. Government schools alone cannot absorb all these students who are candidates. 

Therefore, honourable minister, as you plan, look at the fate of the private schools. People are selling schools because they have failed to manage them. They are in debts. They have bank loans and they are under pressure but you are telling them, “Open tomorrow.” This is not going to work.

The other thing you have to consider is that teachers play a key role in preparing students. They have gone through a lot of financial and emotional stress. Some of them have even changed jobs. You have not done anything to bring these people back on board; no refresher training. You have not taken any step to bring it back to their attention that when children go back to school, they should be ready to take them on. They are out there and you are saying, “Open tomorrow.” I think you need to revisit this decision for the good of this country.

The other thing is that even if you are talking about radios and televisions, you need to vet most of the teachers who are participating in this exercise. Some of them are making serious mistakes on television and our children see it. There is going to be a big problem in future if we leave this to continue happening. Thank you. 

5.29
Dr michael bukenya (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I thank the minister for the statement and I support him on the reopening of the schools in a gradual process.

However, my catch is that the minister should reopen the schools with enough support to the private sector. They should support the private schools as they support the Government ones and also ensure observance of standard operating procedures (SOPs) and preventive measures.

I am sure that when the President went to Tanzania, much as it was linked to oil, he was also benchmarking on the performance of lockdown versus no lockdown. I think he picked advice from His Excellency, Magufuli, and they discussed with the team on the way forward after benchmarking.

I would like to appeal to the House. When it is raining outside, we cannot be here for a full week. We have to get out, get wet and see how we move forward. We cannot sit here forever until the rain stops. Therefore, we cannot remain in lockdown forever. We have to find a way of moving on. 

In science, there is something called “herd immunity” where you have to get exposed and then the body or the community finds a way of adjusting. In a way, we cannot hide from COVID-19 because we did not know when it was coming and we do not know when it is going.

If we talk of a dead year now, it will be a dead year next year up to when COVID-19 possibly goes away. Therefore, I would like to support the minister using both science and logic. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to request colleagues to appreciate the Government’s position on reopening of the schools. Careful thoughts have been taken in most of the issues that members are raising. 

However, I would also like to inform the House that while we were in lockdown, there has been nothing like lockdown in the villages. I witnessed this during the time – because of the lockdown, I was also held up here in Kampala and only went to take some food to my people recently. 

When we went into these scientific campaigns, you will not believe what was going on in the countryside. They believe COVID-19 is a Kampala thing or something in the town. The burials are going on normally without any observance of the standard operating procedures. You find children and women at the boreholes all crowded collecting water. There have also been prayers going on at the community level, Madam Speaker. 

Therefore, with all these considerations and members talking about the rural areas – people in the rural areas have actually been going on with their lives as if COVID-19 is not there. 

Listening to some parents on television - look at a girl or a boy who had a dead year last year and was supposed to do senior four or primary seven; this year. Do we want this year to again be another dead year? This means such a child will have been in senior four or primary seven for three years. Government has carefully looked at this and ensured that we do not have a dead year. Let the children start in October and of course the exams can be done sometime early next year. Madam Speaker, let us accept that and see how we move on. 

COVID-19 is here and will not go tomorrow. If we do not open schools because of COVID-19, it will still be here. We shall not have had the vaccine. Let us only focus on educating our people and building their immunity because COVID-19 has not affected the Africans as it has affected the people in those other countries; this we know. 

Let us focus on the health messages to our people; feeding well to build their immunity and we move on with life. After all, in the villages, people are moving on with life normally. 

Even the salons – I had terrible hair and I did not know but I kept seeing people in this Parliament and Cabinet with very neat hair – they told me that I was the only one seated and thought salons are closed. Salons have actually been operating even before the President lifted lockdown for them to operate. People have been going, locking themselves inside and operating normally. 

We also think that the bars are closed but they are actually operating. Madam Speaker, people are dying every day. I bury not less than 10 people in my district of other diseases. So, COVID-19 is not the only cause and will not be the only cause of death. We have other infectious diseases like TB and others. 
Madam Speaker, I would like to state that let us support the Government position and move on. Thank you. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. She said that we should not declare this a dead year but the Government is talking of only the candidate classes. 

If we are not to declare a dead year, let all school going children, right from nursery, go back to school. Why are you talking of only candidate classes? We are saying if you are only letting candidate classes to reopen, then, let the year be declared dead so that, next year, all children go back and sit their exams at the same time. This is what we mean. Thank you. 

5.36
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. Whereas I support the Government’s position of opening the schools, the Government should always propose well-thought out solutions. 

When we look at some projects we have had, like the learning materials, the posho, the food distribution, the masks and the radio distribution, we notice that everything goes half way. We need to plan and implement. 

Whereas the teachers are going to be kept busy in schools, especially Government teachers – after all they were paid even when they were not teaching. Private teachers are going to be out of this salary income because they have not been earning. 

My proposals are:

    1. Schools which are do not have enough classrooms can teach in shifts; and 

    2. The money that is planned for radios should be put on SOPs so that they can benefit both Government and private schools. 

Honourable minister, I pray that we consider these things and look at the priorities than doing things half way and not reach a conclusion. Thank you very much. 

5.38
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I expected the Minister of Education and Sports, more so, my education expert and teacher, hon. Dr Chrysostom Muyingo to have started by sharing with us what introspect the Ministry of Education and Sports has done in turning the lockdown into an opportunity; to rethink in as far as the areas we are already struggling with in the education sector are concerned.

We had a big debate here on vocationalisation, curriculum, delivery mechanisms and financing. It seems we have not used that opportunity to turn the challenge into an opportunity and now we are just discussing partial opening of schools.

As an advocate of national dialogue, we think the education we have imparted to our children does not inculcate values. We thought that we would take advantage of this when coming back; addressing some of those concerns you have avoided by delaying a national dialogue. 

Now that we do not have them, I am very disturbed. I would like to introduce the economics of partial opening of schools. You do not have to be an owner of a school to know with only candidates opening, you are talking of less than 20 per cent of the school capacity. In economics, that is excess capacity. It means you have higher costs of running the school. That is what tourism is suffering. When hotels were opened without opening the airports, they ran at very high costs without – you are basically killing the schools that are already struggling by opening partially. 

If you really love this country - and I know you love this country, my good friend, minister - I am saying if the Government still cares about the education sector, which is so fundamental in moulding the kind of people you want - these children we are keeping at home – there are girls that have got early pregnancies in Primary Seven and Senior One and will never become a Speaker. These are big challenges but we are not addressing them. 

You had just introduced a new curriculum whereby instead of spending money on the e-learning, where there is no interface between a learner and a teacher, you should have hammered the point of what they can do at home when they are not at school. 

Madam Speaker, between now and the proposed date of opening- it should only be opening of all the schools and then look at those conditions you need to open all the schools. That should be the area of interest and your focus. 

However, you are killing the economy- look at the supply chain, how many people are involved in the supply and value chain of education? Do you know how redundant they are- the unemployment of the stationery people, food suppliers? 

Therefore, as we discuss the health situation and the opening of schools, can we put the economy in holistic manner so that you know; is the country intending to come out of this crisis? Schools required a bailout yesterday. There is no private citizen. All children in private schools are citizens and they are entitled. We are in Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) - do not leave anybody behind. We must be talking about participation and inclusion of all those citizens including the remote private schools that do not make profits but just doing charity. 

Honourable minister, this is not shown in your statement; it is not coming from Cabinet, unless if you are going to declare that during this COVID pandemic, we have a national dialogue and we address what is on our hearts so that we can see the country moving.

However, most importantly, the economics of COVID and running partial schools are not coming on table. Those people who have been disabled by the six months lockdown- what is the plan for those children you want to leave behind because they are not candidates?

As you know, an education system cannot be one without the other. When senior four leaves, senior five comes in and when primary seven leaves, senior one comes. Your plan does not even show us that transition from primary to secondary to university. Therefore, it is redundant.

We would like to request that you revisit this and come back in a more comprehensive manner but with the economics of COVID and making sure that these children do not lose out the way they have lost out. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have a sectoral committee that processes policy issues on behalf of this House. Yesterday, this committee interfaced with the Ministry on the readiness of Government to reopen schools.

What we are getting from the members who were in that meeting, is that there is no point of convergence between what the committee agreed on with what the minister has presented to the House.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am raising on a procedural issue that since a committee of this House interfaced with the minister on readiness of Government to open schools, from the information we are getting from the submission of members, there is no single point from what the minister agreed on in the committee yesterday.

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we defer considering the minister’s statement, now that we have submission from members and direct the committee to give us a report tomorrow on what they discussed and agreed with ministry on the readiness that the ministry is now refusing to present to the House? On the basis of that, we would get a balanced position because this committee processes business on behalf of this House.

In addition, they did that on the readiness of Government to open schools. Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we defer taking a position on the minister’s statement, so that we first get a report from our sectoral committee on what they agreed on with Government and what they proposed to Government to do in order for schools to reopen either partially or fully so that this House can take a well-balanced and informed position? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.46
MR EMMANUEL KALULE SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When Dr Bukenya appeared here, he was of the view that we should open up. There is a theory these days that for us Ugandans to develop immunity against this disease, we should open up and see how many people can die off and see how many will remain to move on?

I suggest that the Ministry of Education experiments with a few schools then we see whether it could work and if it works, then we can open all the schools- (Interruption)

DR BUKENYA: Madam Speaker, hon. Ssengo implies that I support experimenting on lives of Ugandans. I would like to inform members here that there is a committee of eminent Ugandan scientists, with children from School of Public Health, Makerere University and different Government departments who have been sitting for the last two months, brainstorming on the opening of schools and that is how they came up with this idea.

I also added that the President recently benchmarked in Tanzania where they did not close and they agreed as Cabinet to bring those position. Therefore, I did not in any way propose that we experiment on Ugandans to see those who die.

However, I explained the concept of herd immunity, which is a known scientific fact worldwide. So is the member from Gomba, in order to say that I said that we should experiment on Ugandans?

THE SPEAKER: No, the honourable member said that you support opening of schools.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Madam Speaker, these days we have been experiencing so many deaths in our constituencies. I have been wondering whether these deaths are not due to COVID-19. We lack doctors there so people die and we burry them but we do not know whether the cause is COVID. I do not know what the Government can do to at least inform us; are these people dying of COVID-19? Is it a situation where we say let us open up and see how many people can die off then we see how many will remain so that we develop that natural resistance which the honourable doctor was talking about?

Madam Speaker, I also agree with the colleague who came here and said that the learning in the homes is not actually taking place in the rural areas. This can only be talked of around Kampala where people are using radios and televisions. However, in the villages, children are not learning.

That is why I was of the view that the ministry can have a few schools, experiment and if the children do not die, then we can open all the schools. Otherwise, I am not convinced with the plan that he has given us.

I am wondering- Government promised to provide masks to all Ugandans but even here at Parliament, Government has not given us masks. We are buying these masks with our own money. If you cannot give masks to 450 Members of Parliament, how will Government be able to provide two masks to each of the students? Let us be realistic.

Madam Speaker, this idea of saying that day schools will only be day schools and boarding schools will only be boarding schools and pupils will be kept in schools without moving out; this is not practical. How will you make sure that the boarders remain at school without going out at all? How will they get provisions?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I wanted to find out whether you have been able to carry out census of the existing schools. Some of these candidates are in private schools and they have been either sold or taken over by landlords, therefore, they do not exist. 

Do you have census of which schools are really there, where the candidates can go to do their exams? However, you can take the podium and respond to our issues.

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank you for the issues raised and the concerns. I want us to first of all, appreciate that COVID-19 is still with us. When you listen to the scientists, they will tell you that our curve has just started climbing. I wanted us to imagine if the current state continues for three or five years – that implores me to ask my colleagues to appreciate that Government is interested and is really concerned about the education of our children. 

We are operating in an abnormal situation. If the situation was normal, I would have loved to do things exactly the way we were doing them before. However, this is an abnormal situation; you do not know when COVID-19 will come to an end. You do not know whether it will last for one year, two years or three years. As leaders, we need to come up with a position; we need to take a decision about the schooling of our children. Madam Speaker, before we came to you, as I said in my statement, we carried out extensive consultation with all the stakeholders. 

We consulted the parents, the foundation body, members of Parliament and almost every stakeholder in the education sector was consulted. Madam Speaker, that is why we are saying –

THE SPEAKER: Did you consult the Committee on Education and Sports of Parliament? No, let him finish; I just wanted to know whether Parliament is a stakeholder and whether they interacted with our committee, which is assigned the duty of education?

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I remember because I have participated in most of these consultations. One time in Entebbe, we had members of Parliament and they gave us very useful information. That is why we decided –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, please protect me!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are dealing with a very sensitive issue, and we are asking whether you did sufficient consultations. The Chairperson, Committee on Education and Sports wants to tell us whether you – no, let us hear from hon. John Twesigye. 

MR JOHN NTAMUHIIRA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Honourable minister, I was hesitant to make a comment but allow me to state this. 

First, the meeting that the honourable minister is referring to, which we had in State House, Entebbe, was a stakeholders meeting. The meeting did not specifically address the concerns of the Committee on Education and Sports. 

Secondly, allow me to help our minister. The position of the Committee on Education and Sports, which took place yesterday, is not well incorporated in the minister’s statement. For example, he is not giving us a clear roadmap for opening of candidates and other students’ classes. There was an issue, where the committee advised that Government should provide a stimulus package for all the schools, private and Government. 

We also observed and advised that e-learning or online learning or schooling in villages was not taking place. Even in my own constituency in Bunyaruguru, where I come from, there was no learning at all.  We requested that there should be a clear teaching and learning plan if all the students or candidates have to report to school. 

There was a proposal for the teachers to reside at schools for avoidance of interacting with different people, and then interact with students when the schooling is taking place. I have seen Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) of some private schools, which indicate that those private schools will procure masks and provide them to the students, not Government. 

Comparing this, I would advise that the honourable minister withdraws the statement and incorporates the advice of the committee and the members, then he reports back with a clear plan of opening schools. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the information I am giving our chairperson is that when they started publishing stories in papers about opening of schools, we were all confused. We met as members of the committee on our WhatsApp group then our Chairperson, hon. Opolot and the vice-chairperson said we are going to invite the Minister of Education and Sports to come and tell us whether what we are hearing is correct. 

Later on, the President gave a presidential address on COVID-19, and that is how we were invited. However, for the honourable minister to mislead this House that he has ever consulted – above all, the people you should have consulted, I am one of them. He is my friend; we pray from the same church, and we talk on phone. Has he ever consulted the committee? The answer is no. Not until the committee invited them because of what we heard from the public and the presidential address. That is how we got the minister in the committee. 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, to add more information on what my colleague, hon. Ssewungu, is saying; it is true, the committee was not consulted. Even the people from the borders were not consulted. The minister is talking of opening up candidate classes when we have students from Kenya coming to study in Busia. Moreover, Kenya has the highest rate of COVID-19 according to the survey. How do we handle such a case? Whom did the minister consult among the 40 border districts that have just come out of the lockdown and the leaders have not been travelling to Kampala? Thank you.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am happy the vice-chairperson mentioned that he was one of the stakeholders that were consulted. 

It has been decided that second term of this academic year begins on 15 October, 2020 and end on 18 December, 2020. Third term of the same academic year, will begin on 11 January, 2021 and close on 30 April, 2021. We have come up with a calendar –

THE SPEAKER: Was that in your original statement or you are just searching things?

DR MUYINGO: I am trying to respond to the issues that have been raised.

THE SPEAKER: No, was that in your original statement? Honourable minister, you are dealing with the children of Uganda. Government has failed on the masks, it failed on the e-learning and food, and now you are forcing without proper planning. 

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I thought I was responding to the issues that were raised. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, if the minister can clarify on this; he has just stated that the third term starts on the 11th. The voting date is on the 12th of January. How can we start third term on the 11th, more so knowing that some of the students are registered voters? How can that be? The minister should not smuggle things which are not part of his statement otherwise he is going to raise many questions. You know what is happening during that period.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I was responding to the issues that were raised by members. One member asked what this term is going to be: Is it first, second or third term? I had to give an answer to that. That is why I am giving a sketch of what the calendar will look like. Development of the calendar is the responsibility of the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

I would like to go to another issue that was raised about private schools. As Government, we wish we had the means. We would like to sponsor the education of every Ugandan but we have limitations. The resources at our disposal are limited. That is why we are providing masks for private schools. 

We are, however, not going to give them money. We have been talking with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they have told us that there is no money apart from what has been provided for the radios, the masks and study materials. 

About the learning materials –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some of us had decided to listen to the minister as he explained what Government intends to do. However, some of us are professional teachers. I also understand that the minister is a very well learned person in the sector of education, with a PhD. But it is clear that within our curriculum when you have the P.1 class in this 2020, it is expected that these children will be going to P.2 next year. 

Now, here is a scenario where the minister is labouring to explain that the candidate classes will be reporting on Thursday, 15 October 2020. Aware that what the minister has also explained is that they will be doing their final exams in April 2021. It means that there will be a lag for the P.6, P.5, P.4, P.3, P.2 and P.1 pupils. The same applies to S.1, S.2, S.3 and S.5 students. Similarly, the first year and second year students in the university will be affected.

I would like to know whether the minister is in order to continue explaining a matter that is not logical in the circumstance. First of all, when the candidate classes finish their exams in April next year, where will the exit and entry points of the other classes that follow be?

Is the honourable minister in order to continue misleading this House when we are here and some of us are professional teachers who understand the curriculum and went through school? We are not just talking about something that we do not know.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like to propose that you sit down with the committee and you synchronise on the areas of shortage of information because the programme is not just for the ministry, but for the country. 

And I think you need to synchronise with the other stakeholders here. You finished with the others, but you also need the ones here. Please sit down and do some work and we conclude this matter by Tuesday. People need to know what they are going to do, how to plan, how to raise money, to mention but a few.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. I accept your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, although you are busy, this is an important matter. This is to the chair of the Committee on Education; please arrange to have a meeting so that by Tuesday we have a concrete way forward which is agreeable. Thank you very much. 

Now minister, did you have another statement on the fire?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE FIRE OUTBREAK AT MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

6.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the statement about the fire that destroyed the Main Administration Building at Makerere University.

In the morning of Sunday 20 September 2020, at around half past midnight, a police patrol team at Makerere University noticed smoke emanating from the roof of the Main Administration Block. The patrol team alerted the officer in charge, Makerere Police Station who had been deployed at Nateete Police Station for the night.

The officer in charge, Makerere Police Station at that time was in the CCTV control room. He zoomed the CCTV camera to the main building and indeed the camera relayed images of smoke rising from the building.

The OC Station alerted the chief security officer who rushed to the scene immediately, arriving at the building at around 12.47 a.m. He first saw smoke rising from the roof above the offices of the public relations department, and soon after, fire engulfed the roof.

He immediately alerted the control room to ask the fire brigade to rush to the scene. The chief security officer also alerted the Vice Chancellor and the acting Vice Chancellor who both rushed to the scene.

The fire brigade arrived at the scene at 01.10 a.m., initially with two fire engines which did not have the capacity to jet water to the roof of the building. After about 30 minutes, more fire engines with better capacity arrived. By this time, however, the fire had spread through a large part of the roof.

The fire brigade managed to subdue the fire at about 04.00 a.m., but by this time, the entire roof had collapsed, and the entire top floor of the building had been burnt.

The fire engines experienced a challenge of the lack of fire hydrants within the vicinity of the university. Water had to be ferried from the hydrants of the fire brigade headquarters in Kampala.

Madam Speaker, the main administration building is 79 years old, having been completed in 1941. It is an iconic building and is the symbol of higher education in Uganda and the entire East and Central African regions.

The building housed the offices of the Vice Chancellor, the Deputy Vice Chancellor, Finance and Administration, the University Secretary, the University Bursar, the Directorate of Human Resources, the Directorate of Internal Audit and the Public Relations Office and the Council Room. The printery, which is located in the basement of the building, was not affected, Madam Speaker.

Practically, all the documents in the Directorates of Finance, Human Resource, including the Central Registry and the Directorate of Internal Audit, were destroyed. Fortunately, all the financial documents for previous financial years had been moved to the archives. Similarly, all old files in the Central Registry had been moved to the archives. All the files of the current staff have been digitalised and are safely stored away. 

The financial documents for the financial year 2019/2020 are being audited and have been evacuated. The documents in the offices of the Vice Chancellor, Deputy Vice Chancellor and University Secretary were also evacuated. 

The university is now faced with the task of restoring this iconic building, in time for the centenary celebrations due in 2022. The academic programmes at the university will resume on time as directed by Government and all arrangements to receive the students have been finalised.

Madam Speaker, the purpose of this statement is to update the House on the tragic developments at the university and call for your support at an opportune time in the near future.

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not know whether the matter is under investigations. I do not know how much we can say about this matter. Are investigations going on? I do not know. Minister, are there investigations?

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, investigations have started and we have asked them to speed them up and we will be informed as soon as police is done with the investigations.

6.13
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement presented and quite frankly, thank those who responded to the fire quite fast at the instance. Their job is commendable.

Madam Speaker, the fact that Makerere University lacks water hydrants is the highest level of criminal negligence. I hope the inquest into the fire extends into particular levels of negligence, so that we can apportion liability and criminality in some instances.

That the Estate Department of East Africa’s number one university has no fire unit is the best description of absentee planning. I hesitate to imagine that the minister would love to indict particular sections of management for this level of negligence.

Madam Speaker, the most important task of the University Council is planning. Of course, the void in planning is now very obvious at the university. I would like to ask the minister and the ministry to audit the works of the council to see whether they are actually doing their work.

This year and last year, public media was awash with information and stories about the University Council either selling university property illegally or building chiefdoms in the university by employing cronies. We can actually rightly now see that some of these officers are busy with other things while the university is rotting away.

Madam Speaker, we expect that we shall be informed as to whether key university installations are properly insured - the library, for example, key special laboratories, the book banks and archives because it is very obvious now that all these are under threat.

We hope that if they are not insured comprehensively, this should be a reawakening call for management and the council to plan and budget for their insurance. At this stage, we expect the council to immediately move to make provision for other disasters that could emerge in the university. 

The university is a huge facility and therefore, we do not expect the kind of statements we have seen in the media; flimsy statements from management that this and this has not been lost. We have this; we have secured this.

Can we see an audit of even the dust and what that dust was about? Now, if there was complicity in this fire, the flimsy statements, for me, would serve to try and hide away some of what was lost and the purpose for this loss. 

What the minister is not telling us in the statement, Madam Speaker, is that the following day Sunday, another flimsy fire actually caught what was remaining in the building also vanished. So, were these ashes burning what was remaining? We had a fire on the second day after –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, now you are going into the issues that might be under investigation, please.

MR MPUUGA: I appreciate, Madam Speaker but I would like, in finality, to say that we would like to see a clear audit of what took place. I would like to believe that there is negligence. I would like to invite the minister to play his part and ask Parliament to help you where feasible. Thank you.

6.17
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, it was disheartening to see the Ivory Tower on that day.

However, what was more disheartening is that it showed how this country is ill-equipped in fighting fires because the Police Fire Brigade tried what it could but could not handle the fires.

I think this is also an eye opener to the Government of Uganda to really step up and equip the Police Fire Brigade. Also, Makerere University should really equip itself because we would have expected - if we are a country where people prepare – to see helicopters spray that place with water to extinguish the fire.

However, for our case, we could only gaze and look at the Ivory Tower come down. Therefore, I think the Minister of Internal Affairs and Government in general should really take this seriously because it may not only be affecting Makerere University.

You saw what happened a few days after that; the petrol station. If the fuel tanks had caught fire, I do not know what would have happened. So, we need to prepare.

Madam Speaker, it was just barely two weeks ago when in the newspapers - the Daily Monitor and the Independent - were awash with a scandal of more than eight billion shillings at Makerere University; the money regarding the purchase of the academic gowns, which they failed to deliver.

There was also the issue of the National Insurance Corporation (NIC) regarding about Shs 26.1 billion. Was there a coincidence or what for this fire did not start from anywhere else but from the Finance Department of Makerere University? It raises so many questions.

If I compare the minister’s statement with what the Vice Chancellor was talking about - because they hurried to explain that the financial statements for the previous years had been secured. The one for this year is with the Auditor-General. 

I do not know whether it is because the financial year ended in June; this is September. I do not know why they hurried and indeed, whether it is really true. I hope the investigation is able to bring this up because that will help us understand that because there are so many allegations.

We hope the team that has been put in place will come out with the truth on what happened on that issue of NIC because Makerere University had disregarded the advice of the Auditor-General.

Finally, Madam Speaker, we should ask the Government to provide the necessary resources for us to restore the Ivory Tower. I had thought the minister would tell us that they have the resources for us to restore the Ivory Tower. I had thought the minister would tell us that they have resources for us to restore the Ivory Tower. That iconic building of 79 years at Makerere University is a pride for most of Ugandans especially those who went through the university. 

So, I would like to hear a comment from the Minister of Education and Sports regarding the funding of the rebuilding of the iconic tower. Thank you. 

6.21
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It was a sad moment when that tragedy happened like any other one. 

Honourable minister, I pray that you talk to the administrators of the university, most especially the Vice Chancellor. Some statements that are aired out by your people lead us to think that there is a guilty mind somewhere.

Secondly, I have always asked the Ministry of Education and Sports, and I will ask again on the Floor of Parliament. Do these universities and tertiary institutions have inspectorate teams that visit them? If they are there, when they make recommendations, how do you work on them? If there were inspections in these universities, and their recommendations were fulfilled, this building would have had fire extinguishers that would have saved it. 

Thirdly, I wonder what is happening with the fire brigade system. Okay, why didn’t you at least - If they have failed to work. At night, there is no demonstration; the police would have brought out the vehicles they use to arrest opposition and fight our political rallies. They have strong water pressure to fight that kind of fire.

As I conclude, we should investigate – In this country, we had a company called Fire Masters, which had come to fight fire during the time of fire in schools. Recently, I heard that some mafias in Government fought the company until it left the country. It took back its assets, and yet this company was very strong. It would have helped to solve this problem.

Seeing this building burn was so painful. Still, the care was far below. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I still insist that the minister goes back to the Vice Chancellor of Makerere University – when he gives such statements, it raises eyebrows in the public that there is a guilty mind somewhere. That is why people go on posting everything they find instead of focusing on the cause of the fire. Thank you. 

6.23
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Yesterday, I was in the university. We feel so bad because Makerere University is really the pride of Uganda, East and Central Africa, and probably Africa at large. It is so historical. It can be a centre for tourism. People can come to see the university. To find the Ivory Tower burn like that is so sad.

The fact that this fire started from the finance offices leaves a lot to be desired. Moreover, I do not know - It should be an eye opener. Honourable minister, is there some way of putting fire detectors in the buildings of universities so that whenever they detect fire, they make a lot of alarm for people to respond. Also, the response of the fire brigade was a bit slow. The whole thing looked like we are still very poor, as a country, to manage disasters. 

Honourable minister, we all feel so sad for that 79-year-old iconic structure, which is the administrative office of the institution, to be lost like that! 

Right now, we should focus on the investigation. It should be done thoroughly. Unfortunately, it looks like we do not love Uganda because sometimes, those investigators will focus on what will come into their pockets. That should not be the case. The police should do thorough investigation. At the same time, there should be plan to reconstruct that building. If it can come back to its proper structure, it will be good for the institution.

I know financial losses by some individuals who do not love this country will actually come out when this investigation is done thoroughly -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not speculate please. 

MS BETTY AOL: The country feels very bad for that loss. An investigation has to be done. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It was a very sad day for me – (Interruption)

6.27
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Hon. Byandala, it is my turn. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do recall when I was still in Makerere University, the institution had its own police. Whether it was during daytime or nigh time, these security personnel would be positioned in most of the locations which the university deemed very critical. I do recall that one of the critical areas where the university police would not actually miss was the main building.

Secondly, unlike today, ten years ago, Makerere University did not have a clear perimeter wall. One would expect that because the university has a very good perimeter wall, it would help to boost the security within the university. That notwithstanding, even the lighting in the university has improved. It means visibility is very easy at night even from a very distant point.

What baffles my mind is that in the interviews that some of the university staff gave, you would see a lot of casualness. I would like the honourable minister to explain to the country the following:

First, if Makerere University’s iconic building, the Ivory Tower, is in very bad shape now, what do you expect in other universities which are at the periphery and do not have both the manpower and financial capacity like Makerere University?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would have also expected –(Member timed out.) 

6.29
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It was very sad when that building caught fire. I am a graduate of Makerere Primary School; that school which is over the Faculty of Technology. I am a graduate of Makerere College and Makerere University. 

I remember in 1970 when I joined Makerere University as a 20-year-old student, we were the first group of young boys and girls. We were very stubborn, and I remember many things about that main hall. I appeal to the minister to make sure that this building is restored. We are ready to contribute money. 

I think it is time we told these local authorities that the installation of water hydrants is a must on buildings of that magnitude. Even in Kampala here, there are very few buildings with water hydrants. It is the same with the lightening arresters. We must put our foot down in Parliament on these. Otherwise, we have talked about it many times and the Ministry of Education and Sports is doing nothing. 

We have lost so many children. These things must be done. Government must get money and reinstate the Ivory Tower. Thank you. 

6.31
Mr Geoffrey macho (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, it was sad for the education fraternity of this country when the tower went into frames.

I would like to tell Government that the firefighting Department of the Uganda Police Force lacks a lot. If we can have fire outbreak in Kampala, the city of our country and it takes two days to fight fire in an institute, what about when our oil tanks or pipes ever caught the fire?

I therefore encourage Government and request the police of Uganda that when they are planning, they should put a lot of resources into firefighting. 

I come from Busia Border where you find that all the firefighting equipment and vehicles that were donated by the Chinese are grounded. They have no tyres and lack service. It is a very big problem to majorly the people at the border where we have the oil tanks crossing day and night.

Lastly, I request the minister to tell the council and the Vice Chancellor that every university has a Public Relations Officer (PRO). Let the PRO of Makerere do his work, not the Vice Chancellor – (Member timed out.)

6.33
Ms janepher mbabazi (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is indeed a sad event and it teaches us how unprepared we are for disasters. 

Every Government department should have at least a business continuity plan. In this case, I commend the institution of Makerere because it had moved its records to the archives, according to the minister.

Storing data and files electronically should be a must. I know it is very costly. It cannot be afforded by every institution or buildings but at least the main building of Makerere should have had one.

This brings us to our Parliament. How prepared are we for such emergencies? Look at the fire detectors and the recovery plans. I do not know how prepared we are as Parliament.

I therefore request you, Madam Speaker, to commission a study so that we can gauge our preparedness in case of fire in this august House. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable members, for your comments. I would like to remind the House that when we were making the law on physical planning, we made Uganda a physical planning area. I do not know who to charge this duty on the issue of hydrants in this city and the districts. Uganda is a planning area and that is what we agreed upon when we were making that law.

Secondly, about three years ago, this House had a very lengthy debate on the poor availability of firefighting trucks. We made a resolution that every district must be supported. Every police station should have a Fire Brigade Truck but I am sure it remained somewhere in the archives.

All these are things we discuss and nobody takes them up. Now, imagine our tower at Makerere getting burnt. Great men like Nyerere and the late Kibaki studied here.

Honourable minister, we hope you will be updating us on what is going on around this in the future. Are you giving us money to build the tower? That is what members want to know.

Minister of Education and Sports, do you have something for closing?   
 
6.36 
The Minister of state for Education and Sports (Higher Education) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for the concern and the kind words used this time. 

Council has started devising ways and means of first of all, understanding exactly what happened and secondly, developing a plan or programme that will enable that university to get back to its feet. Government is committed to see to it that that structure is put back. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, we have done quite a bit of work. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.36 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 24 September 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 
