Tuesday, 25 September 2012

Parliament met at 2.51 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As indicated last week, we commenced our activities to commemorate the 50th Independence Anniversary yesterday when we held interdenominational prayers here in the Conference Hall. The prayers were led by Bishop Ivan Kisseka of Luwero Diocese and other members of the Uganda Joint Christian Council.

This morning, we had a charity walk whose endeavour was to raise funds to save the crested crane, our national symbol, which is threatened and faces extinction. I also did a launch of a blood donation drive and this activity will continue until Friday, 28 September 2012. I would like to urge members and staff to donate blood to save lives. 

With regard to the crested crane, the funds that we raised today will go towards the sanctuary of the crested crane - it lives in wetlands. It will also go to eradicating poaching because it is being poached and taken to outside countries. I am told that because it is a monogamous animal, it is also endangered by the population. Please put in all the effort to save the crested crane. I thank all the members who took out time to participate in the event. 

Tomorrow we shall be launching the Institute of Parliamentary Studies in the Parliamentary Conference Hall at 9 O’clock. As indicated last time, Parliament will not sit in the afternoon so that we can go and participate in the football and netball matches to be played by the Parliament against the national veteran players. So, tomorrow afternoon, honourable members, let us assemble at Nakivubo stadium by 2.30p.m. to give support to our team.

On Thursday, we shall have a public lecture at Imperial Royale Hotel at 9 O’clock in the morning on the theme, “Uganda at 50 years: Parliament’s Achievements, Challenges and Prospects.” Please attend. We shall have a session in the afternoon. 

The Parliamentary Week will be crowned on Friday, 20th September with two activities. There will be the special sitting of the Parliament, which is scheduled for 10 O’clock, to thank our pioneer legislators, some of whom will be here, those who led the road to our legislative history. In evening, there will be an awards ceremony for distinguished personalities in recognition of their contribution to Uganda’s legislative history, to be followed by a dinner reception, to which you are all invited, at Speke Resort Munyonyo. Among those to be honoured will be the President of Uganda, President Museveni, who was the Chair of the National Resistance Council for some 10 years.

This is a unique opportunity, a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity - we shall never have any other golden jubilee celebration - so please be visible in all the activities so that you make history. Your participation is therefore vital. Let us complete the rest of the programmes as we had planned them. 

In the public gallery, there are a number of children who came to support us in the charity walk; these are: St Theresa Kisubi Girls Primary School, St Theresa Primary School Namagunga, Lowell Girls High School, Baptist High School, Lugoba High School, Alliance High School, Kawempe Moslem Secondary School and Tina School of Beauty. 

We also have Teachers and pupils of Rukanga Primary School, Kajara, Ntungamo represented by hon. Tashobya and hon. Kabasharira. I do not know which side they are sitting. You are welcome. 

2.57
MS PROSCOVIA OROMAIT (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Once again, I am the newly elected MP of Usuk County. My name is Oromait Alengot Proscovia. (Applause) Thank you for this opportunity to raise a matter of national importance concerning my constituency. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is her maiden speech so let her speak.

MS OROMAIT: I will start by thanking all my people of Usuk County for overwhelmingly voting me into this Parliament. (Applause) I would also like to thank all the leaders of NRM for their support, and most especially his Excellency the President of Uganda who has continued supporting the young people of this country. (Interjections)

The matter in question is about the floods in my constituency. Due to the excessive rainfall, the people are suffering, the crops in the garden have been destroyed, most especially the groundnuts and the cassava. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have informed you that this is hon. Proscovia Oromait’s maiden speech. Please, do not disturb her.

MS OROMAIT: There is destruction of houses by the excessive rain, which has rendered many people homeless. Many people are sleeping under trees. Our roads are really impassable; the excessive rain has left many roads in Usuk impassable. Therefore, I request Government to provide people of Usuk with seeds that will mature very fast so that we fight the famine during the dry season, because right now their gardens have been destroyed.

I also request Government to provide us with tarpaulins. I think we have the minister responsible for disaster with us here. We want the tarpaulins provided to the people of Usuk to dry their crops so that they do not suffer any more. 

Finally, attention should be given to our roads; this goes to the Minister of Works. Our roads are really impassable and we want them to be passable and not impassable. We want you to help us on that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let me appeal to the ministers concerned to really help hon. Oromait and the people of Usuk in these issues. Please assist her.

3.02
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, last week on Thursday, Government committed to make a statement on its preparedness for the celebrations of 50 years of independence. The minister for security was supposed to make a statement but he did not do it. Can we hear from Government about the plans?

There was also an issue that was raised by Dr Chris Baryomunsi regarding the taxation of contraceptives and Mama Kits. I can also add that when I went to pay taxes on the goods I imported, I did find the complaint that even the X-ray films are also being taxed. So, Madam Speaker, this matter is very serious. Can the Minister of Finance today present us a statement to that effect? Why are they continuing to charge these goods and services taxes despite what was resolved?

3.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Thank you so much right, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Okupa for raising this issue again. As you are aware, hon. Muruli Mukasa had his statement ready but by the time we got to your office, the Order Paper was out. As we agreed with you, it will be presented on Thursday. As we talk now, they are printing the copies so that we are ready for Thursday.

On the issue of tax on all the items, I want to request you, Rt. Hon Speaker, to allow the Minister of Finance to come and present.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the statement on taxes of reproductive health products is ready. We have agreed with the Speaker that this statement will be delivered here on Thursday.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister came without copies and I said that I cannot allow him to read without them. I think they are printing them.

3.05
MR SANJAY TANNA (Indpendent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A couple of weeks back, I did stand on this Floor and asked the Ministry of Finance to give us the state of the economy. The same minister today, hon. Matia Kasaija, stood on the same microphone and said that he would inform us. The matter at that time was the increased bank interest rates vis-à-vis the economy. As we speak today, the interest rates are still high; the Governor Bank of Uganda has brought down the Central Bank Rate (CBR) and requested the commercial banks to follow suit and they have adamantly refused. 

At an appropriate time I am willing to present the documents that I have. All the commercial banks in this country made abnormal profits. Abnormal profits in economics mean profits beyond their expectations. Whereas banks all over the world are suffering, the ones in Uganda are making supernormal profits. Can the Minister of Finance reassure us that while he is going to come with that statement, he will come along with a statement on the state of bank interest rates?

THE SPEAKER: Minister, that statement has been pending for several weeks.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, you know we are five ministers in the Ministry of Finance and to the best of my recollection, hon. Tanna, it is not I, Kasaija, who stood up and promised to bring a statement on the state of the economy.(Interruption)

MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. This House had an occasion when the Executive requested for an increment in Cabinet portfolios and Cabinet ministers. We did this with a view that it would help in the harmonisation and in performance of their ministerial duties. Is the minister procedurally right to come here and be the one to lament about the big number of ministers, that they cause disharmony and confusion to the extent that he is not aware of who is supposed to hold the docket?

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister was saying that it is not his docket.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I think the truth should be told. If I recollect well, hon. Tanna said that Kasaija stood on the Floor of Parliament here and made a statement that he will come back like I did on taxes on reproductive health products. What I was objecting to was that hon. Tanna was referring to me personally. 

I said that we are five ministers - and I was not lamenting, hon. Ssekikubo - and maybe there is a colleague of mine who did that but not me.  We are five ministers; there could have been another minister who made that statement but not me. However, I was saying that I will carry the message to my senior minister and she will allocate one of us to come back here and give a statement about the state of the economy. Thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Tanna for raising that pertinent issue. The Committee on National Economy, which has a mandate to report on the state of the economy, is in the final stages of fulfilling this mandate. Last week, we met the bankers’ association, we have met KACITA and the manufacturers, and we are remaining with Bank of Uganda. 

Indeed, it is true there are challenges to do with the interest rate. You remember we presented a report earlier highlighting those issues before they went that bad. Unfortunately, our committee report was never discussed on the Floor. I remember hon. Otada and others rose many times to ask why such an important report was not discussed by the House. So, we are making another report, but I agree that it is important this matter is given the due attention it deserves. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that we wait for yours or we get the minister’s?

MR MUKITALE: The ministry has full rights to update the country when they are ready. We do not substitute the ministry but we are doing our routine work in coming up with the report.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, that statement is overdue. Whether it is you or your colleagues, it is overdue. We want it. 

MR TANNA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I have never been so vivid about a matter. I am sure that if the Hansards of this Parliament are crosschecked, hon. Matia Kasaija mentioned on this Floor, at the same box, that he would talk to the ministry - it was actually the exact statement he has made today - and that a statement on the matter would be delivered, without giving a timeframe. Infact, I met him in the corridor and asked him, “why is there no timeframe?” If he remembers, I talked to him on that day. Even today, he has sat down without giving us a timeframe. 

The issue of bank interest rates is hurting many of our colleagues seated in this House - (Laughter) - and the traders outside there. I belong to the business community. This issue should be taken seriously by the ministry. It is a matter of regulation. We understand that we have liberalised the economy, but you cannot liberalise to an extent that the banks have an oligopoly. An oligopoly is where a few players in the market come up to decide how to move, whether up or down. 

When the CBR was increased, within less than 24 hours they increased even on monies which we had borrowed at lower interest rates. Now when the CBR has come down and it is almost coming to 60 days, they have not yet followed suit. I request that the honourable minister gives us an appropriate day and a timeframe within which that report shall be presented on the Floor of this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that request for the statement came in the first session; we are almost coming to the middle of the second session. The interest rates do not just affect the traders but us, the consumers, ultimately. So, when can you bring it?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter – (Laughter) - although we may talk about it lightly. In delivery, you can deliver a message in a light way but this is a serious matter. It is affecting the lives of our people. It is affecting the business community, including ourselves here in Parliament, especially those of you who borrowed money. I think all of us virtually have borrowed money from the banking system. 

I would like to promise this House - as I told you, this matter is coming to me for the first time and I apologise on behalf of the ministry that we were not able to catch it up. Now that we have caught it up, can I beg for one week - (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, I am not very familiar with our next timetable for the sitting of Parliament

THE SPEAKER: The next sitting of Parliament? Next week.

MR KASAIJA: Can we come here next week and present that statement, please? (Interjections) Tuesday next week is okay, Madam Speaker. We shall do that.

THE SPEAKER: Is that a government assurance?

MR KASAIJA: It is a government assurance. Thank you.

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON A PETITION OF THE TOBACCO FARMERS FROM BUGANGAIZI WEST CONSTITUENCY, KIBAALE DISTRICT

3.16
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Prof. Baltazar Kasirivu Atwooki): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will recall that this petition was presented by me on behalf of the tobacco farmers from Bugangaizi West. Since I am the one who presented the petition and I am the chairperson of the committee, in order to have justice I should not have handled the matter. My vice chairperson at that time was heavy and therefore, I delegated to another member of the committee. I therefore request that hon. Margaret Kiboijana presents the report of the committee. I thank you. 

3.18
MRS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. This is the report on a petition of the tobacco farmers in Bugangaizi West Constituency in Kibaale District.

On the 7 December 2011, on behalf of the tobacco farmers of Kibaale District hon. Dr Baltazar Kasirivu Atwooki Kyamanywa, MP Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale District, presented a petition seeking for the intervention of Parliament into the allegation that Continental Tobacco (Uganda) Ltd had failed to pay for the tobacco leaf collected from the said farmers during the buying season of July to November 2011. 

The petition was referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for investigation and to report back to plenary within two weeks. However, since the House was prorogued before the expiry of the two weeks, the committee considered the matter during recess, and in accordance with rules 45(1), 133(c) 177 (a) and (b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda now reports as follows:

The Complaint 

a) 	The petitioners stated that they are tobacco growers in Bugangaizi, Kibaale District.

b) 	Tobacco growing is the only income generating activity for the petitioners.

c) 	In the months of July, August, September and October 2011, the petitioners delivered tobacco leaves to a company called Continental Tobacco (U) Ltd.

d) 	From July to December 2011, the company had failed to pay any consideration for the tobacco leaves it bought from the petitioners despite several reminders. 

e) 	The petitioners had suffered and continue to suffer economic constraints, particularly failing to raise money for school fees, food and other basic necessities of life. 

f) 	The situation has been compounded by the fact that almost all the petitioners are servicing loans from microfinance institutions and now live in fear of arrest, and they are bound to lose their land and other properties to the microfinance institutions due to the default in loan repayments. 

Terms of Reference

The committee developed and adapted the following terms  of reference to guide the investigations: 

•	To establish the authenticity of the company - whether the company was registered, date of incorporation and who the directors are;
	 
•	To establish authenticity of the allegations and the magnitude of the financial loss as a result of non-payment for the tobacco.

•	To establish the contractual obligations and the pricing systems between the company and the famers.

•	To evaluate the contracts between the famers and Continental Tobacco (U) Ltd in regard to the matter, and establish the legal implications and the sanctions and penalties for non-compliance with the contracts;
•	To establish whether the allegations have merit or not and thus make appropriate recommendations.

Methodology

•	The committee met and received views from several stakeholders including: 
•	Hon. Dr Kasirivu Atwooki Beltazar Kyamanywa; 
•	The Minister of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives 
•	Officials of Continental Tobacco (Uganda) Ltd – (Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it procedurally right for the honourable member to speak as if she has beads in the mouth – (Interjections) – because we cannot hear? 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I represent the people of Mbarara Municipality and I am a qualified medical doctor, so I know people who have got speaking problems and all that. Hon. Kiboijana is a woman of integrity and she speaks very eloquently - (Applause) - and I was hearing her well from here. 

Madam Speaker, unless hon. Katoto Hatwib has a hearing impairment, – (Laughter) – is it in order for a Member of Parliament to reduce a woman, - (Interjections)- a mother of this country, a representative of Ibanda,  on the Floor of the House, that she has beads in the mouth? 

THE SPEAKER: Order, members! Honourable members, when you took oath here, we gave you a copy of the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure. Our rules prohibit the use of derogatory and insulting language against other members; withdraw that statement. 

MR KATOTO: Madam Speaker, with due respect, I withdraw and apologise. But I was not hearing what she was saying.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katoto, I have supplied you with the text; if you cannot hear, you can read. Please continue. 

MRS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee also visited the premises housing Continental (Uganda) Ltd at Kiwatule. 

The committee reviewed relevant documents which included: 

•	Unpaid farmers lists and contracts between the company and farmers from Kibaale; 

•	The Tobacco (Control and Marketing) Act, 1967; 

•	The Tobacco (Control and Marketing) Regulations; 

•	Documents availed by the office of the Registrar of Companies, which include: the Memorandum and Articles of Association of Continental Tobacco (Uganda) Ltd, and the certificate of incorporation.

I will go to page 6, Madam Speaker. The committee established that the company headquarters is located on Plot 142, Kiwatule–Ntinda. In Kibaale District, its area of operation is divided into three zones, namely, Kagadi, Karuguza and Kakumiro, and each zone is manned by a supervisor. 

Due to the demand from the farmers and the local authorities of South Kigezi, Continental Tobacco (Uganda) Ltd extended its services to include sponsoring farmers in South West Kigezi and the Ministry of Trade Industry and Cooperatives granted them permission. Although the ministry approved this extension, it had reservations on the ground that: 

•	The company had not shown a good example in meeting its financial obligations in North West Uganda in the previous year of 2009/2010. 
•	There were signs that due to financial difficulties, the company would not ably sponsor farmers in accordance with the tobacco marketing regulations.

Observations

The committee observed that the above extension could have weighed in heavily on the company’s resources and preparedness. The committee further observed that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should have been cautious in granting Continental (Uganda) Ltd permission to operate in the areas it extended its operations to.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should require Continental Tobacco (Uganda) Ltd to execute a performance bond securing its obligations before granting it a valid registration certificate as provided for by regulation 6(2)(b) of the Tobacco (Control and Marketing) Regulations, 1967. This performance bond should be renewed at the start of every growing season to protect farmers from default. 

Unpaid Tobacco Framers for 2011 Growing Season

The committee was further informed by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives that: 

•	Approximately Shs 639,011,600 had not been paid to the farmers for the crop sold to the company as at 19 October 2011 and according to the marketing returns submitted to the office of the district tobacco inspector in Kibaale. 

•	The management of Continental Tobacco (Uganda) Ltd was directed by the district commercial officer/tobacco inspector Kibaale to clear all the outstanding amounts to the unpaid tobacco farmers not later than 18 November 2011. No action had been taken up to the time the committee visited Kibaale District on the 15 December 2011. 

•	The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives had in addition asked the company to explain these circumstances but no reply was given by the company management until the growers’ petition reached Parliament. 

Reasons for Non-payment 

Management of Continental Tobacco Company informed the committee that the delays in payment were due to a number of factors: 

•	The global economic repression/meltdown since the year 2008, and the tobacco industry was not spared. 
•	Whereas most of the users of fire tobacco - grown in Kibaale - are in the western world, where most of it is mainly used for making cigars, many of the cigarette manufacturers in the western world have suffered due to economic depression.

Liabilities (Estimated Financial Loss to Farmers) 

The committee was informed by management of the company that nationally, the company owes farmers about Shs 26.3 billion, and the debt for farmers in Kibaale District only is Shs 1.5 billion. 

Observations 

The committee noted that delayed entries and poor reconciliation of farmers’ claims could cause losses to the farmers. There could be deliberate wrong entries which might cause losses to farmers.

It is recommended that the company should revise their receipting system for the receipts to indicate the amount of kilogrammes sold by the farmer and amount of money accruing from the sale. The company should also devise mechanisms for resolving claim disputes. 

The Store

The committee made a random sampling at the store of un-processed tobacco and the findings were as follows: 
i) 	The employees had no protective gear;

ii) 	An impromptu check on one of the tags of the delivered UF6 tobacco was showing that whereas the owner was Muhereza Bosa under that code, the weight was not shown. Whereas the grade was shown and the buyer was also shown, there was no signature to confirm that this tobacco had been received by the company and there was no reclassification since there was no price indication.

Observation 

The committee noted that the following were not filled in: weight, signature, reweighed kilogrammes and reclassification. This indicates the farmer who sold this tobacco cannot be traced. If he wanted to make a claim to the company, his records would be missing in the database of the company, yet the company had claimed it had all the data for their farmers. 

Recommendation

The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives needs to be more vigilant in monitoring the operations of this company and other tobacco buying companies. 

Default on Payments

Section 11 of the Tobacco (Control and Marketing) Regulations, clearly provides that in case of default on payment, the sponsor, in this case the company, shall pay interest on the purchase price in respect of the period of payment, which interest rate shall be calculated at a rate equivalent to the Bank of Uganda minimum commercial lending rate and calculated on daily balances compounded monthly with an additional margin of two percent. 

Recommendation

The committee therefore recommends that Continental Tobacco (U) Ltd should pay the tobacco farmers with interest as provided for in the regulations. 

Agreement between Tobacco Farmers and Continental Tobacco (U) Ltd

The committee reviewed the tobacco growers’ contract between the tobacco farmers and the company and makes the following observations: 

Objective of the Contract  

The contract provides that, “The farmer shall grow and sell to the company without fail for a period of one year.”  The committee notes that the expression “without fail” shifts the entire production risk to the farmer.

Recommendation

The price paid at the end of the production chain should be worth the risk.

General Observations and Recommendations 
 
Observations

In a meeting between the committee and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives held on 24 January 2012, the ministry was tasked to organise a meeting in which Continental Tobacco (U) Ltd would be invited to provide a way forward. Subsequently, in a meeting which was held on 2 February 2012, the company agreed that it would pay a sum of US$ 6,240,000, the outstanding amounts to all tobacco growers in the country, with interest before 15 March 2012. Details of the agreement are attached. Madam Speaker, allow me to lay the details of this agreement on the Table. 

However, as we present this report, in many areas of Hoima District, notably Kyangwali, Kitoba, Kigorobya and Kikonda of Kyankwanzi, Continental Tobacco (U) Ltd has made partial payments to farmers. In Koboko and Nyadri, there is also partial payment. To all farmers, the company has not paid any interest as agreed.

Recommendations

1. 	Continental Tobacco (U) Ltd should fulfil its obligations in the agreement between the company and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives in where it undertook, among others:  

•	To pay all the outstanding amounts with interest to be determined to the unpaid farmers for the crop sold to the company during the 2011 season. 

•	Not to sponsor farmers to grow tobacco for marketing this season 2012/2013 unless it pays, with interest, for the tobacco it took on credit in all the districts it operated in.

•	To declare the list of the staff it employs to enable the District Tobacco Task Force to vet their competence, as some of the irregularities were attributed to their lack of compliance with sector regulations.

2. 	The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should not issue tobacco buying licenses to Continental Tobacco (U) Ltd until it has ascertained that all farmers have been paid for their tobacco leaf with interest. 
 
3. 	The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should make a comprehensive report to Parliament on the progress within one month.

The committee undertakes to make a follow-up on the   recommendations. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report. (Applause)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. Two months before this petition was presented to this august House - that was in October 2011 - I personally presented a petition on behalf of the people of Agago and cotton growers in Northern Uganda on the plight of cotton farmers. A few weeks later, some other members followed with several other burning issues on cotton growing, which were forwarded to this same committee. 

I want to know, procedurally, how this committee works. Does it mean that the petition that was presented two months before was less important than this one which was presented in the month of December of the same year? I want to know so that the people of Uganda also know how some committees work. I thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: In the same manner, I did present a petition on behalf of the farmers of Bugisu under Bugisu Cooperative Union (BCU). The petition as passed over to the Committee on Agriculture but up today, there has been no report on this Floor concerning the BCU issue. Can I also find out from the committee how they choose which petition they handle first?

MRS KIBOIJANA: I thank you. The cotton issue was not only in the honourable’s region; it was also the same issue in some of the northern Uganda regions and Kasese region. As I speak, the Committee on Agriculture is in Kasese as a follow-up, to get more information regarding that petition. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Bugisu Cooperative Union?

MRS KIBOIJANA: The issue of Bugisu Cooperative Union is still pending because we did not have enough information on the ground and we are still looking for more information. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems that this report is interim but let me hear from the Minister for Trade and Industry because a lot is directed at her ministry.

3.40
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, I wish to refer to the report. In the meeting of 2nd February, we met the company and the ministers, as alluded to in the report, and they agreed to pay. However, I regret to inform the House that since that time, they have been quite elusive and evasive. I do pledge that the ministry will comply with the recommendation and submit a comprehensive report in one month’s time. I wish to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. 

3.42
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. I just wanted to raise a matter for the minister responsible for trade. In the report, the committee recommends that the ministry should not issue a licence to this company until they have paid, and I am told this is the season when the licences should be issued. So, we want to know, have you actually issued them a licence or not? 

The reason why I raise this is because, as honourable members know, at the end of last year I moved a motion seeking leave of the House to allow me introduce a Private Member’s Bill, the Tobacco Control Bill. Recently, I had a public hearing on the tobacco industry. One officer who came from the Ministry of Trade and Industry was introduced as a member of the tobacco industry. So, there seems to be a problem; these companies are compromising officers in your ministry. 

We would want an assurance on whether you have issued a licence or not. I do not know whether you are aware whether a licence has been issued to this company or not. You could have issued a licence for a whole year when we are here saying, “halt until they pay”. Do you have any information to this effect, on whether a licence has been issued or not? 

3.44
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the additional clarification I would like to seek from the Minister of Trade is to the effect that it is not only Continental Tobacco doing this. For the last five years, the people of Bunyoro – and if I can mention, neighbours like Kyankwanzi, Mubende - were conned by BAT when they did not pay for a whole year. After so many years of legal battles, even when the case was in favour of these farmers, there was some arm-twisting that has been taking place and up to now the people have not got justice. 

Can I request the minister and also Government – I must confess, I do not support tobacco growing economically, health-wise and otherwise. How I wish it was banned yesterday. (Applause) I would like to request that Government reconsiders tobacco growing in this country if we are to protect the citizens. I thank you.

3.45
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much. When Government decided to liberalise the various industries within the country, the intention was to improve efficiency, and also enable the farmers benefit from the fruits of liberalisation. Right now, the experience is that liberalisation is hurting farmers more and yet we have a minister in charge of cooperatives. What cooperatives is the minister in charge of? Why can’t we help our people to cooperate so that the minister who is in charge of cooperatives can take the rightful title when the farmers themselves can market and reap the benefits of co-operation? So, what cooperatives is the minister in charge of? May I seek clarification? 	

3.47
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to seek further clarification from the honourable minister. I do not know whether she is aware that as we talk right now, companies like Uganda Breweries, Nile Breweries and East African Breweries are convincing farmers and getting into agreements with them to grow, and most of these agreements are not on the side of farmers; it is mainly the companies who stand to benefit. 

I would like to seek further clarification from the honourable minister. Can she assure this House that in case these people get into these agreements again, such scenarios will not happen and that farmers will benefit. Thank you so much.

3.48
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the presenter of the report on this petition. The issue is very big. It is not only limited to tobacco farmers from the constituency represented by the petitioners, Bugangaizi West, but also tobacco farmers in West Nile are complaining. 

Whereas the people of West Nile have not presented a petition here, I stand as a witness passing daily and hearing the complaints about exploitation by tobacco purchasing companies. Could we request for a more comprehensive and extensive report about the situation of tobacco farmers in Uganda, including the ones of West Nile? Thank you.
 
3.49
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to question the competence of the minister and the Ministry of Trade and Industry. I am raising this because of the revelation made on page 6 of the report where even after realising failures of the Continental Company in 2009/2010, the minister went ahead to license this company and you can see what happened the following year. Now Shs 26.3 billion is at stake and the minister seems helpless. 

This is revealed on page 9 where the committee tells us that the Minister of Trade and Industry asked Continental Company to pay up but the company remained adamant until this petition came here. What power do you have, honourable minister, to control these companies? Why do you have to expose the farmer this way? As if that was not - (Member timed out)

3.50
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I equally want to thank the committee for the work done. Just like Bugangaizi, in Buhaguzi County which I represent, one of the major cash crops is tobacco. This problem of Continental has been going on; in fact, at one time we were supposed to have presented even faster than the Bungangaizi one, but I think the chairman did a right job by also covering part of the area especially in regard to my constituency, Buhaguzi.

The report indicates that there have been some partial payments made to the farmers. I want to report to this House that in my constituency, no single payment has been made. Up to now, the people there still ask me for a way forward. They tried to report the matter to the Police, a file was opened, but there is no hope. We requested for the intervention of the ministry; fortunately, Parliament, through this committee, has done some good work.

I have a question to the minister. No payment has been made yet the company seems to be operating under a licence issued by the ministry that you head. Now, what should I tell my people?

3.52
MR BARNABAS TINKASIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the chairperson and members of that committee for presenting this good report. 

I would like to inform this House that investors in this country have received a lot of protection to the detriment of the citizens. In my constituency, this company has terribly fleeced people. I, therefore, would like the concerned minister to table, in this House, documents showing the amount they have paid. I have been told that they did part payments, but in my constituency there is nothing like part payments that have been given to the people.

I would like to request that instead of giving a licence to this company, the minister should put this company under receivership henceforth because it cannot pay – (Member timed out)

3.54
MR REMEGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Madam Speaker and honourable members, when you look at page 4 of the report, you will see the company profile, which shows that the company was initially owned by three people – MIG International (60 per cent); Vanessa Murerwa (20 per cent); and Florence Mbabazi (20 per cent).

On 29 November 2005, these people relinquished their shares, which has seen the company being bought off and is now owned by five people, but who all seem to belong to one family if you look at the names – Murungi Wilfred, Ithiru Murungi Joyce, Wanja Murungi, Murungi Angella, Nyaga Murungi and Mugambi Murungi. So, in the transition to this one family, could there have been a problem? If this company became insolvent, since it is now owned by five people seemingly from one family – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half minute. You seem to have something important.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week on Thursday, we were told that when Tullow Oil sold its shares to CNOOC Total, it abandoned the waste in Nwoya District, which is the constituency of hon. Richard Todwong. Today, we are talking about the performance of this company in respect to tobacco but we have also talked about several private things not being done in the right way in this country. So, I think it is high time for the Government to review our liberalisation policy, well knowing that no private-business-oriented person can become a charity-moving house. Without proper regulations and management, the private sector is essentially predatory. So, it is high time we focused on reviewing how we relate with the private sector operators in this country. Madam Speaker, thank you.

3.56
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think this is a bigger problem. In a country where we do not have strong consumer protection laws, you are bound to have this sort of problem. We have left our people to the vagaries of the market forces of sometimes so-called investors and sometimes sharks.

Our people are now so vulnerable, not only in the agriculture or contracts family alone, but also in other areas. Let me give you an example. See what is going on in the telecommunications industry. All the telecommunication companies were licensed to provide telecommunication services to our people. What are they doing these days? They are now indulging in what we call gaming where they feature games of chance – sukuma; there are so many phrases they use - which have made our people get into gambling. The figures we have show that actually, over Shs 90 billion is earned by these telecommunication companies monthly in gambling. 

Our people are not getting any services. They just say that for one to win a Toyota, they have to put in maybe Shs 400,000. Another person will inject in Shs 500,000 while other people will put there Shs 1,000,000 because they all hope to win a Toyota vehicle. But you realise that our Government is not protecting our people from such gambling. They are going into - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute more.

MR KATUNTU: There is the mobile money business, for example; yes, the service is good, but there is no legal regime that governs that service. Today if MTN closed business, over Shs 200 billion is held on people’s phones just in the air there, where do you resort to? There is no law and there is no contract between you having Shs 1,000,000 on your mobile phone with MTN or the agent who sold you that airtime on mobile money. So, Government should really think about bringing consumer protection laws to protect our people because they are vulnerable. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.59
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me start with the report. Hon. Dr Kasirivu Atwooki is the chairperson of the committee and it is good he handed over to another member. However, it was wrong for him to sign the report because that means he is part and parcel of it, which is an illegality.

We are talking about an area where the biggest population of Uganda is employed. The minister is saying she needs a month to bring a report yet on page 3, it is indicated that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives was contacted. So, I hope they have an answer. I do not think we need a month for them to go and get those answers. Unless she is telling us that she is incompetent not to have these answers; otherwise, she was contacted and she should be ready to respond to the issues we have raised.

Madam Speaker, the minister is in trouble; instead of helping farmers, they are the ones participating in not helping farmers. If they knew there was a problem in the tobacco company like this, why haven’t they taken action? By now they should have taken action. It is a bad thing for the ministry not to take action yet the people are suffering.

You get an example of Bugisu Cooperative Union, which I want to bring here, and where I am chairperson. The Ministry of Cooperatives run to Bugisu Cooperative Union because they knew it had money. Now they have taken all the money and the farmers are suffering and there is no action for the last two years. You are talking of cooperatives and yet you are the same people killing cooperatives.

Madam Speaker, this ministry is the one which controls Uganda National Bureau of Standards, but there are so many fake products on the market because the ministry is not regulating this organisation. I want to say that this problem is serious and we cannot give the minister one month. She should give us the answers now because our farmers are suffering and if we do not get the answers now, we will be in problems. I thank you.

4.02
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I thank you all for the submissions. As far as the licence is concerned, I requested in my previous presentation that I be given a month to go back and study the recommendations and then make a comprehensive report. However, I will be able to comment on one of the issues about the cooperatives. 

The honourable Member of Parliament asked, “Where are the cooperatives?” Let me use this opportunity to appeal to the Members of Parliament to go back to their constituencies and lobby for the formation of cooperatives because some of the cooperatives, as we all know, are dysfunctional. They collapsed in the 1970s and 1980s and we are trying to revitalise them and we are making headway- (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In 1986 when the NRA took over power, many of us were already mature and we were already holding senior positions in Government. We know for a fact that there was a deliberate policy decision to do away with the cooperative movement and cooperative societies. It was a Government policy.

Is the honourable minister, therefore, in order to mislead this House and say the cooperative societies died when they were killed, when they were and purposefully, through a policy, done away with? Did they just die? They were purposefully done away through a policy; they did not just die on their own. Is the minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe the minister knows how they died. Please explain.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, it is true some died, and I will reiterate my appeal to the honourable members to help me revitalise some of these cooperatives in your areas- (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I asked a deliberate question on this Floor because we have somebody who is paid a salary for being a minister in charge of cooperatives. There must be a cooperative policy of Government. What is the policy of Government concerning cooperatives? What does the law say since liberalisation came into effect and actually the apex institutions got destroyed? 

There should be cooperative officers in the offices. That is not the work of Members of Parliament. That is why we are misleading people into doing things that they are not supposed to do. Whereas we can help in educating, there must be a deliberate policy of Government of promoting cooperation and how it should be administered. What is the policy? Can the minister clarify on that? That is the only thing we want before we can support what she is proposing. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should let the minister answer. We need to move to other work.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, there is a cooperatives policy but it is due for amendment. We submitted the amendments to Cabinet and it is due to be deliberated upon. It is in Cabinet. After amendments, it will come here. Madam Speaker, I would pray that you give me a month to clarify further on some of these issues pertaining to tobacco. 

MS OLIVIA KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing on a point of guidance and I would particularly focus on my district which I represent, Iganga District. Depending on the situation and the circumstances regarding cooperatives, you find that the Minister of Industry sends people to our constituencies to open up SACCOs without our knowledge. We seek to know from the minister or I seek guidance from you, Madam Speaker, on the way forward regarding the relationship of Members of Parliament and the ministers concerned with cooperatives especially when they are operating in our constituencies. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The people of Bugangaizi West brought a petition to this House and indeed from the submissions of some Members, it is a bigger problem beyond that constituency and the minister has been aware of this problem. 

The information I have is that even when the minister was aware of this challenge, her ministry has gone ahead to renew the licence. I just wanted to disagree with her that we should give her one month. If she is not ready to give us information, I wanted her to come back on Thursday ready with the answers and even further propose that if the company is not complying, the licence should be withdrawn until they have paid the farmers because the farmers are complaining. They want their money and you are saying one month! This matter must be handled expeditiously and I want to suggest that we give her up to Thursday to bring the responses so that we finalise on this matter because she should be in the know and she should be in charge of the ministry.

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister should separate the licence from the other issues, otherwise we are going to amend the report because the report suggested one month. That is what I am following here. So, either you are amending the report or you are accepting, but the issue of the licence you can answer within less than a month. Have you licensed or have you not?

On the issue which hon. Kwagala raised, I want to remind members of the Cabinet that right from the Eighth Parliament, the then Prime Minister issued instructions that no minister should go to a member’s constituency without informing them. So I hope nothing has changed. Can I also state that no Members of Parliament should go to other member’s constituencies to do things without telling them. I hope nothing has changed. I also state that no Members of Parliament should go to other members’ constituencies to do things without telling them. (Applause)

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, the minister in charge of microfinance is responsible for the SACCOs. So sometimes we do not get to know the activities that pertain to the SACCOs because they are financed by the Ministry of Finance. We are supposed to regulate them but we find challenges because they claim that we do not finance them, so they are loyal to the Ministry of Finance. So, sometimes we do not get to know about those events. However, I will rectify that. If it so happens, I will make sure it will not reoccur and then – (Interruption)

MR AYENA-ODONG: Madam Speaker, I arise to seek clarification, following on a point of clarification that was raised by hon. Dombo. He was very specific but I see that the minister is being elusive. Hon. Dombo specifically sought to know whether the Ministry has a clear policy for cooperative movements and the Minister stood to say that she is making an amendment. Let the Minister clarify whether there is a policy and what it says about the cooperative movements. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us distinguish between the SACCOs and the big cooperatives like Busoga Growers Cooperative Union, Banyankole Kweterana and others. What they are asking about are the big cooperative unions and not the small SACCOs. I think the unions are still under your ministry. 

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I do confirm that there was a Cooperatives Act, which was drafted in 1978; so now, it is almost obsolete. So we have been in the process of amending it and it has been presented to Cabinet – (Interjection) - the policy as well. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have to go to other things. I put the question that this House adopts this report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, you will report within one month but on the licence issue, you will report next week. 

4.15
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving a special consideration to the people of Buliisa who are now mourning. A catastrophe has befallen us. As a Member of Parliament hosting a national park, like many other members in this House, we have been expressing concern over the loss of our people and crops to hippos and crocodiles. As I speak now, I have lost seven people within just a week and the last two died just last night. 

These are fishermen being shot under the directive of “shoot-to-kill”, as we celebrate Independence Day. The UWA rangers are operating under the shoot-to-kill policy in Buliisa and Nwoya. As we are celebrating 50 years of independence, citizens can just be gunned down easily! 

The seven names I am going to read are for the fishermen but people are scared in the three sub-counties along the river because actually, more than 10 people have been killed in the park without their bodies being seen. The names are: Usua Odongo of Kicoke village, Ubebigiu Lusie of Mubako village, Bicendi Emmanuel of Kisomere village, Silvano Jole of Kiriango village, Komakech Magambo of Kasenyi and Richard Oloya of Muvule. 

Madam Speaker, I am raising this matter because many times as members who host the park, we want to coexist with the national parks, especially I, as a promoter of tourism. But at this point in time, I am at crossroads whether not to tell my people to do otherwise. 

I would like to request the Minister and the Leader of Government Business to immediately announce a ceasefire. You cannot shoot citizens because they are looking for Angara in the river. That is very primitive and even the colonialists did not do that. I request that this is immediately handled and the committee should investigate who introduced the shoot-to-kill policy at a time Uganda is celebrating 50 years of independence. (Interruption)

MRS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I am giving information to my colleague. In 2004, in a bid to promote tourism in this country, crocodiles were introduced into Lake George and these crocodiles have grown and they are eating fish. Once they deplete the fish in the lake, they pounce on the citizens. 

As I speak now, over 10 people along the shores of Lake George have been eaten up by these crocodiles. The crocodiles, like hon. Mukitale has said, also attack to kill; they do not just attack for the sake of attacking. Yes, we do support tourism and we want our tourism sector to prosper, but we may find a hard time promoting tourism at the expense of people’s lives. 

The people of Kasese who live along the lake – the fishermen themselves – are in danger. I want to ask this House to arrive at a lasting solution, particularly the ministry responsible. They should either remove the crocodiles from the lake or they compensate the people around them or the people themselves kill them. Moreover, crocodiles multiply very fast and it is the disadvantage we have. As we promote tourism, we should also be mindful of the residents who are neighbouring the parks and other tourism sanctuaries. Thank you.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET ON THE HARMONISATION OF THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/13

THE SPEAKER: Where is the chair? He is not here?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I am rising for your guidance. I have seen some honourable members in the House who took leave by stepping aside from the front bench. We have not received any further communication whether they have come back. I am at a loss to see one of my honourable colleagues seated in front of me on the front bench and yet I know that he stepped aside. I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my recollection is that the Members wrote to me to ask for leave which I gave to them but they are Members of Parliament. I think that is why they are here. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, my guidance is on the matter of them taking the front bench, not being in the House.

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall get an answer. Let us continue with our work. 

4.24
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Christine Ondoa): Madam Speaker- (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We left when you had directed the Budget Committee to harmonise with Government and in this matter we are looking at Ministry of Finance on the figures and reallocation. Right now, I can see the Minister of Health proceeding to make a statement yet our item No.3 is very clear. It should be a motion. Has the minister constituted herself into the chairperson of the Budget Committee? Because that was the directive you gave this House. I beg to be informed and this House demands to be informed, Madam Speaker.   

THE SPEAKER: The instruction was to both the government and the Budget Committee. So, I expect two reports: one from the Budget Committee and one from the government. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Procedurally, it should be the chairperson to go first and thereafter the minister can come in to present. That is the procedure we have. Although we want something, let us do it procedurally and in the right manner. I beg, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, we sent out two bodies to go and look at this issue and both of them report back. So, I am saying let the government report be presented first and then the committee. 

DR ONDOA: Madam Speaker, I am making a statement concerning the additional funding to the health sector. The President has repeatedly been demanding for the Ministry of Health to make health centre IIIs and IVs fully functional so as to ensure the consolidation of immunisation, which has been progressively improving; to tackle more effectively maternal health; deal with HIV/AIDS and also with general health care. 

One of the key strategies is human resource for health. The Ministry of Health has now worked out a cost-effective establishment that can achieve this. This will involve 19 workers at health centre IIIs, 14 of whom are health workers and five support staff; and two medical doctors at Health Centres IV plus the 47 other professionals and support staff. The money for this will be either wholly or in part raised this financial year and in the subsequent financial years. 

Although some commentators have been talking of the recruitment ban, one other challenge has been poor remuneration for especially the doctors. That is why we have not been attracting and retaining doctors at the health centre IV, which was not covered by the recruitment ban.

Madam Speaker, the government is therefore undertaking to ensure that within this financial year, the process of enhancing the pay of doctors will begin but with those who work in health centre IV and in the coming few years, their earning should be comparable to the earning of other doctors in the region. (Applause)

We are deliberately targeting Health Centres IV and IIIs because that is where the biggest bottleneck is. Take the example of the greater Toro sub-region where the full functionalisation of health centre IIIs and IVs has been done as a pilot project and this has created an impact on health service delivery and also decongested the general and regional referral hospitals.  

A total of 6,172 staff will, therefore, be recruited for both levels and this will require a figure of approximately Shs49.6 billion per annum. We are also aware that some of the cadres of health workers required at this level may not be easily available, for example, the anaesthetists. This calls for concerted effort by the Ministry of Health and the training institutions to plan and train and make sure they are all available for recruitment.

We all need to know that health issues will not be handled by the health ministry alone; health issues are inter-sectoral. And when we successfully address immunisation, hygiene, safe water, nutrition, behaviour change to prevent HIV/AIDS, we shall eliminate over 90 percent of all the illnesses.

The Ministry of Local Government needs to help us handle the construction of latrines and also mobilise the population for immunisation. The Ministry of Water needs to handle safe water in order to eliminate waterborne diseases. The AIDS Commission to deal with HIV/AIDS; and the Ministry of Agriculture to handle nutrition. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Education has to train more of all the cadres of professional health workers required. The Ministry of Health is continuing to introduce reforms some of which capture these inter-sectoral characters of the health issues.

As demonstrated by the pilot project in Toro sub-region, making the health centre IIIs and IVs functional will improve some of the health cadres, which have not improved over time. It is worth noting that the sub-counties without health centre IIIs or those that are very large and may require more than one will be planned for accordingly, in a phased manner. The work plan to carry out the above recruitment will be completed within two weeks, and the progress report will be given regularly. I beg to state. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let them complete their statements then we get the other one and then we debate all.

4.32
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, having listened to the statement of the problem and the solutions proposed by Government, I rise to inform this House that the consultations that this House asked the Executive and the Budget Committee to carry out have been done.

I am very happy to report to this House that the two have harmonised their positions and we have one position-(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am a Member of the Budget committee and we did not agree. Some of us had dissenting voices and we have a minority report. The Prime Minister was there; I am surprised that he comes to the House and says, they are happy there was an agreement! Is he in order to lie to this House that there was an agreement yet we have a minority report which we served-[Mr Tim Lwanga: “I want to give information”]- I want to appeal to the Chairperson of the Budget Committee not to act like an animal on heat. 

So, is the Prime Minister in order to say that we are in agreement when we have even served him, the Chair of that Committee through his vice-chair with a minority report and a copy was delivered to the Speaker’s Office? Is he in order to mislead the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately, he had just started. I do not know what he was going to say. I do not know whether he was going to say 50 percent agreed or 30 percent agreed. Let him speak first. (Applause)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the Minister of Health has clearly stated, I want to re-state the position of Government as I have done several times in this House and outside, as the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and as the Member of Parliament for Kinkizi West-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aol has reappeared for the first time after her wedding. I think that is why Members are excited. (Laughter)You are welcome!

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I seek the indulgence of the Chair because I was not here to welcome the two new MPs: The one of Butambala and congratulate him-

THE SPEAKER: Can you stand up.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Congratulations! Madam Speaker, I welcome him to Parliament and we look forward to working with him very co-operatively and closely.

May I use this opportunity to welcome in this House, the history making Member of Parliament for Usuk-

THE SPEAKER: The new Member is registering in the library.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Rt hon. Speaker has just given me the information I did not have that the new Member is going through the process of registration where her name is required to be as a Member of Parliament. Let me take this opportunity to welcome her to Parliament and to congratulate her upon her very sweet victory in the by-election in Usuk and of course, to register what we all know that, she is a history making Member of Parliament being the youngest ever to be a parliamentarian in Africa. In fact, in Britain, the youngest member is 26 and when hon. Odonga Otto came to Parliament he was young but he was 25. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I want to record the clear position of Government about the state of health in Uganda that we are very much concerned, and we are very familiar and conscious of the challenges that we have. We are all in agreement that we need to attend to our health status in this country-(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, just a simple clarification for the record. I joined Parliament when I was 23 years and then I was the youngest MP. So, hon. Proscovia Oromait has broken my long serving record. I just wanted to make the record clear. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I may be the longest serving Member of Parliament.  I want to confirm that yes, he was young and also to definitely confirm that he has matured in my eyes – (Laughter).With the passage of time, you can see that hon. Odonga-Otto is now beginning to speak as a real MP.(Laughter)

Our concern as Government on this matter is undivided. We are very concerned about the level of nutrition in the country, the level of children being stunted during growth. We are very concerned about the declining trend in the maternal health sector and, therefore, it is very important that we take action and urgent action now. We are also conscious of the improvements which we have built over the years, the achievements we have had and the need to consciously build on them.  We want to look at those critical areas where we need action now in order to reverse, especially the trend in maternal health care.  

As the Minister of Health said, we have clearly identified that primary health care, the level where the community comes in consultation with medical services at the community level, is the place to pay the greatest attention to. We all know that if we can have an effective primary health care system, then it will be easier to cater for the secondary care which is where the patients come into contact with professional people like doctors and the tertiary level where there is consultancy like referral hospitals Mulago, Mbale, Mbarara and so on.

We think the first point of call is at the primary health care level. The policy of Government has been that we should have a health care centre or unit within walking distance of every household in this country. We think on average, we should have a radius of about five kilometres within a health centre III for most of the sub-counties. Therefore, we are proposing – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I wish to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for accepting this point of clarification. You are about to bring me closer to you. You are augmenting the statement made by the technical docket, the Minister of Health. In her statement, she has made it very clear that what you are expounding on is derived from a pilot project, which was implemented in Toro sub-region. My belief is that for a health care system to be in place, you need the technical staff, the doctors, and the medical staff of all cadres. You need the structures and facilities around and medicine in those health units. You are now emphasising the issue of health centre IIIs and IVs that they should be the first point of call and should be made operational. Can we learn from you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the lessons you have learned from Toro in those three areas that will convince us to believe you and take you seriously that these things will be for everybody once these resources are made available? Can you share that experience with us so that we can appreciate you more. I thank you.   

THE SPEAKER: But Members, why don’t you allow him to finish his statement then we can ask for clarification? Please go straight to the point, Prime Minister.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, actually my presentation answers my brother’s point, hon. Kassiano Wadri, from the other republic. My –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, the constitutional provisions for a person to be a Member of Parliament are well spelt out. One is that, you must be an adult of 18 years and above. Number two, you must own an S.6 certificate or an equivalent which I do not only have but above that. Third is that, you must be a citizen of this country. I have tendered all documents to the satisfaction of the Electoral Commission to know that I fully satisfy those conditions. Is the honourable member and also a Prime Minister from Kinkiizi–(Laughter)- whom I also know very well that he is a product of the first missionary work having settled in Mparu Church of Uganda and thereafter moving to Kinkiizi where he is located now - is he in order to abuse me and insinuate that I am not a Ugandan?(Laughter) Can you prove further that a whole me, from Tegot with origin from Omoro County having originated and come down through the Nile, the Luo migration - is he in order to begin insinuating that I, Kassiano Ezati Wadri, the MP  for Terego County, is in a wrong place and that I should not be in this Parliament? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, what is that republic you are referring to where he belongs? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I want to state very clearly without any fear of contradiction that Uganda is a republic. Therefore, every part of Uganda is a republic. (Laughter) I, therefore, know that he is from Terego and, therefore, he is from the Republic of Uganda, Terego.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, can you say hon. Ezati is from Terego in the Republic of Uganda. I think that is what he wants to hear.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Hon. Kassiano Wadri Ezati from Terego, the Republic of Uganda –(Applause)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I certainly take the apology and the correction made by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, John Patrick Amama Mbabazi–(Laughter). I take it with a good heart.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, the point I was making was thatwe have identified as the critical level where we can have the greatest impact. Therefore, the cadres to be recruited are senior medical officers – (Interjections) – cadres not in a political sense; I am now speaking English; medical officers, senior clinical officers, senior nursing officers, nursing officers, mid-wifely, nursing, enrolled midwives, enrolled nurses, laboratory technicians, laboratory assistants, anaesthetic – 

THE SPEAKER: Receive some help from Dr Bitekyerezo.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I want to help the Rt Hon. Prime Minister as a doctor. They are called anaesthesiologists – (Laughter) – or analogists. We have two of them; we call them anaesthetists or aesthetical officers. But when you have got masters, you are called anaesthesiologist– (Laughter).

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, those ones. We were told that for every 100 women who deliver children, 15 develop complications which are beyond the medical officers at the level of health centre IIIs. Therefore, they need to be referred to a medical doctor. Therefore, in order to have a complete intervention, we think we should come to Health Centres IV. Therefore, we have decided the following – (Interruption).

MR OCHOLA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I seek is that to the best of my knowledge, in health centres III and IV, all the workers are recruited by the local governments. And I think there is no law which has yet been amended to allow the central government recruit health workers for the local government. So even if we are looking for this money – (Interjections) – I am talking from an informed point of view. So, I want clarification on how central government is going to recruit health centre III and IV workers and post them to the local governments?

I have been a chairman before and we had this debate; I was a chairman LC V which most of you have not been. So, honourable members, what I am bringing forward is a very important point and I need clarification on it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether the Prime Minister said that they are going to recruit and post. I think he said they are going to provide the money.

MR OCHOLA: Madam Speaker, I would have expected the Minister of Local Government to be here to clarify on how – (Interjections) – Yes, because I want the people of Serere to know what is happening. I do not want the people of Serere to ask tomorrow for the workers who were promised in Parliament. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have read the statement that is being debated more than four times. I remember – 

THE SPEAKER: We are not debating it yet.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Okay, I am following the presentation by the minister together with that of the Leader of Government Business. I am at a loss and I ask you, Madam Speaker, to procedurally guide the House. 

The issue we had in contention was on the Shs 39.2 billion. Where we are now, we seem to be digressing into a policy position without specifically attacking the point of contention. So, may I be guided; is the statement and the presentation by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in furtherance of the position of Shs 39.2 billion or it is another position? Can we have the position cleared?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I believe you wanted the Shs 39 not to pay trees; you wanted it for services. That is what the Prime Minister is trying to explain. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, can I first of all clarify the point hon. Ochola– (Interjections) – No, someone has asked me to clarify. Health centres III and IV are under local government but we are now not talking about administration; we are talking about budgeting, putting money in our national budget to provide for them wherever they are. That is what we are doing and that is what I am addressing. In terms of budgeting, this means that the centre pays the remuneration of medical doctors even in Health Centres IV. So I am announcing that even though in the past the policy has been that we have one medical doctor in a health centre IV, now we have decided that we have two. (Applause)

As the minister said, for a full establishment at health centre IV, we need 47 other staff including all these professionals that I read here plus support staff. So, we are going to employ a total of 49 staff at every health centre IV – (Applause) – and for every health centre III, we will be employing a total of 19 workers and support staff. 

So, as the minister said, at health centres IV, in order to attain that level of functionality that we need, we shall recruit 1,656 and for health centres III, we shall recruit a total of 4,516. Currently, the staffing is as follows: for health centres IV country wide, we have 1,404 and we need an additional 1,656. At health centres III, we currently have 6,183 and we need to recruit 4,516 in order to attain that level of functionality, so that in all we have 7,586. 

The reason why we have these numbers, especially with the position of doctor, is not because there was a ban on recruitment of doctors but it was a problem of remuneration of doctors. So, the lessons we have learnt from the Toro sub-region pilot scheme are that when we enhance the payment of doctors, they respond positively. Therefore, we have come up with a decision that for every doctor – (Mr Tinkasiimire rose_) - Just a second; I will give you in a moment.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us listen first and then you will be given a chance to speak. Let him finish and I will give you a chance. Hon. Tinkasiimire, please wait for him to finish and then you can ask. I will give you an opportunity.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I was making the point that in order to attract these medical workers to health centres IV, we have decided to increase their pay by giving them a consolidated allowance in addition to their Shs 1.2 million per month, so that their total earning in a month becomes Shs 2.5 million. (Applause)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I thank you, Prime Minister, for giving way. I have heard you loud and clear repeating the statements from the Minister for Health that in the greater Toro sub-region, there is total functionality of health centres III and health centres IV. You are deliberately not telling us the attendance in these health centres IV and health centres III. 

You are referring to the impact by saying that there is decongestion of the referral hospitals. I come from a region that houses a hospital where many of these patients from Kyenjojo District, that is part of Toro, normally come; they come to Kagadi Hospital every day. On minimum basis, you cannot count less than 100 patients from Kyenjojo. What type of decongestion are you talking about? I want you to tell this House about the reduction in infant mortality rate in this region and the reduction in maternal mortality in this region such that we can buy your idea, that there is total functionality of health centres III and health centres IV in this region.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish you could let the Prime Minister finish and then we can allow you to talk. Let him finish first.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: First of all, I will answer hon. Tinkasiimire. What we are proposing now is in recognition of the fact that staffing at health centres III and health centres IV is not adequate. That is why even Mulago Hospital, which is a national referral hospital, is the first point of contact of the patient with the medical service for some people. It is both a community and a referral hospital, and that is the problem we are responding to by saying that let us have enough staff at health centres III so that we do not have people who have to leave their sub-counties to go to the county because there is no service at the sub-county. Therefore, the decongestion we are talking about will come about when we have fully recruited staff, deployed them and these centres are fully functional. (Applause)

I was saying that when you look at the numbers of people that need to be recruited and – we are going to distribute these figures - and we look at their level of remuneration, we require a total of Shs 49,549,839,142. So I am happy to inform this Parliament, which had put the case that we require Shs 39 billion, that Government thinks and has actually established that we require Shs 49 billion and we will provide the Shs 49 billion. 

I am happy to inform this august House that we have managed to secure sufficient funds to embark on the recruitment exercise for this total number that I have just given. (Applause) Accordingly, we have managed to identify an additional Shs 6.5 billion as seed money to enable the Ministry of Health to start on this endeavour to recruit as soon as the budget is passed. (Applause) As we all know, recruitment is a process and takes time; it is not something that can be done overnight or in one month. So, to recruit 6,172 people will take time.

Secondly, I have instructed the Ministry of Health together with the Ministry of Public Service that as soon as the budget has been completed, they embark on the exercise of drawing an implementation plan for that recruitment. I have given them one month to complete that plan. (Applause)

We have calculated, Madam Speaker, that the recruitment exercise for these staff, which is going to be done at district level – As hon. Ochola said, these are at local level. The process of recruitment, which includes advertising and so on, takes time and it has a cost. So, of the Shs 6.5 billion, Shs 3.0 billion covers the cost of going through the process in the districts to recruit these staff. The other Shs 3.5 billion is money available to immediately pay the wage bill of all those staff recruited as soon as this budget is passed. (Applause)

The balance of Shs 43 billion will be provided by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development through a supplementary. This supplementary can only be worked out in detail after the Ministry of Health has submitted a well costed and sequenced work plan. As I said, I have asked the Minister of Health to submit a work plan within one month of passing this budget. (Applause)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give information. I have incessantly heard the Rt Hon. Prime Minister saying the Ministry of Health is going to come up with a plan. I have read this document and understood it. It is from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development of which the contents – (Interruption)

COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, is hon. Tinkasiimire, as a Member of the Budget Committee, in order to raise these issues now when we were there debating in the committee? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are usurping the rights of other Members. You are a member of the Budget Committee. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, mine is a matter of information. I am not debating. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, give the information then.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mine is about a matter of information, and the rules allow that when you see a Member submitting and trying to mislead the House, a committee member will give the necessary information. 

THE SPEAKER: You give the information, if you have it.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I will request you to restrain Members who want to do accountability on the Floor of the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Please give the information.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: The information I want to give the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is that on page 429 of the National Budget Framework Paper, the Ministry of Health presented their work plan. (Applause) On the basis of this, the National Budget Framework Paper was published and laid on the Table. Is the - (Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member is using the National Budget Framework Paper but we have moved away from that; we have received policy statements and this book has already been adjusted. We have even received corrigenda. So, the information he is giving us is very old. Is the honourable member in order to mislead the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you suggesting that this document is fake, that it is no longer a record of the ministry?    

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I want to read the contents of the National Budget Framework Paper to show Ugandans that the work plan from the Ministry of Health still stands. They are only under pressure to deny it on the Floor of the House. (Applause) “The budget for the financial year 2011/12 has a shortfall of Shs 20 billion. The proposed budget for 2012/13 should be revised to cater for the shortfall in PHC wage bill of Shs 20 billion and allow the recruitment of health workers in the districts facing severe shortages of Shs 33 billion, and enhance salaries of health workers by Shs 200 billion.” Therefore, their requirement is Shs 260 billion. The work plan was made by the Minister of Health and it is contained hereto in this budget framework paper. 

THE SPEAKER: Was it a proposal or a work plan? How much time did she say it would take to recruit those people? I think it is a proposal.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that the MTEF paper had all the figures. However, it is also true that this august House did make a response to that MTEF. I still remember the figures in my head. The human resource was Shs 33 billion;  wage shortfall was Shs 33 billion; local government support Shs 38 billion, and the total was Shs 104 billion. In addition to that, funds allowing, another Shs 130 billion was for allowances. That is what this House recommended. Therefore, Madam Speaker, this document, authentic as it is, is out of date. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, let me inform my colleague, hon. Tinkasiimire, that we are now talking about new levels of staffing. We are talking about two medical doctors per health centre IV. This was not there before. It is not contained in that framework paper. We are talking about 49 staff as I listed them. Most of these are new in the establishment. Therefore, I am speaking with maximum authority on this; the work plan is for a new element on this focus that we have.

I would like to appeal to colleagues; we have spent days and weeks not disagreeing about the need for intervention in the health sector, but trying to find a source of the funds. We need to have an impactful intervention in the health sector. What I rise to happily inform this Parliament is that the Shs 39 billion that the committee had recommended, we think is good but we need more. Therefore, we have come up with a figure of Shs 49,549,839,142. I therefore, can only expect my colleagues who have been struggling with me to happily receive this good news.

I beg to move, Madam Speaker, as I did before, that the Budget Committee report – before we adopt it – be amended in the schedule which was proposing cuts, so that we provide as I have indicated in this document whose copies I hope have been distributed, so that we can make those cuts as we proposed. I beg to move.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister seems to be indicating that the new figure, Shs 49 billion, is very new and accommodating to the health sector. However, the committee on health that I belong to sat with the Minister of Health throughout the budget process and gave a detailed work plan. I am even shocked that the Prime Minister is now alluding to the fact that the ministry is being given time to come out with a work plan. 

The minister laid before the Committee on Health the different scenarios to address the core issues in the healthcare sector. That is why the committee recommended Shs 260 billion. So, when the Budget Committee came up with Shs 39 billion, it was a very substantial reduction from that figure. So, when the Prime Minister keeps pampering the Shs 49 billion figure, which actually, according to Ministry of Health, will not even substantially address the key needs of the health sector, I do not understand.

So, is it procedurally right for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to ignore the key budget recommendations of Shs 260 billion, which the Committee on Health made, and keep on referring to the Shs 49 billion as if that is enough for revamping the health sector?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you had moved from Shs 260 billion to Shs 39 billion and what has happened is that Government has enhanced it by another Shs 10 billion. That is where we are, not so? Okay, let us hear from the Member from Padyere.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has spent time explaining but his explanation has covered only areas of administration. I want to know whether this additional funding to supplement the budget of the Health Ministry will also go into equipping the health centres IV and upgrading the health centres III which were already in the Government plan to be upgraded to health centres IV, for example, Elusi Health III. The President pledged to upgrade it to a health centre IV in 2010. So, will this budget also cover the upgrading of such health centres?

Finally, I just want to know whether the Shs 49 billion will be reflected as a corrigendum into the total amount that was provided. Thank you.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of procedure I am rising on does not concern what my colleague holding the Floor said. It concerns the behaviour in the House. We are handling serious issues concerning the budget and Ministry of Health in particular. Yes, I appreciate the fact that we are time barred, but I have observed the way members from that side are behaving, particularly those from the other side –(Interjections) – the NRM side. 

While I see empty seats, there are NRM colleagues who have chosen to stand and they are busy heckling! The bell has been rung several times to make them listen to the Members holding the Floor, but to no avail. In the circumstances, I would like to seek your guidance on whether you can ask the Members to take their seats so that we can listen to each other while we debate this important issue in preparation to pass the budget. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please stop organising small meetings in your corners. You are disrupting the proceedings of this House, and it is from both sides of the House. Let us hear from hon. Frank Tumwebaze and thereafter, I will take the minority report.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few remarks to make especially on the statement from the Ministry of Health. The Budget Committee did a great job to try to identify some resources to intervene in the most critical area of the health sector, but the question is: how should we intervene in as far as recruitment is concerned? Should we recruit for only health centres II or we should recruit for only those health centres where the activity of handling money takes place, which would be at both health centres III and IV.

This is a very good measure for the Ministry of Health. Year in and year out, this is a pool on which to measure them. To me, this is very important and everybody in this House including the Speaker and the Prime Minister have constituencies. We all need health centres III to be functional. We all need health centres IV. So, if they bring a plan of intervention, this does not mean it is the Health Sector Strategic Plan, but it is a specific plan of intervention. 

The Prime Minister has made a commitment that in as far as the budget priorities stand, they can have start-up seed money and he made a commitment of a supplementary. What else are we looking for? We all emerge victors, and we now all need to hold the government accountable to start implementing this plan such that the cry of dying mothers stops forthwith.

Madam Speaker, I have no reservations that the supplementary will be provided. We have provided more supplementaries for subsidising electricity. Government of Uganda was paying more than $40 million for some years to subsidise electricity and we passed here a supplementary of Shs 92 billion. Why then doubt that we cannot achieve this? We will all emerge winners; nobody loses or gains. Let us all pass this money and demand accountability from the Ministry of Health.

5.32
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Budget Committee by virtue of being the Chairperson of Government Assurances Committee, and I read this minority report in line with rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure. If honourable members would only listen to me.

THE SPEAKER: Listen to the report, honourable members.

MR ODONGA OTTO: The Budget Committee sat today in Room 102B to harmonise their position. Madam Speaker, I beg for protection -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you told our Budget Committee to go and meet the government side. Before the Budget Committee could present its report, the Ministry of Health presented a report and the Prime Minister came and made a response. We had anticipated that the Budget Committee would be the first to present a report, to tell us what took place, and then the Ministry of Finance would have come in, and then maybe the Ministry of Health and the Prime Minister to supplement; but things have turned out the other way. 

Now, you are saying we go for a minority report. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Budget Committee to present its report first and then we go to the minority report? Then we could debate from an informed point of view. Otherwise, in this form, we are just getting more confused and we don’t know what we are going to do. Don’t you think it is procedurally right for the Chairperson of the Budget Committee to present his report first?

THE SPEAKER: I haven’t seen his report, but I think he will update us on how far they have gone.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To be honest, I was wondering what the minority report was in respect of. Why? Because, when we last met here on Thursday last week, you adjourned the House and referred the issue of Shs 39.2 billion additional funding to the health sector back to the Executive and Budget Committee to come back with a harmonised position.

We already have a report from the Budget Committee on the Floor. This report has been debated and the only issue was for the government - because they disputed our figures - to come up with the other figures. Therefore, Madam Speaker, we had the meetings and what we have are minutes of the meetings that we had. Madam Speaker, if you allow me, I will lay the minutes on the Table. Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is very clear that the chairperson of the committee only managed to prepare minutes and I don’t know if the Members signed them. Now he is saying there is no report. It is because of that that we are saying, the minority report. If it is true that we are debating the earlier report, hon. Barnabas raised an issue of Shs 260 billion, and he said there was a work plan, which is true. All the budgets, which are submitted in Parliament, are after work plans and procurement plans have been made and costed. Then, the right figures are the ones we put in the budget and that is when we get the shortfalls.

This Parliament in its wisdom said we needed to get Shs 260 billion to fund the health sector. The Committee on Budget was supposed to look for Shs 260 billion. It managed to get Shs 39 billion. That means there is a balance of Shs 221 billion. Now, the chairperson of the committee is coming up and instead of telling us about the Shs 260 billion, he is telling us about the minutes, and he is very happy with Shs 49 billion and yet we are looking for Shs 260 billion.

So, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I am at pains to give this information because I heard both the submissions of the minister and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. He said that they are only going to provide Shs 6.5 billion in this financial budget. Consequently, they are going to look for money, which will come in the supplementary, and which is actually against our rules, as this is anticipation. 

Rule 71 states that you cannot, on the Floor of the House, commit Government on anticipation, particularly when at the end of the day, the Shs 6.5 billion is going to end in an Appropriation Bill. When we pass it into law, the balance from the Shs 49 billion will not be there. So, this is total anticipation, and it breaks our rules.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to ask the chairperson of the committee; since you have no report, do you agree with the position as presented by the Prime Minister?

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, we met, we discussed, and it is all in our minutes. We agreed that the proposal, as put across by the Prime Minister, is acceptable. Not only that but when you have the Shs 6.5 billion -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I wish to guide on the application of rule 71 because hon. Tinkasiimire says that it is out of order to debate on a motion in anticipation. Technically and principally, he is correct, but the problem is that we do not read most of these provisions together; you point out one and leave out the others. I am sure if he had looked at rule 71(3), he would not have raised that point of order because it says, “In determining whether a discussion is out of order on the ground of anticipation, the Speaker shall have regard to the probability of the subject matter in anticipation being brought before the House within a reasonable time.”

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I think I will start from where the learned Attorney-General started, to agree with hon. Tinkasiimire that anticipation is barred by our rules. And we all agreed on that. The point of disagreement, according to the learned Attorney-General, is under rule 71(3); but that part of the rule is only applicable if this matter had been raised as a point of order to the Speaker and the Speaker was determining, which hon. Tinkasiimire did not do. He only reminded us of our obligations and duty under rule 71(1). If he had gone ahead to raise it as a point of order, then the Speaker, in her ruling, should have taken into account rule 71(3). (Applause) The argument of the learned Attorney-General, therefore, does not arise. (Laughter)

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, the position of the committee is that this is a continuation of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are wasting a lot of time. Please, hon. Lwanga, complete your report.

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, the position of the committee is that this not a new debate and what we are waiting for is for the Executive to come up with their proposal putting forward whatever amendment they wanted on our report. And as Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, I believe I can either accept or disagree or go outside and consult.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, in debates of this nature, we need to move according to our own rules. It is unprecedented that a committee of Parliament is given an assignment by the House on a very difficult and important subject like this one, and they come back with no report. We are now having a casual response from the committee chairperson. This has never happened in the history of this House. I want, therefore, -(Interjections)- honourable colleagues, can I request for one thing? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow hon. Katuntu to speak.

MR KATUNTU: Honourable members, I think we need to treat this important subject with the seriousness it deserves. Shouting at each other will not help us. I think the country is looking to us to have a solution to this problem. Instead it is a shouting which in itself also offends the rules. I suggest that we need to – 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Katuntu, for giving way. You may also have noted that when the Prime Minister was speaking, he had no written information. But we could pick his word and the word we can only take is that Government has Shs 6.5 billion. But the committee identified Shs 39.2 billion. So, the only thing we would do – and I would invite the Speaker – to vote on whether we want Shs 6.5 billion or Shs 39.2 billion, and we move forward. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I still have a problem, and I want to appreciate that Government has identified the Shs 6.5 billion. But ordinarily, I expected the Budget Committee – hon. Tim Lwanga – to come up with a report and say, “Whereas the Budget Committee had earlier on suggested these areas to be cut, we are now agreeable to these particular areas.” But we do not even know from which areas they have agreed to raise the Shs 6.5 billion. We are now just having a general debate. I think that we are not moving as we should be, and my view is that although we may not sort out this problem today, we can sort it out tomorrow –(Hon. Amama Mbabazi rose_)- you can have the Floor. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I stand to express my profound apology for not having asked the clerk to distribute the paper. Can I ask him to do so now? Please distribute the paper I presented. Secondly - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think receiving that paper is just for the purpose of information because you have debated part of it already. However, I think we need to relieve the country of the tension over this money -[HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”]- you moved away from Shs 260 billion and said you wanted Shs 39.2 billion. The government is saying we have found Shs 49 billion. What else do you want? Honourable members, I see no report; so there is no minority report -  

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have been in the budgeting process and many ministries and statutory bodies including Parliament presented their plans. All the ministries and departments had areas that were not going to be funded because of the resource envelope. The budget committee has worked and come here with a proposal of sourcing Shs 39 billion. We sat here and referred the two to go and find out what the best available option was. Government has come up with a plan and put money in place, and actually increased it by 10 billion -[HON. MEMBERS: “No!”]- Yes! 

Madam Speaker, my view is that when Government is making a commitment, it is not in anticipation because the resource is budgeted by Government -(Interjections)- yes! So, we must put this issue to vote -(Interjections)– yes. 

5.54
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to speak first of all as a member of the budget committee, and I want to speak also as a mother of four. 

Last week, you sent the Budget Committee to go and harmonise with the Executive. It is true that at first when we sat as the Budget Committee in the earlier meeting, the figure was Shs 260 billion. When we went through the figures as a committee, with the Chairperson for the Health Committee, we failed to realise it. They had three areas: One area for enhancement of salaries of the health workers; another for recruitment; and a third for providing equipment to the local government health centres. Because we could not realign the budget to realise the Shs 260 billion and we had only managed to propose areas to cut worth Shs 39.2 billion, we concentrated on two areas: The enhancement after recruitment. And this is what we presented to Parliament in the committee report here. 

Now, you sent us as Budget Committee to harmonise with Government this morning. With the view of harmonising, Government came up with a position this time and said, “After Parliament giving us this assignment with you, honourable members, we have gone back as Government, looked broadly at our needs, aware of our resource envelope, aware of our needs and very responsible especially to maternal health and other areas affecting the health sector. They propose that indeed, after considering, they realise that even the Shs 39.2 billion was not enough. Government comes up with a position which I am very happy with as a mother -(Applause)– that we need to enhance capacity at health centres III. We have been having less than 60 staff at health centres III. Government is coming up to say that we have 19 health workers at health centres III. We have been having dysfunctional health centres IV and Government is coming up with a position to enhance the capacity to have 49 health workers at health centres IV. 

However, Madam Speaker, we tried to look around and all this amounts to - including the figure for recruitment – Shs 49.54 billion. Now, when we look at the cuts and as the Budget Committee considered the position of Government that some areas that had been affected had already committed to some activities like Defence, Electoral Commission and UBoS,  we have to agree on one thing that had been presented by Government. We looked at it as a Budget Committee; where do we start from? Having been happy with the position that we should enhance the status of health workers, we said we want money in the budget. 

Honourable members, you remember, their earlier position was that they shall bring a supplementary, but we have made head way today, and they have identified some money with commitment attached. (Applause) They agreed, first of all, to Shs 3 billion to start off the recruitment immediately. They have committed to putting more Shs 3.5 billion because there are some districts, including my own of Kyankwanzi, where we have got health workers who have gone without pay.

Madam Speaker, this makes Shs 6.5 billion meaning that as the process of recruitment goes on, those ones who are already recruited will access payment. We agreed to this in the Budget Committee, and they are committing to go and bring a well laid out work plan on how they are going to implement. This is not only the work of the Ministry of Health. This is our work as Members of Parliament. Health centres III and IV are decentralised and it is our responsibility to guide our district service commissions to handle recruitment as fast as possible. 

And with that process, that we want to attach the work plan and the timeframe to, we agreed to the Shs 6.5 billion, but we also said that before -(Interjections)- this is the position of the Budget Committee - that before Government presents any supplementary -

THE SPEAKER: Order! Let her finish. We are getting very good information from the Budget Committee. 

MS ANN MARIA NANAKABIRWA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. Finally, we have also said that Government should make a commitment. That is why my chairperson could not present a report, but had to present the minutes. (Interjections) However, we had this to inform the Executive: That if we adhere to this position, you must also fulfil your word, and as Parliament, we shall not accept any supplementaries brought to the House. (Interjections) Unless the supplementary for the Ministry of Health for the balance -(Interjections)- because when we say Shs 49 billion, and the Shs 6.5 billion is provided, that balance must be provided in a supplementary soon, before we can consider any other Government supplementary. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katoto. Let us hear from the other Members –(Interjections)- order on who? There is nobody on the Floor; who are you ordering? There is no point of order. Hon. Katoto. 

6.00
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Members, unless you tell us that you have a hidden motive, and you want to overthrow the government - I am saying this because we were here demanding -(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members. Hon. Katuntu, are you speaking or not?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I want to speak, but I cannot speak when colleagues are shouting. I am not used to that. 

Madam Speaker, you are the custodian of our Rules of Procedure. Our Rules of Procedure prohibit imputing bad faith. Is the hon. Katoto in order to impute that Members contributing and airing out their own views and debating have got ulterior motives? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, he did not name any particular person.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Members, we were here saying that we were not going to pass the budget until we get the Shs 39 billion for health. Now, the government is coming with a position of getting us Shs 49 billion per annum. If for sure we do not have any bad intentions of failing the government and of paralysing the government, what are we up to? Therefore, Madam Speaker, I request you to put the question or I raise a motion that we vote on this matter. Thank you very much.

6.03
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The constitutional framers thought it wise to give the responsibility to appropriate money to the institution of Parliament. At the beginning of this session, we passed a Vote-on-Account and progressively, the institutions for which we are deliberating are running out on the Voteon-Accounts which we put for them to do business. Even the mothers whom we portray and whom we speak for now - we could be killing more mothers by postponing the budget as the Eighth Parliament because we are not doing what we should do. 

On a procedural point, I want to propose; recently, I have received a number of reports from the Committee on Government Assurances based on nothing, but pledges without commitment. This is now a government assurance which the Committee on Government Assurances should  note so that we can count the days every time we come on the Floor and monitor what Government has committed to. 

May I, therefore, propose that since the committee went to negotiate and Government has conceded, and not only conceded to what the committee has proposed, but has even given more. Can we make the adjustments and you put a question on the Budget Committee proposals so that we can move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I invite hon. Odonga Otto to speak to his issues not as a minority report, but to just speak to those issues because he is not responding to any report. Just speak to them without calling it a minority report and then we shall take a decision after that.

6.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES (Mr Odonga Otto): Madam Speaker, rule 208 of our Rules of Procedure, if we address our minds to it, states thus, “The minutes of the proceedings of a committee shall be brought up and laid on Table of the House together with the report of the committee by the Chairperson or the Deputy Chairperson or any Member nominated by the committee when reporting to the House.”

I thank the honourable Member for Kyankwanzi for having presented the position of the Budget Committee even when the Chairman is alive and on the Front Bench. (Laughter) Members should watch very keenly, these kinds of chairpersons.

I just have three comments to make since I have no minority report to present because the Chairman did not present any report. One, in relation with what hon. Dombo said that whatever we pass here is a government assurance. As we talk now, we have 507 unfulfilled assurances made by the Executive in this House. Last week, we summoned the Prime Minister; we called his office but he even avoided and dodged the committee. He did not appear and not even send an apology or acknowledgement of receipt of summons from the Committee on Government Assurances. This is the same person you want to entrust with this responsibility of following the money for health workers. 

These things are not personal. As the Prime Minister said, we all want our health services to improve all over the country, but we have a difficulty of dealing with an Executive that tells lies to this House day after night, and I am speaking in my capacity as Chairperson of the Government Assurances Committee. 

In the circumstances, I just request for two things. One, can the Prime Minister tell us about the Shs 2.5 million they say is going to enhance the salaries of doctors. Can he come and tell us unequivocally when and in which month it will start. I am just assisting you because you need an exit route out of here. So, can the Prime Minister tell us in which month the medical personnel shall start getting the Shs 2.5 million.

Secondly, the Shs 6.5 billion which the government has said they have; can they tell us where exactly it has come from; because we are tired of passing budgets then permanent sectaries spend six to seven months visiting the Ministry of Finance trying to persuade them to release the money Parliament passed. So, can we be told unequivocally by the Prime Minister where this Shs 6.5 billion is coming from? Put it on record.

Lastly, -(Interruption)

MS NEBANDA: Thank you so much, honourable colleague, for giving way. I sit on the Budget Committee. One of my concerns – I appreciate that they are going to recruit health workers in health centres III and IV. But where I had a problem is that we can recruit the health workers but there is no equipment. Some health centres III or IV do not have theatres for operations –(Interjections)- these people do not have accommodation. My concern when I was in the Budget Committee was to get assurance –(Interjections)- from the Prime Minister, when that will also be implemented. We are going to get health workers but some health centres III and health centre IV do not have equipment to be utilised. I want you to add it on your assurances when it will also be implemented. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, the most important of all –(Interruption)  

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I have been standing, but the problem also is my size. I wanted to inform the House –(Interjections)- I am shorter than I should have been. That is what I mean. I wanted to inform the House that much as we are not disagreeing - I do not think this side of the House is disagreeing on the additional amount. I do not think that is the point of division.

Personally, I believe that whatever we are going to do, we should do it procedurally and follow the rules. Hon. Odonga Otto has quoted rule 208, which states that if there is any report to be submitted, it must be accompanied by the minutes of that committee. That is what hon. Odonga Otto has quoted. But I would like, in addition, to quote rule 193, which says that not only should the chairman sign the report, one third of the committee should sign the report. The minutes should have been signed. The House has not been able to examine whether the report and the minutes were signed and presented as laid on the Table. Procedurally, that is one of the points I would like to share with the House.

The second concern which touches on the law - and I thank God that the Attorney-General is here. I happen to have been long enough as a member of the Budget Committee and all I know is the Budget Act will not allow pre-emptive plans for the supplementary budget. The supplementary budget should never be pre-emptive. What the Prime Minister has told us is that, “The rest of the money, do not worry; you will get it in the supplementary.” That is not allowed by the Budget Act. (Interjections) I just want to put it right. If I am wrong - I am not a lawyer. I just want to sound your mind so that when we arrive at implementing the decision of the Prime Minister, which I have no problem with; we should accept it and move ahead. But I am concerned about the legal provision of the Budget Act. 

I am also concerned about the huge difference between the amount requested for by the Ministry of Health, which is accompanied by the action plan and the amount which is provided by Government. How are we going to bridge that? Those are the three concerns I wanted to raise to help hon. Odonga Otto. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga-Otto, please conclude. We need to move.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, on page 2 of the Prime Minister’s statement, this is what he stated, if I may quote him verbatim because this is the gist of my conclusion. “The balance of Shs 43 billion will be provided by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development through a supplementary after the Ministry of Health submits a well-costed and sequenced work plan. I have asked the Minister of Health to submit a work plan within one month of passing the budget.”

My bigger concern is this, other than the two concerns I had raised. I do not have to remind you. One, when are you paying the Shs 2.5 million so that we can all go on the radios and tell the doctors to start waiting from next month? Two, where you are getting the Shs 6.5 billion from. But the most important one, since you have instructed the Ministry of Health to bring a costed work plan within one month and this morning before the committee, you implied that the supplementary budget can come within one month or so; why can’t we give health all the Shs 48 billion, then after one month, one body which is not very urgent, maybe like National Planning Authority –(Laughter)-, UBoS – Madam Speaker, I am begging for your protection. Why can’t we give the Ministry of Health all the Shs 48 billion you suggested right now, then within one month, you can give money to the National Planning Authority –(Interjections)- to Uganda Bureau of Statistics or to the Electoral Commission so that we save the lives of the mothers? (Applause) I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to appeal to you. First of all, I want to say that we have made progress as a country. This is the first time the government is responding to the report of the Committee on Social Services, which has been made over several years. Finally, they have said, “Yes, recruitment is necessary.” I think we should accept that we have made progress.

Now, about the supplementary, each time a supplementary comes here, you ask, “Didn’t you anticipate this?” I think this is one occasion where we shall be able to say, “Yes, we discussed it and we were expecting it.” 

Please, let us close this matter. What we need to do is to agree whether we are amending the motion to increase by Shs 10 billion as proposed by the government so that we have Shs 49 billion. That is what it should be. [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”]

6.18
DR SAMUEL LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. (Interjections) I just want to take this opportunity to thank all honourable Members of Parliament, both from the ruling party and also from the Opposition. This is one of the times we have come together to fight for the people of Uganda.

When the Committee on Health came to the conclusion that one of the key binding constraints in health was human resource, we had in mind that there would be a lot of other measures that would be undertaken. But according to the issues of the budget, one binding aspect was to make sure that 6,172 health workers are recruited. I just want to thank Parliament and the Executive for having come to a consensus to recruit this number of workers. I think that leaving politics and other things out of this, both Parliament and the Executive have concluded this matter in a very positive direction for the people of Uganda. (Applause)

I know that there are many other administrative constraints we are going to face. For instance, as we go to recruit, we shall have situations in the district service commissions and Health Service Commission; but the intention of the committee was to work closely with the Ministry of Health so that we can be able to pursue this matter and maybe report to Parliament as regularly as possible. 

Honourable colleagues, I know that when we asked for the Shs 260 billion, we had in mind three aspects. The first one was recruitment, which we have achieved. The second one was enhancement; and we have managed to enhance the doctors in health centres IV. The next issue we should be talking about is enhancement of the other health workers, and I think this is the commitment that Government was trying to come up with and see how best to achieve it. 

So, Madam Speaker, our most important point would be to make sure that recruitment is done and to also make sure that enhancement is done. The only contention we have now is when the other health workers come, they will need enhancement. But this is a matter which I think as Parliament, we should insist that at an appropriate time, the Executive comes up with a timeframe for enhancement. (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. At the risk of being taken aback over this transfiguration we are witnessing on the Floor of this House, the Member is rising to convince Parliament about the Shs 6.5 billion. And when you look through page 3 – on the Floor of this House, Government vehemently opposed touching the so-called statutory bodies. Even now, when you look at the Shs 6.5, they are talking about the autonomous bodies like Uganda Land Commission, Uganda Cotton Development Organisation, Uganda National Bureau of Standards, National Environment Management Authority, Kampala Capital City Authority and so on. Where are we going to get the Shs 6.5 billion? Is it a supplement or has Government turned against its own position? Is the honourable member in order to point this out as a source of funding when the same government shot this down the last time we were here? Aren’t we being taken for a ride? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know that our committee has been meeting and negotiating; don’t you think the Government has had a change of mind? Prime Minister, can you please tell us where the Shs 6.5 is coming from? Let him tell us where it is coming from then we will go to the motion.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, may I formally lay on Table a copy of the statement I made. I want to respond to the point he made and that of hon. Odong Otto. I invite Members to look at the report which they have in their possession now. The question is, When will the Shs 2.5 million be paid for those who are going to receive the consolidated allowance? I answered this, actually. They will be paid as soon as we pass the budget, and we pass, therefore, this decision which Government has made, and when we have money in the budget to pay them. We will start immediately –(Interjections)– when you pass the budget. I do not know which month you are going to pass the budget – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Just for clarity –(Interjections)– if we passed it today – because we are passing money for one financial year. What the doctors would like to hear is that this is effective 1 July 2012 and the arrears are going to be paid. So, we want to hear that from you; because we pass a budget for 12 months. We do not want a situation where doctors are going to labour demanding for arrears from July to September. We want to hear from you; such that we don’t have doubts about it. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, please respond, and also tell us the source of the Shs 6.5 so that we can move.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, we have taken a decision that we will begin this new policy in terms of levels of staffing at health centres IV and III at the sub-county, with effect – I am assuming that this House is going to appropriate this month, which is September. Then, considering that payment will be from new money in the budget, we shall begin to pay this money with effect from October. 

Number two, you asked where the Shs 6.5 billion will come from. I would like to invite colleagues to the tables – Table 1 –(Interjections)– Table  spells out the recruitment of –(Mr Wadri rose_)– I am going to give you way; I am just making reference to it. Table 1 is on recruitment of the people to fill the positions where there are vacancies in order for us to achieve a functional level. 

Annex 2 - maybe it should be Table 2 - is the proposed cut to generate the Shs 6.5 billion –(Interjections)- it is there; please study that. The votes are specified; the amounts are specified; and that is where it is coming from. And then, Annex 2 –(Interjections)- maybe the other one –can I make a correction, because they are both labelled “Annex 2”. So, let us call the first one Annex 1, which is the schedule showing proposed areas of cuts to generate Shs 6.5 billion; and the next one becomes Annex 2, which is the areas to generate –

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you read out the ministries or bodies that are going to generate the money?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So, this one is a continuation, and the total is Shs 6.5; and that shows out there. You can look at all the votes. I want to go to page 3. 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you just read out the sources and we finish this matter because the Members want to know the sources. Read out the sources because they are here.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, Annex 2 –

THE SPEAKER: Point of order. Hon. Ssekikubo.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I am a Member of this House and discharging my duties under Article 79 of the Constitution, but as I was rising to raise a genuine point about the ring-fenced bodies and budget, and the need for the Prime Minister for the sake of the Hansard, to tell the country where we are going to get the Shs 6.5 billion. But there in between, my honourable friend and neighbour, Sam Kutesa, who has shown his way into this House right now –(Laughter)- proceeded to insinuate that the Prime Minister should disregard my submission, well aware that it is under the faulty items that he is known for taking advantage of. (Laughter) Is it in order to insinuate as such?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was only one microphone in use, and it was being used by the Prime Minister. I did not hear what was said on this side. (Laughter) Please conclude.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, I can read out the items – if I can make reference to Annex 2; and in the first column we have the vote, then the vote holder, and then we have columns for: staff training, workshops and seminars, hire of venue, recruitment expenses, welfare and entertainment, special meals and drinks, printing, stationery, photocopying and binding. These are the specified areas where we are proposing to cut.

The first on the list is Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service. The next one is Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, and I hope that you are seeing the details because I do not have to read the details. There is Vote 15 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Vote 16 - Ministry of Works and Transport; Vote 17 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resource Development; Vote 18, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; Vote 19 - Ministry of Water and Environment; Vote 20 - Ministry of Information and Communication Technology; Vote 022 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities; Vote 108 - National Planning Authority; Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board; Vote 119 - Uganda Registration Services Bureau where we are cutting only Shs 4 million which is under welfare; Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority; Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission; Vote 150 - National Environment Management Authority; Vote 152 - NAADS Secretariat; Vote 154 - National Bureau of Standards; Vote 155 - Uganda Cotton Development Organisation; Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission; Vote 157 - National Forest Authority; Vote 160 - Uganda Coffee Development Authority; and Vote – 

MR OKUPA: Just a bit of correction. On the figure of Uganda Cotton Development Organisation; the figure that is reflected there is Shs 999,990 but then from the total you are having 1,999,999,980 -(Interjections)- is that the total on the side? You try and clarify on that.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: We can correct that -(Interjections)- I thank you for the correction. [HON. MEMBER: “Further clarification.”]  

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I think we need to get our figures right since we are talking figures. My attention has been drawn to Vote 007  - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs on workshops and seminars; a provision of Shs 200 million has been given. I do not know whether the Prime Minister wants to tell us that Government has decided to remove Shs 200 million for workshops and seminars for that ministry.

My suspicion is that this work has been in haste and that we run the risk of passing wrong figures even if we agreed on the Shs 6.5 billion that Government has provided. I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, to allow Government some time to try and reconcile these figures even as we consider debating the gist of the matter. There are flaws in these figures and that is my suspicion.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite hon. Ajedra.

MR AJEDRA: The comments I want to make are as follows. When the Prime Minister was giving his presentation, I thought he made it very clear that the Government has been able to find Shs 6.5 billion as this side, so that we can pass the budget. Carl Rogers said that the reason why men do not comprehend issues is because of their failure to listen effectively. The Prime Minister was very clear that Shs 6.5 billion will be made available now to kick-start the process in anticipation that we shall have a supplementary of Shs 43 billion to come later on.

Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague, Cecilia Ogwal made –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite hon. Tumwebaze to move a motion.

6.41
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move under rule 172. 

“HAVING had an extensive debate over this matter for a number of days and weeks; 

HAVING received the report of the Budget Committee;

AND HAVING had the Speaker refer the issues therein to another consultative process between the Budget Committee and the Executive; 

HAVING ALSO been informed of a clear plan of intervention in the health sector, which requires an extra Shs 10 billion that Government has committed itself to;

AND HAVING also heard the cuts Government has alluded to that Shs 6.5 billion will be readily available after this appropriation; 

AND AWARE THAT it will kick-start a process that will cause a substantial change in the health sector;

I beg to move that the question be put that the Budget report be adopted with those amendments.” 

I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Budget Committee be adjusted as proposed by the Prime Minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report, as adjusted, be adopted by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, thank you so much for this opportunity and I congratulate those who said, “Aye”. I just want to seek your indulgence that you accordingly direct the Prime Minister, when summoned by any committee of Parliament - not only Government Assurances because most of these are pledges that will end up before our committee - that he should create time and appear in person. Because if we don’t follow up all these things to which we are saying “Aye” we shall all be seen as liars by the people we are serving. 

So, I request that you direct the Prime Minister that when he is invited by any committee of Parliament, especially the Government Assurances Committee, he appears to substantiate on these issues we have just passed now. I seek your directive on that matter.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to congratulate you, the government and Parliament, for the meeting point in a pro-people budget and pro-poor budget, and for the decision to enable Parliament to do appropriation tonight.

I would like to immediately request the Ministry of Health to get back to the Committee on Health and we discuss the details of administration, policy and implementing this very good intention. What we have done now is that we have dealt with the figures in the budget function. But let the Ministry of Health immediately come back with a comprehensive work plan so that the Committee on Health can pronounce itself - as those who indicated the business in the first place. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, of course we want you to know that we shall not allow you to bring any other supplementary other than that of health. So, don’t even try to bring any supplementary other than that of health. That is our agreement with you. (Applause)

6.45
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I rise to give an assurance to this House that the government will work as hard as possible to expedite the process of completing this exercise so that we can even beat the deadline of one month. 

I do hear what Parliament is saying, but I want to assure you that unless it is an emergency; if Bududa suffers another landslide tomorrow, I will not fear to come to this Parliament knowing that this Parliament is pro-life, to seek money to help those in need. Otherwise, without that, we shall come and keep this House informed of the progress that we are making. 

Secondly, I want to respond to hon. Odonga Otto about directing the Executive and summoning the Executive. I have had occasion here to say that when you look at the relationship between the Executive and Parliament, it is true that under Article 90 - I think - which talks about committees, it says, “In the exercise of their functions under this Article, committees of Parliament —
(a) May call any minister or any person holding public office and private individuals to submit memoranda or appear before them to give evidence.”

So, when hon. Odonga Otto says he summoned the Prime Minister, I am afraid that he is acting outside his powers. [MR ODONGA OTTO: “That is a very bad statement.”] So, as far as I am concerned, Madam Speaker, this Executive is as willing, as it has demonstrated, to cooperate with Parliament. 

So, if you want me to appear before your committee, please, don’t simply send a letter of invitation; give me a fixed date. I may not even be here. Why can’t we have a cooperative relationship where we interact with each other and we act according to mutual convenience of both sides? Where is the problem?

So, I think the attitude should be - we are willing to be party to the functionality of your responsibility as a committee. As an Executive, we will not stand in your way; Absolutely not! But please, also, allow us to do our functions. Otherwise, we will not do anything else. 

My recommendation is, when you need me, please invite me. We will discuss and agree. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You know, hon. Mbabazi, is a senior counsel, and you have to listen to his words very carefully. He has just stated that you are free to invite them to the committee, but allow them do their roles. That sounds like an exception; that they may not appear before the committee if they are doing their roles. 

Madam Speaker, I am speaking with a heavy heart, and the members of the Government Assurances Committee are here. We sent a letter to the Prime Minister and the office acknowledged receipt. We made a phone call to the Office of the Prime Minister and we knew very well that he had three other deputies. We sat in the South Committee Room with 502 assurances waiting for the Prime Minister to respond. He did not appear. Instead, I called hon. Bahati to ask where the Prime Minister was. He said he was in another meeting, which I appreciate was in relation to this budget. Out of courtesy, one of your ministers, hon. Rebecca Otengo, replied that she would not be in position to come. 

So, the clarification and information I am giving is that if you don’t help us discharge our roles, then you should stop coming here to talk in this Parliament because you make so many pledges. For example, today alone you have made about seven of them. And we have technical personnel funded by donors who sit in this Parliament to extract assurances made by ministers daily. Just today, you have added seven to the other 502, which makes the number now 509. 

My prayer is that when we summon you, with all due respect, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have a deputy behind you there - unfortunately he may not be with us right now –(Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, please conclude.

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS: Colleagues, I was just trying to be helpful, and I want to give you one more assurance today – I want to make it eight - that this Government will cooperate with Parliament in the most truthful way to support it in the discharge of its duties and responsibilities. There is no doubt about that.

But I also want to assure this House and the country that in so doing, we must all be mindful of the fact that either side has some responsibility to perform. So, when you use the word “summon” that is a directive. For example, in court a summon is a document that orders you to appear in court at a given time and date. That is what a summon means. But in the Constitution, it is stated, as I read, thus, “You may call them.” And you know that this could also mean inviting them, which could also mean requesting them to come and discuss some business with you on an agreed day. From that point, we can agree and come over. I don’t have any problem with that. So, that is the only point I was making. 

Before I sit, let me say that please don’t use words like “direct” or “summon” or things like that. That is not the way the cooperative arrangement is.

However, I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable members, for overwhelmingly - especially the “Ayes” from the other side of the House - supporting the motion from Government in order for us to adopt this report so that we can provide funds for running this country. I am saying this because there was fear that we may be leading into a crisis. I am a very happy man today. (Laughter) On behalf of the Government side, I once more want to thank everybody for bringing this to an end. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was an issue as to whether one of us was hear or not. So, he would like to tell us whether he was actually here or not.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I am happy to be given this chance, Madam Speaker. I want to go on record that actually when I close my eyes, it does not mean I am sleeping. (Laughter) I have two measures and one is that maybe what is being said – I didn’t want to look at this man who was speaking –(Laughter)– and so, I chose to close my eyes. But it is not that I was sleeping. So, when our young brother, hon. Odonga Otto was talking, I just felt tired. So, because I didn’t even want to look at him, I just closed my eyes, but not that I was sleeping. So, let the country know that I was not sleeping.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for bringing this matter to a close. I will now ask the officials to do the necessary processes so that we can complete the work on Thursday.

I now invite you to the Parliament Conference Hall tomorrow, Wednesday at 9 o’clock to attend the launch of the Parliamentary Studies Institute. I also invite you to Nakivubo Stadium where we will be playing netball and football with the veterans tomorrow afternoon. The House is adjourned to Thursday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.56 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 27 September 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
