

Wednesday, 16 September 2020

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I just have one matter to communicate. Last week, I received a delegation, the Consortium of Private Universities Academic Staff in Uganda. It was registered under the Cooperative Societies Act, Cap 112. They came to me to report the impact of COVID-19 on private universities, which have been deprived of critical financial resources. Therefore, they are not able to meet their financial obligations including staff remuneration. 

Their request is for Government to have an intervention of an emergency financial relief for bailout for private universities’ staff. They also request that the Government recapitalises their SACCO to an estimated amount of Shs 25.4 billion to create a revolving fund for members and to begin a phased opening of universities with the observance of the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). 

I refer this matter to the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for action.

Secondly, I have also received a petition from the workers in the casinos who have not been working for over six months and are, therefore, not earning. They are also saying they need relief from the Government. I hope the Government will take an interest in the livelihood of those members of our society who have been disadvantaged in that manner. Thank you very much.

There are two matters of national concern from hon. Komakech and hon. Songa.

2.47
MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, concerning the situation of COVID-19 in Zombo. Zombo District is considered a high risk COVID-19 area. The district had been under lockdown for a very long time and up to now, the Ministry of Health has not distributed face masks to the district. 

My prayers are:

    1. The Ministry of Health should avail face masks to the district immediately.

    2. Since the Infectious Diseases Institute is willing to provide some medicines and non-food items, the Ministry of Health should work with them to see that they supply these items to Zombo District. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, the Member of Parliament for Pakwach raised the same issue about the absence of face masks in the high risk areas. We similarly call on the Ministry of Health to update us on the distribution of facemasks to the 40 districts, but specifically in Zombo, which has also been raised. The ministry should give us an update on Tuesday next week. 

Thank you. Let us go to item No.3.

STATEMENT BY MINISTERS

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION OF 3 MAY 2018 ON PAYMENT OF MONEY OWED TO UGANDA-SOUTH SUDAN TRADERS

THE SPEAKER: Again, I do not see the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, in Sub-Saharan Africa, Uganda has the biggest Cabinet. Among the East African countries, Uganda has the biggest number of ministers in the docket of finance. The status of Uganda now needs urgent attention due to the economic pressure that our people are facing. 

Many times, this matter and other matters concerning finance have come on the Floor but it is only during borrowing when ministers attend plenary in numbers; when it comes to loans, even ministers on sick beds come to the House. 

I know other ministers are still facing political pressures as a result of the recent NRM primary elections. However, I believe it is intentional and deliberate for ministers in the docket of finance to fail the work of Parliament. 

I do not know whether we are proceeding well when matters affecting the economic status of our people come and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is always absent. It is not only the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who is absent, as you can see. Out of a Cabinet of 80 ministers, we have only one Cabinet Minister available. 

If some people are not capable of handling their dockets, I request my party chairperson, His Excellency, President Museveni, to give people who are capable of being ministers to work for him because the absence of the ministers means we are failing as NRM. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter of the Uganda-South Sudan traders has been on the Order Paper for a very long time. For now, we shall not entertain work of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development until this matter has been resolved. This includes what is on the Order Paper. It will not be handled. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF TARMAC ROADS IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is absent.

LAYING OF PAPERS

PETROLEUM AUTHORITY OF UGANDA ANNUAL REPORT OF 1 JULY 2016 TO 30 JUNE 2017


2.53
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I am here to give information to the House that there was a special Cabinet meeting today. Personally, I did not go there because I am yet to sort my COVID-19 status. Most ministers and the Leader of Government Business could still be held up in Cabinet. So, I beg that that should be put into consideration. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I know hon. Tumwebaze to be my friend and one of those ministers who are very rare in Parliament ever since they became ministers. Before, however, when he was the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, he was regular here, as a backbencher.

In our Constitution and other legislations, it is the Speaker who is supposed to be given any information between you, the President and the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business.

Ever since the emergence of COVID-19, one of the people who have been rare here is the Prime Minister and yet, he is supposed to be updating Parliament on a number of issues including COVID-19. Therefore, is it in order for the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the hon. Frank Tumwebaze, to defend other ministers when he is here? Is he really in order when you have not been informed, as the Speaker of Parliament, supposed to get firsthand information even before he comes to inform the House about such?

Madam Speaker, this is the right time for Members to shine. Members have been in constituencies fighting and others almost killed each other. You directly put up information to every Member and the public that Parliament would resume on Tuesday. We who are responsible are here and yet, the minister is busy defending fellow ministers. Hasn’t he disobeyed the President who called them?

Therefore, is he in order to defend others on the Floor of Parliament whereas he is here? Even adjourning this House is your prerogative.  

Is he in order to mislead this House and yet, these people have been fighting and killing each other and failing to respond to your call and the purpose why they have been fighting to become -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have no information about any Cabinet meeting. I am only aware that Cabinet meetings take place on Mondays and today is a Wednesday. We shall proceed. Moreover, notice was issued last week about our intention to sit during this week. 

Therefore, I am not going to listen to any excuses and it is incumbent upon you, the Government people, to ensure that at least every ministry is represented here. Let us go to the next item.

PETROLEUM AUTHORITY OF UGANDA ANNUAL REPORT OF 1 JULY 2016 TO 30 JUNE 2017

THE SPEAKER: The responsible Member is absent. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL DAY OF DEMOCRACY

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Akamba? He is also absent. Next item, please.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT ON THE GOVERNMENT PROPOSAL TO CONSTRUCT A HYDRO POWER GENERATION PLANT OVER MURCHISON FALLS

THE SPEAKER: The Chairperson of the committee is not present as well. Let us go to the next item.


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LABOUR DISPUTES (ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Bill was given a first reading and the report was presented. However, there were issues that you were expected to respond to under the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and settlement) (Amendment) Bill, 2019, which your new minister was not able to handle.

Hon. Kanyike moved the Bill for a second reading but she was not able to respond to the concerns of the Members.

2.57
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I thank you for having accepted my apology when I was unable to be here because it was five days to the primary elections. I spoke with you and explained my difficulty and hon. Sarah Kanyike who was a maiden Member had to stand in then. I thank you and Parliament for the extent to which you were able to progress with the law.

As far as I know, we are in concurrence with all the committee recommendations. I, therefore, request and if it is acceptable, we move on - either debate ensues if it had not been concluded or we continue with committee stage.

THE SPEAKER: There were issues raised on the Floor by the Members during the debate, which we thought you could answer before we proceeded to the committee stage. I do not know whether you have them.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence, I do not have a record of the concerns.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the Bill goes on for the second reading.
Were there any Members who wanted to contribute to this? If there are none - where is our chairperson? Hon. Kunihira is here but before we do that, maybe we go back to item no. 5 because it was a short matter regarding the International Day of Democracy. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development could in the meantime pick up the issues that were raised in his absence.

Can I invite hon. Akamba to move the motion?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL DAY OF DEMOCRACY

3.00
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a Resolution of Parliament on the Commemoration of the International Day of Democracy under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament;

 “WHEREAS in 2007, the United Nations General Assembly adopted the 15 September as the International Day of Democracy and since then, the International Day of Democracy is celebrated around the world each year with the purpose of promoting and upholding the principles of democracy;

AND WHEREAS yesterday, the world observed the International Day of Democracy under the theme, “COVID-I9: A Spotlight on Democracy”;

AWARE THAT the International Day of Democracy provides on opportunity to review the state of democracy in the world and encourage Governments around the world to strengthen national programmes devoted to the consolidation and promotion of democracy in their respective countries;

APPRECIATING THAT democracy is a universally cherished value, based on the free will of the people and provides the natural environment for the protection and effective realisation of human rights;

APPRECIATING FURTHER THAT Uganda is governed based on democratic principles enshrined under the political objectives of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I995 which, among others, enjoins the State to encourage and empower the active participation of the people of Uganda in their governance;

NOTING THAT Uganda, being part of the United Nations and a member of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, is duty bound to recognise and celebrate the International Day of Democracy as a means of building democracy and democratic institutions like Parliament and strengthening the voices of citizens, to strive for the realisation of shared universal values of democracy;

AWARE THAT the 2020 International Day of Democracy comes of a time when the world is faced with on unprecedented COVID-I9 crisis, which has resulted in major challenges to democracy, hence, the theme for this year;

FURTHER AWARE THAT as the world confronts COVID-l9 pandemic, democracy is crucial in ensuring the free flow of information, participation in decision-making and accountability for the response to the pandemic in order to achieve a holistic approach to the pandemic;

Cognisant that the International Day of Democracy enables democratic countries to take stock of the challenges passed by the Covid-19 pandemic on democracy and find ways to counteract those challenges; 

Now therefore, be it resolved by this Parliament that;

1. 	Uganda joins the rest of the world in observing and commemorating the International Day of Democracy. 

2.	The Government of Uganda reaffirms its commitment to observing democratic principles enshrined in the Constitution and international legal instruments even in the face of the covid-19 Pandemic.” 

I beg to move.

The Speaker: Thank you. Are there seconders? (Members rose) Motion seconded. Please, give your justification. 

Mr akamba: Madam Speaker and honourable members, today, we join the rest of the world to commemorate the International Day of Democracy. Due to the covid-19 pandemic, the theme recognises the challenges of attaining democracy amidst this pandemic. 

Objective number two of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy recognises democratic principles, which among others empowers and encourages the active participation of all citizens at all levels in their own governance. 

The above has been recognised further under Article 1, which gives powers to all the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with the Constitution. 

However, most importantly, under Article 1(4) of the Constitution, the people shall express their will and consent on who is to govern them through regular free and fair elections of their representatives. 

In Uganda, not even the COVID-19 pandemic is stopping us from implementing the provisions of Article 1(4). The Government is determined and indeed, the process has started of the people of Uganda deciding on who should govern them in the coming political term.

This should not be underrated. Not very many countries have managed to organise elections in this pandemic but Uganda has, and indeed, it is organising general elections. We hope that in 2021, we shall have a successful general election amidst the COVID-19.

As we join the entire world to commemorate this day, we just enjoin our Government to ensure that as we implement the democratic principles enshrined in the Constitution, we should not overlook the human rights therein. You cannot talk about democracy without looking at the human rights of Ugandans.

Therefore, I enjoin the Government that as we commemorate, let us ensure that every Ugandan enjoys the rights as enshrined in the Constitution and that every Ugandan participates in the decision of who should govern them. I know that we shall continue observing these democratic principles. 

For that matter, I beg to submit that it is befitting of us to join the rest of the world in commemorating this very important International Day of Democracy. I beg to move.

The Speaker: Thank you. 

3.08
Mr Wilfred niwagaba (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, the topic brought by my honourable colleague is very important especially in these times. We know that every right has a corresponding responsibility. However, our rights, as Ugandans, particularly to participate fully in democratic activities has been grossly affected by this pandemic.

Unfortunately, we now have a situation where some rules have been put in place to restrict the obvious rights; particularly, the right and freedom to associate, the freedom of movement, among others.

When it comes to enforcement of those limitations, it seems to be one-sided. It tends to militate against those who hold different views and opinions from those of Government. 

It is befitting that this motion has come at this time. It is up to Government, if it is truly interested in enshrining the principles of democracy in the Constitution, that all citizens of Uganda, regardless of their political opinions and shades, be treated equally, notwithstanding the challenges of this pandemic.

I support the motion, Madam Speaker.

3.10
Ms jovah kamateeka (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank our colleague, hon. Akamba, for bringing the motion that indeed, Uganda should join the rest of the world in commemorating the International Day of Democracy. It is unfortunate that we are debating it a day after but creation of awareness and commitment are very important.

As hon. Niwagaba has mentioned, we are in the process of electing leaders for the next term. The exercise we have just had - it is party primaries and issues will be taken to party caucuses - but it is important for us to note that in order for Ugandans to be able to participate fully and meaningfully in democracy and elect their leaders democratically, Government should come out and carry out sufficient sensitisation of the masses.

All people of Uganda should know how to elect their leaders and also their responsibilities as citizens. For example, in the just concluded primaries, we had children who were lining up to vote for candidates and you would wonder. What does a child know about electing a future leader? Why would those leaders entrusted with the process let such children vote?

We have that responsibility to ensure that there is sensitisation and even our children know that they are children and are not supposed to vote until they are 18 so that they are adequately guided.

Secondly, people who are put in positions of responsibility to ensure smooth running of processes should be held accountable. You leave the nation hurting because the leaders that were supposed to be elected did not get elected because of a faulted process.

Of course, we are all affected by COVID-19 and we agreed that the campaigns should be digital but you would get amazed that people get onto TVs and radios only to tell lies and abuse others. We also need to have that sense of responsibility and probably also have regulations as to what should be aired on national radios and TVs, rather than mislead people or going there to abuse fellow Ugandans.

I think we need to build a culture of respect in order for us to have leaders able to move Uganda forward. I thank you. 

3.14
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would really like to thank my colleague, hon. Akamba, for such a wonderful motion. Democracy is very important for the development of any country. The motion comes at a time when Uganda is going through political participation. 

Madam Speaker, I consider this motion as an issue that will help political parties to build their internal democracy, whereby in our country, in particular, people think parties belong to a person than parties belonging to people. This will help us to build good governance so that people own the governance of a country. 

At the same time, COVID-19 has majorly mixed up the politics of our country - which has helped many ruling Governments in East Africa – I will the example of Kenya, where the ruling Government is using COVID-19 to block other people who would have been free to express their political views. We see this as a factor that will hamper the upcoming general elections in this country. 

I, therefore, call upon legislators here to support freedom of expression and freedom of our people so that they participate freely. That is what the Uganda Communications Commission had started; to make sure that people must register by force. I think it is a target to make sure that freedom of some people, majorly freedom of the media, is supressed, which I think comes in bad faith for our country.

Madam Speaker, as I summarise, I believe this motion comes and calls for equal participation of all political parties in this country. When all parties participate freely, it brings good governance to the country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

3.17
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank my colleague, hon. Akamba, for bringing this motion at this moment when we have just come from NRM party primary elections and other parties. 

However, I wish to note that although we have not gone far in democracy in Uganda, we need to celebrate the level of democracy where we have reached so far. Again, I wish to urge each and every Ugandan to look at democracy as a very important issue in governance and even other sectors of any nation. 

We need to note that we have been backsliding because when you consider the primary elections of the parties, especially NRM, it has not been simple. Therefore, we need to think about how we can improve our democracy. 

We also need to note that democracy is very important as far as economic progress is concerned. If nationals are comfortable with their leadership, they do much to make sure that they are productive but when they are not sure of what is coming next, it is not simple. 

It is important to note that even the foreign investors find a democratic country very good to settle in. Therefore, if democracy is not good enough, we are not likely to get enough foreign investors and our economy will suffer. It is not only here in Uganda but it is in most countries in Africa and we need to really change the way we live politically such that this concept of democracy –(Member timed out.) 

3.19
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank hon. Akamba for the motion. It is very important that this report has been brought on the Floor of Parliament. Democracy is the backbone of progress of any society. Particularly, there is a relationship between democracy and the type of development or service delivery. 

Democracy defines the power structures, relations and responsibilities of any given society therein. For example, good governance defines the social contract of the leaders and those that should be led. This motion should cause all of us leaders here to reflect where we are in democracy in our country and where we want to go. The salient issues of use of money in our politics and violence in our politics should not define our politics in Uganda. 

Breaking it down to the experience of members of Parliament, I urge all of us stakeholders and Government in particular to do civic education because many of the masses are not so abreast of the elections of the members of Parliament. 

Honourable colleagues, I am aware that you know how the roles of Members of Parliament have been distorted –(Member timed out.) 

3.21
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also join my colleagues to thank hon. Akamba for bringing this motion. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to join my colleagues, to first of all, appreciate the motion. When we talk about democracy, I agree that it is a universally cherished value, which is based on the free will of the people. 

The commemoration of democracy comes at a time when Ugandans have just gone through a party primary. It could have been a primary issue and an issue of one of the political actors but this is a party of Government. 

The lessons that we learn from these party primaries should help the country in improving our democratic principles. I appreciate that Uganda has come a long way in improving its political landscape. There are a lot of things that have changed; a lot of democratic principles have been adopted and we have moved a long way. However, we still have many contradictions that still prevail and may negate all the gains that we have achieved so far.

Some of the contradictions that we still have and we witnessed very glaringly during the NRM primaries, are issues to do with unlevelled grounds, election rigging and monetisation of our democratic process. 

Madam Speaker, if these democratic tendencies are not addressed, then all the gains that we have achieved in our political landscapes –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.24
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague, hon. Akamba, for this wonderful motion. As we all know, democracy did not start today; it has been there and different countries have fought for it. They have tried to defend and protect the rights and principles of democracy. 

However, when it comes to Uganda, our mother country – and I would like to inquire whether the basic principles of democracy that we are talking about have a resemblance to the image of democracy or it is something else that we are talking about. 

Secondly, it is true that when we talk about democracy, we are talking about protection of the rights of the people, participation, involvement and good governance. This motion is helping us to self-examine ourselves as Ugandans; whether we are following those basic principles of democracy like freedom of speech. For example, recently, we had elections - those for the NRM Central Executive Committee, the NRM and the ones for FDC and we saw the reality. When I was in Ngora, I saw what was going on even in FDC. 

This motion has come at a time whereby as a country, we must examine ourselves properly such that we address the challenges that we have gone through as a country, in promoting democracy in Uganda.

As I conclude, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, by saying that democratic organisation is the one that controls all the resources. I am sure the use of resources in this country –(Member timed out.) 

3.26
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to add my voice to thank hon. Akamba, for remembering to move this motion in this House. However, democracy and freedom, and democratic elections, are indeed what everyone desires in the whole world. 

Since the start of the multiparty dispensation, Uganda has never been in such elections because in Uganda, we just have elections under false surveillance and high technical elections that are falsified. 

Therefore, on this day of commemorating the International Democracy Day, I would like to call upon and encourage our independent Electoral Commission, to follow the real democracy and its values - not just to say it and read it on paper, especially in this era of COVID-19. Let the commission allow everybody to exercise democracy and freedom as we go for the general elections in 2021. I thank you.

3.28
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague, hon. Akamba, for tabling this motion about celebrating democracy today. I am in a state of confusion; contrary to what other Members have just alluded to, I think we should not be celebrating right now. If it were possible to postpone this celebration, I would be very happy.

The reason is that some of our people are still suffering because of the Coronavirus. In some districts, people are not allowed to move freely and are still under lockdown because of this Coronavirus. Some people even failed to reach polling stations to exercise their rights of choosing their leaders.

When we say that we are participating in the celebrations, we may not be in the right position to do that under the current circumstances. 

Madam Speaker, whereas some people are exercising their rights by conducting their businesses, places of worship are still closed and schools are not open. We cannot talk about democracy and base it only on elections. In the just concluded NRM primary elections, some people who participated did not see democracy at all. However, we cannot say –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: For clarity, honourable members, this is an international day, pronounced by the United Nations in 2007 and each country is required to commemorate it; and that is what we are doing today. 

3.30
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion, presented by hon. Akamba. As we commemorate this day, I have tried to think about the day when it was adopted in 2007 and in 2006, Uganda had just adopted the multiparty system. Therefore, you can say that the commemoration of the day and its recognition is as old as the multiparty system in Uganda. 

National Objective II of our Constitution talks about democratic principles that should empower and encourage active participation of all; not to stifle and emasculate the participation of others. While we commemorate the day, we must reflect the journey we have taken from 2006 when we adopted multiparty democracy or 2007 when the day was first recognised. 

Madam Speaker, the recent history of a few days ago, reflects the kind of state we are at, as a country. That has been a concern for everybody, including the Head of State. We have seen viciousness in this country that does not reflect or show advancement of democracy. We have seen people dying, others being killed during internal party elections. We have seen people being battered and bloodshed and I think this is not a good reflection on the journey that we are taking. 

As a country, I think we have a long way to go. There is a lot of sensitisation that –(Member timed out.)

3.33
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion, as a human rights activist and a democrat.

As we reflect on democracy, we need to ask ourselves the questions: can we have democracy where there is no justice, no equal opportunities and where there is no fairness? This is because if we are to talk about democracy, we must talk about fairness, equal opportunities and justice. 

Therefore, as a country that yearns for democracy, this Parliament is best placed to help Ugandans. Otherwise, we see a lot happening. Institutions supposed to help this country to continue to democratise are being fused with the State. Institutions like the Uganda Police are now partisan. You saw the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) working for some candidates. Therefore, as long as such still happens and we do not condemn it, we will be moving backwards. 

Therefore, while I support the motion, I would like to take this opportunity to condemn institutions and individuals that are working towards taking Uganda backwards. I would like to also implore Parliament to work together to promote democracy. Thank you very much. 

3.35
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion and congratulate our country, Uganda, for being part of the entire world in celebrating democracy.

As a developing country, we still have some ups and downs and that is the way to grow. There is no way we are going to avoid such. From 2007 to now, which is just 13 years, when the UN General Assembly adopted the International Day of Democracy - I have hope that if we, the players and other actors, can practice fairness, we shall have democracy enjoyed by many. Otherwise, if the players are still complaining against each other, there is no way we can say there is democracy?

Madam Speaker, while I support the motion, I must say that as a developing country, we need to overcome whatever is ahead of us by learning and leading by example. Otherwise, I totally support the motion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the House adopts the proposal in the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I direct that the resolution should be extracted together with the Hansard and sent to the Headquarters of the Inter Parliamentary Union in Geneva. Thank you very much. Let us go back to item 11.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LABOUR DISPUTES (ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT) AMENDMENT BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: I understand the minister now has the issues, which were raised on the Floor last time. Hon. Tumwebaze, please, take to the Floor.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, I have managed to capture two issues from the Hansard of that day. One issue, raised by hon. Jonathan Odur, concerned the appointment of judges to the Industrial Court, which he said would limit their professional development because they will be full time at the court and they will not be transferred to other divisions or to move around.

My response to him is that the issue of appointment of judges of the Industrial Court was settled by the Constitutional Court ruling in Constitutional Petition No.33, where the Constitutional Court held that the Industrial Court is a subordinate court with concurrent jurisdiction. 

Therefore, the appointment is specific to the Industrial Court. The judges of the Industrial Court cannot be transferred but can be promoted. So, on appointment, definitely, it means they can advance their professional career.

The other concern I noted was that the Administration of the Judiciary Act did not make reference to the judges of the Industrial Court. Therefore, I have accordingly proposed an amendment to specify the terms and conditions of the judges of the Industrial Court, who will enjoy benefits similar to those enjoyed by other judges, as provided for in the Administration of the Judiciary Act. He was concerned with the need to cross-reference and yes, we can do that. I guess the lawyers will be able to sort that out.

Dr Lyomoki was concerned about the backlog. However, the amendment, which proposes to increase the number of panelists to 20 members, from five, will solve the concern he raised.

Madam Speaker, those were the sticky issues that ensued in the limited debate I saw on the Hansard. Thank you and I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I now put the question that the Bill be read for a second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LABOUR DISPUTES (ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
        
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2, do stand – is there an amendment?

MS KUNIHIRA: In clause 2, we propose an amendment on section 7 of the principal Act by substituting it with the following: “2. Amendment of section 7 of principal Act: the principal Act is amended by inserting, immediately after section 7, the following: 

7A. Official seal: the Industrial Court shall have a seal, which shall be judicially noticed; and two, the Head Judge shall be the custodian of the seal of the Industrial Court and - Madam Chairperson, we would like to make a correction on the title; the title should be Head Judge not Chief Judge and he/she may: 

    a. Assign the custody of the seal or a duplicate of it to a Judge or Registrar of the Industrial Court; 
    b. Give directions, subject to this section as to the manner in which the seal shall be kept and used; and
    c. Nothing in this section shall affect the validity of any document lawfully sealed before coming into force of this Act."

Justification

1. 	To conform the clause to the provisions of section 42 of the Judicature Act, Cap. 13, which provides for the seals of the Supreme Court, Court of Appeal and High Court.

2. 	To expressly give the responsibility of the custody of the seal to the Head Judge, as it is for other courts.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal. I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 4; I think the Chairperson has an amendment.

MS KUNIHIRA: Clause 4; amendment of Section 10 of the principal Act.
Clause 4 is amended in the proposed section 10. 
(a) 	In sub-section (1): 
(i) 	By deleting paragraph (b)
(ii) 	Paragraph (c), by substituting for the word “three” with the word “four”

(b) 	By substituting for sub-section (2), the following:
	“(2) The Head Judge and the Judges of the Industrial Court shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission and with the approval of Parliament.”

(c) 	By inserting, immediately after sub-section (4), the following:
“(5) The members of the Industrial Court, other than the Judges, shall hold office for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re-appointment.

The justification is:

    i. Sub-section (1)(b) is to align the Industrial Court with the hierarchy in other courts;
    ii. Sub-section (2) is to align the provision with Article 142 (1) of the Constitution that provides for approval of the Judges appointed by Parliament.
    iii. Sub-section (5) is to utilise the expertise and knowledge of the members, considering the limited number of people with qualifications and experience in the labour sector.

I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals. I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MS KUNIHIRA: Madam Chairperson, we seek to insert paragraph A – that is clause 5; insertion of sections 10A, 10B and 10C in the principal Act. We seek to insert paragraph A, seeking to amend the proposed Section 10.

In the proposed Section 10A:

Clause 5 is amended:
    (i) In sub-section (2), by deleting the phrase “and shall be subject to the Judicial Service Commission.”
    (ii) By substituting for sub-section (3), the following:

“(3) Where
    (a) The office of a Judge of the Industrial Court is vacant;
    (b) A judge of the Industrial Court is, for any reason, unable to perform the functions of his or her office or
    (c) The Head Judge advises the Judicial Service Commission that the state of business in the Industrial Court so requires, the President may, acting on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, appoint a person qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Industrial Court to act as Judge, even though that person has attained the age prescribed for retirement in respect of that office.”
    (iii) By inserting, immediately after sub-section (3), the following:

“(4) A person appointed under sub-section (3) to act as a Judge of the Industrial Court shall continue to act for the period of the appointment or if no period is specified, until the appointment is revoked by the President, acting on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, whichever is earlier.

The justification is that the new sub-section (3) is to:

    i. Provide for the procedure of removal and appointment of a Judge in the interim, in case of a vacancy arising under any of the circumstances mentioned and 
    ii. To harmonise the operations of the Industrial Court with those of other courts of Judicature and to ensure continuity of administration of justice. 

Sub-section (4) provides the procedure of removal of a Judge appointed in the interim. 

Madam Chairperson, we seek to correct what was named paragraph A to be paragraph B in the proposed Section 10B (a) in the proposed section 10B.

    a. By substituting for subsection (3), the following
	“(3) Notwithstanding sub-section (1), where at any time, before a matter is determined, the Industrial Court is constituted and one of the members ceases to be a member or is not available to attend the proceedings –

    (a) If the member is not the Judge, the Presiding Judge, in consultation with the Head Judge, shall have power to co-opt another member of the Industrial Court to hear the matter until it is determined or
    (b) If the member is the Judge, the Head Judge shall assign another Judge of the Industrial Court to preside over the hearing of that particular matter until it is determined.”

    b. By deleting sub-section (4).
The justification is that:

    i. Sub-section (3) is to ensure speedy resolution of labour disputes and to maintain the tripartite nature of the court, which would be hampered if the matter proceeded without any of the required persons. 
    ii. Sub-section (4) is redundant since the provisions are encompassed under sub-clause (2).

We also seek to amend paragraph (b) in the amendments to read in the proposed section 10C.

    (i) Sub-section (2), by inserting the words “giving thirty working days” between the words “by” and “notice”.

The justification is that the period within which to give notice is important to give the minister ample time to replace the member through the procedure set out by the law. 

I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals. I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MS KUNIHIRA: Madam Chairperson; amendment of Section 18 of the principal Act.

Clause 7 is amended in the proposed section 12:

    (i) In sub-section (1), by deleting the phrase “who shall be appointed by the Judicial Service Commission”;
    (ii) By inserting immediately after sub-section (1), the following two new sub-sections:
	“(2) The Registrar shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission and shall be disciplined and removed from office, in accordance with Article 147 of the Constitution.
	“(3) The Deputy Registrar and Assistant Registrar shall be appointed, disciplined and removed from office by the Judicial Service Commission in accordance with Article 148 of the Constitution. 

iii. 	By deleting subsection (5).

Justification
    1. To conform the provision of Article 145 (2) of the Constitution which mentions the appointing authority for the Registrar as the President on advice of the Judicial Service Commission.
    2. To align the provisions with Article 145 (a) of the Constitution. 

I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals on Clause 7. So, I put the question that Clause 7 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think Clause 9 has some – 

MS KUNIHIRA: Clause 9: Amendment of Section 14 of the principal Act. Clause 9 is amended in the proposed Section 14 by:

    i. Deleting subsection (5);
    ii. Deleting subsection (6).

Justification: 

    1. Subsection (5) is not necessary since this power is enshrined in the power of the court to make binding decisions and orders.
    2. 
    3. Subsection (6) is against the principle of corporate governance for the court to descend in the arena of the operations of the corporate bodies. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in relation to Clause 9, those are the proposals. I put the question that Clause 9 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR TUMWEBAZE: 	Madam Chairperson, we have an amendment to move there. In consultation with the chairperson of the committee, we are in agreement. Also to respond to the concerns of the members, we are moving an amendment in Clause 11 which seeks to amend the principal Act. It is amended by substituting Section 41 with the following: 

“41. Remuneration, allowances and other expenses

    i. The remuneration, emoluments and benefits payable to the Head Judge, Deputy Head Judge and other Judges and Registrars of Industrial Courts shall be the same as those payable to the Judges and Registrars of the High Court as provided under the Administration of the Judiciary Act, 2020.

    ii. The calculation of benefits under subsection (1) shall take into account the period of service of such Judge or Registrar in the same way as under the Administration of the Judiciary Act.”

Justification

It is to put the Judges and the Registrars of Industrial Court at the same level with those of the High Court, thereby encouraging judicial officers of long experience and high rank to join and serve the Industrial Court without fear of lesser benefits. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in relation to Clause 11, you have heard the proposals. I put the question that Clause 11 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS KUNIHIRA: There are other clauses in the Bill that should remain.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think I just addressed the proposals. We are not deleting Clause 11. 

MR OTHIENO: As the chairperson of the committee prepares to make her submission, whereas I agree with the amendment proposed by the minister, I find the second part of it redundant. It is because already, in the first part of it, we are saying the remuneration, emoluments and benefits are payable in accordance with the other law. So, we do not need the other one because the benefits and how you calculate them are already catered for. Therefore, I think the second bit of that amendment is actually redundant and we can do away with it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think there was a clause including retirement benefits. I think they added the words, “including retirement benefits”. 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, you are perfectly right because the particular Act we passed is in respect of retirement benefits only, and yet the appointment of judges and registrars and their remuneration is covered under other provisions. So, the proposed amendment by the minister captures the spirit of covering these particular officers, and I beg my honourable colleague from Tororo to abandon his objection.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 11, as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS KUNIHIRA: Madam Chairperson, I think we got a mix-up. We had prepared a clear amendment, but we have harmonised with the ministry. I would request that you allow me to read the amendment that we had prepared on Clause 11 and we see how to move. Thank you.

Clause 11, as amended

    i. In the proposed subsection (1), insert the words, “including retirement benefits” immediately after the word, “benefit” and delete the words, “Deputy Head Judge”. 
    ii. In the proposed subsection (2), substitute for the word, “judges” the words, “staff of the Judiciary”.
    iii. Replace the proposed subsection (3) with the following:

“(3)The remuneration, emoluments and benefits including retirement benefits payable to the Registrars, Deputy Registrars and Assistant Registrar shall be the same as that payable to the Registrars of equivalent rank in the High Court”.

    iv. Insert a new subsection immediately after subsection (5) as follows:

“(6) The Head Judge, Judge, Registrar, Deputy Registrar and Assistant Registrar of Industrial Court shall be deemed to be staff of the Judiciary, and shall be entitled to the retirement benefits and other benefits applicable to such a staff of the Judiciary under the Administration of the Judiciary Act, 2020.”

Justification

To align the provisions of the Act to the recently enacted Administration of the Judiciary Act, 2020, which among others, provides for retirement benefits of judicial officers. 

I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do we do now with the minister’s amendment? 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, when you look at that provision, I need to be helped. You see, they talk of Head Judge and I am not a lawyer. Who is a Head Judge in terms of Industrial Court? Are we talking of the Chief Judge –(Interruption) 

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, hon. Abala, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that when we were passing the law on the emoluments of the Judges, we catered for the Principal Judge as the head of the court. His or her benefits are different from that of the other judges. 

Here, we also have a head of a court. So, the information that needs to be clarified is, does this put the Head Judge at the level of a Principal Judge? It needs to be very clear. We may be cheating this Head Judge when it comes to calculating his emoluments being also a head of a court as a Principal Judge.

Therefore, we need to be clear what this Head Judge is: Is he at the level of Principal Judge – so that we know that his/her benefits are known and not going again to the Constitutional Court for interpretation?

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, that is the clarification because we are in a real jam if we do not address this matter. I was talking of a Head Judge and a Principal Judge; in this case, what are we referring to? Are we talking about the Principal Judge or a Head Judge? Who is this Head Judge? And Under which law is it operating? That is where we need help. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Head Judge is the head of the Industrial Court. The Industrial Court is different from the High Court and the Court of Appeal. It is under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Therefore, the Head Judge is the head of that court.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, the amendment from the chairperson features the spirit of my previous amendment. Therefore, I concede to a large extent and I only beg to make a slight amendment with the concurrence of the chairperson where she says, insert a new sub-section immediately after subsection (5) as follow: “The Head Judge, Judge, Registrar, Deputy Registrar and Assistant Registrar of the Industrial Court shall be deemed to be staff of the Judiciary.” That should be deleted because they are not. Otherwise, the entire amendment moved by the chairperson preceding mine stands with that amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, do you want the words “it shall be deemed to be staff of the Judiciary” removed?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Removed, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So after Industrial Court, “shall be entitled”; is that okay?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Yes, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11-

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I need to be helped because some are saying, “They shall be as those…” – now the question is; are we using mathematics to say “because you are heading here, so you must also be equal to the other one.” I need help here because this bit is challenging. I need either the minister or the chairperson to clarify this matter because it is not very clear to me and other colleagues who are here.

MS KUNIHIRA: Madam Chairperson, you had put it clear that the Head Judge is an administrative head judge of the Industrial Court. He or she is a judge – not equal to the Principal Judge but they are also judges – but at the Industrial Court, they are administrative heads. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the words “shall be deemed to be staff of the Judiciary” and “shall be entitled” be deleted? I am just trying to remove the words which are offending. Therefore, if we could remove those words “shall be deemed to be staff of the Judiciary”, and just remove “shall be entitled to the retirement benefits and other benefits applicable”, we delete that and then we take the proposal.

I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

The title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.07
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto?

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.08
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze):  Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement0 (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and passed it with the relevant amendments. I beg to submit.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE FROM THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.09
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LABOUR DISPUTES (ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019 

4.10
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read the third time and do pass?

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE LABOUR DISPUTES (ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT) (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2020”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.11
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? (Members rose_) Justification for the second reading?

4.11
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I have the honour to undertake the second reading of the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019. 

The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019 was sponsored by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to address the following prevailing challenges registered under the current law:

The current law was enacted in 1985 and does not adequately address emerging challenges in the management of social security in Uganda. The current law limits the ability of the National Social Security Fund to extend coverage to all workers. It does not provide for the flexibility to introduce new benefits yet changing circumstances may require that benefits be introduced.

Madam Speaker, under the current law, workers’ contributions and NSSF income are taxed while the workers’ benefits are not taxed. This system is like taxing the seed and not the harvest. Taxing workers’ contributions discourages long-term saving by workers and also reduces the amount of revenue collected by Government from NSSF.

The current law does not specify stakeholder representation, especially the workers and employers as required by the International Labour Convention 102 on social security. The penalties for non-compliance in the current law are as low as Shs 10,000. 

The appointment of the managing director and deputy managing director by the minister without the role of the board undermines the ability of the board to supervise them.

Currently, only workers in a company that employs five or more employees are eligible to contribute to their retirement, which contradicts paragraph (VII) of the National Objectives of Directive Principles of State Policy under the Constitution, the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Convention, 102 on social security and the Social Protection Policy, 2015, which all call for social security coverage of all persons regardless of the number of their employees.

The Act does not make provision for a window for the limited expenditure prior to approval of the annual budget by the minister. 

Besides, despite the high cost of private fund managers, Section 33 of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority Act, 20ll requires that all funds of the retirement benefits scheme be invested through a private fee charging fund manager yet some of the investments like the buying and selling of Government securities can be done more cost effectively in-house by National Social Security Fund. 

In addition, whereas the filing of annual returns by employers is important for purposes of monitoring workers' contributions, failure to do so is not an offence under the Act. 

The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019 therefore, seeks to address the gaps highlighted through –

    i)   streamlining the appointment of the board and staff of the Fund including its governance;
    ii) extending the coverage of the Fund to all workers regardless of the size of their enterprise including voluntary contribution by workers and self-employed persons;
    iii) providing for mid-term access to voluntary benefits on such terms and conditions that may be set by the board;
    iv) increasing the fines for offences under the Act;
    v)    providing for tax measures for exempting workers’ contributions and scheme income from taxation;
    vi) empowering the minister to prescribe a threshold of expenditure by the Fund prior to approval of the annual budget by statutory instrument;
    vii) empowering the board to use in-house expertise and Fund managers in the investment of scheme funds including lending to Government;
    viii) empowering the board to introduce new benefits in consultation with the minister; and
    ix) providing for payment of an annual levy by the Fund to the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority.

I wish to restate that the Bill, in view of what is stated above, is necessary. Therefore, I pray that Parliament concurs with my observations and approve the Bill for enactment into law. I beg to move.

The Speaker: Shall we have our chairperson present the report?

4.15
The Chairperson, Committee on gender, labour and social develppment (Ms Agnes Kunihira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to bring to your notice that there are two minority reports attached to the major report.

One has been authored by the hon. Anthony Akol and hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the second was authored by the hon. Kenneth Lubogo. I beg that the House allows the two to read their reports. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Present your report and after that, the others can present theirs too.

Ms kunihira: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a joint committee report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 20l9.

The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019 (herein referred to as the Bill) was read for the first time on 13 August 2019 and referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for consideration in accordance with Rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.
 
Following the request from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Speaker later on instructed the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to join the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development in coming up with the final report on the Bill. The joint committee considered the Bill and now reports as follows:

The background

The current law - the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) Act, Cap 222 - was enacted in 1985. Over the course of 35 years since its enactment, Uganda’s economy and pension sector has evolved faster than had been envisioned in the principal Act thus requiring changes in how the Fund is managed to improve its relevance to the saving workers and the economy as a whole.

Policy and principles of the Bill

The policy behind the Bill is to expand social security coverage by making the contributions to the National Social Security Fund mandatory for all workers in the formal sector and also allowing workers in the formal and informal sectors to make voluntary contribution to the Fund. 

In addition, the Bill seeks to enhance the spectrum of benefits available to workers and to improve the management of the National Social Security Fund.

Methodology

The joint committee held consultative meetings –

The Speaker: You can leave those because members can read that.

Ms kunihira: Okay, members will read that for themselves. We did documentary review, study visits – I will have to read study visits because we had some best practices there.

The joint committee undertook a study visit, from 20th to 25 October 2019, in Ghana to benchmark on the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019.

The expected outcome of the benchmark were: a better understanding of the processes undertaken in conducting reforms to the retirement benefits sector; the stakeholders involved in the processes of reforms and the roles each of them plays; and the general impact of the reforms on the sector and economy.

Reforms in the pension sector in Ghana

In 2004, the process of reform of the pension sector in Ghana commenced with the appointment of a Presidential Commission on Pensions whose mandate was to study the pensions sector in Ghana, make comparisons with international best practices and come up with recommendations for reforms.

The commission studied the pensions sector and came up with the following recommendations:

    i) Set up a three-tier unified contributory pension structure comprising two mandatory schemes and a voluntary scheme, which would cover both the private and public sector workers, as well as those who maybe self-employed; and

    ii) Establish a regulator to oversee the administration and management of pension funds and service providers in the pension sector in Ghana. 

The recommendations of the Presidential Commission on Pensions were executed through legislative reforms under the National Pensions Act 2008, Act 766 that saw the introduction of the tiered pension system, the restructuring of Social Security and National Insurance Trust (SSNIT) to ensure it was the national mandatory scheme and the creation of a pensions regulator to ensure the realisation and implementation of a unified pensions regime.

Tax incentives introduced

To encourage savings, which would ensure affordability, the reforms introduced tax incentives both in the formal and informal sectors. In Ghana, the tax application to pension schemes is therefore, total exemption, that is, ‘EEE’ (Exempt, Exempt, Exempt) where contributions are exempted, the scheme income is exempted and the benefits are all exempted from taxes.

Application of the lessons from Ghana to Uganda

As earlier noted, the pillars for the reform of the Ghanaian pensions sector were predominantly to improve/extend coverage, ensure adequacy of benefits, and ensure sustainability of pensions. The joint committee, therefore, observed that these pillars resonate with the objectives of the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019.

From the lessons learnt from Ghana, the joint committee recommends the following to be incorporated in the Bill, where possible, or considered by Government, as the case may be:

a) 	Coverage

(i) 	The formal and informal sectors should be covered by the social security scheme.
(ii) 	NSSF should be permitted to support the national objectives that provide for or expand the other pillars of social security including health and employment.

(iii) Benefits of members, including health benefits, unemployment benefits, among others, should be enhanced through voluntary contributions over and above their mandatory contributions.
(iv) 	Tax incentives must be provided, for that will act as an incentive to encourage long term savings.

b) 	Products

(i) 	Benefits arising from contributions should be permitted to be utilised as collateral for mortgage finance for residential housing. Section 68 of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority Act, 2011 permits benefits to be utilised as collateral for mortgage finance.

c) 	Minister responsible for social security

(i) 	The responsible minister for social security and national insurance trust is the minister responsible for labour.

General Observations

1. 	Compliance of the NSSF Act, Cap 222, with the Provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995

The joint committee observed that the principles of the NSSF Act, Cap 222, cover only the mandatory contributions in the formal sector, excluding voluntary contributions both in the formal and informal sector. There was, therefore, need to amend the law to give the workers access to social security, no matter the number of employees in the organisation, both formal and informal.

2. 	Compliance with the United Nations (UN) 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development

The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a universal call to action to end poverty, protect the planet and improve the lives and prospects of everyone, everywhere.

The joint committee observed that if the country is to achieve the goals under the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, a reform of the pension sector is inevitable. 

The joint committee observed that the NSSF (Amendment) Bill, 2019 is compliant with the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, especially in the areas of poverty alleviation and social security. However, it should be strengthened to support the provision or expansion of the other social security pillars like health and employment.

3. 	Compliance with the Principles of Gender and Equity

I will leave that one out, Madam Speaker. Members can read it for themselves. 

Specific Observations and Recommendations of the Joint Committee
The joint committee observed as follows:

1. 	Clause 2: Supervision of NSSF

The joint committee observed that in 2004, His Excellency the President of Uganda had transferred the supervision of NSSF from the ministry responsible for social security to the ministry responsible for finance. Consequently, during the consideration of this Bill, His Excellency the President wrote to the Speaker of Parliament requesting that the oversight role of NSSF be streamlined and placed under the ministry responsible for finance. The two ministers responsible for labour and finance met the joint committee and re-affirmed the decision of the His Excellency the President.

Having received the President's directive after the Bill's first reading, the Rt Hon. Speaker advised that the ministers responsible for labour and finance be present during the consideration of the Bill at its second reading to ensure that the directive of the President is captured in the amendments.

Notwithstanding the above, the joint committee observed that the roles of the ministers responsible for social protection and finance are separated in the Bill and are in line with their sector-specific mandate. It was further noted that it is not novel for a legislation to share responsibility among several ministers; after all, the Minister of Public Service is also mandated, under Section 17 of the NSSF Act, to specify public employees for whom the Treasury may make payments to the fund. Reference was made to Ghana, where both the ministers responsible for social security and finance serve different roles in their social security sector.

The joint committee recommends that the status quo remains, whereby the fund is supervised by both the ministry responsible for finance and the ministry responsible for gender, labour and social development.

2. 	Clause 10: Mid-term Access to Voluntary Benefits

The joint committee noted that the purpose of mid-term access is to provide for additional benefits and relief to members of the fund before they reach the age prescribed by the law for accessing their full benefits.

The joint committee further observed that the Bill only covers voluntary contributions and should therefore be amended to apply to all contributing members of the fund, including mandatory contributors. This is because benefits are primarily intended to better the lives of all members of the fund.

The joint committee recommends that-

    a) Where the member has not exercised the above benefit, a member may access a mid-term benefit of up to 20 per cent of accumulated contributions including mandatory savings to be allowed upon application;
    b) A beneficiary must have saved for at least 10 years and attained the age of 45 years;
    c) A person with a disability who lacks gainful employment or fails to generate income, and unable to make contributions to the fund for a period of not less than one year, should access up to 75 per cent of their contributions upon application, subject to approval from the minister;

3. Clause 12: Lending to Government directly by the Fund

The joint committee observed that the Bill seeks to authorise the fund to lend directly to Government.

The joint committee observed that this contravenes section 68 of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority (URBRA) Act, 2011, which prohibits direct lending that is not through securities sold on the open market. This is intended to avoid abuse of members’ funds and to avoid conflict of interest. 

The Joint-Committee further noted that NSSF already lends to Government and other entities using instruments prescribed in the URBRA Act and Regulations. These include Treasury Bills and Bonds and Government securities.

The joint committee recommends that the authorisation of the fund to lend directly to Government be deleted from the Bill.

Additional Amendments

1. 	Section 21 of the Principal Act: Access to Withdraw Benefits

The committee observed that only foreign members who have saved for four years or more are entitled to a withdraw benefit as provided under section 2l(2) of the principal Act. For members who have saved for less than four years, they are entitled only to their contributions to the fund, while the rest of the money is paid into the reserve account.

The joint committee observed that subsection 2l(2) of the principal Act is unfair and disadvantageous to a member of the fund.

The committee recommends that the principal Act be amended to allow for any member who has saved with the fund to obtain their full withdraw benefits at the end of the work permit period.

2. Section 36 of the Principal Act: Management of the Reserve Account
The committee observed that section 36 of the principal Act establishes a reserve account to which particular funds shall be deposited, including fines and penalties, special contributions to the fund, and investment income of the fund as the minister may, in consultation with the board, determine.

The joint committee observed that special contributions that relate to the 10 per cent employer contribution for expatriates who do not remit 5 per cent of their monthly salary are retained by the fund as forming part of the income to the fund. 

The joint committee recommends that –

i) 	Special contributions should not be retained by NSSF in a reserve account unless they cannot be allocated to the account of a member who had contributed to the fund;

ii) 	Publication of unallocated benefits in newspapers should be made mandatory to inform the concerned member so that he or she can claim their benefits.

Conclusion

Uganda has had a successful record of poverty reduction over the years. Poverty has steadily declined from 56 per cent in 1992 to 21.4 per cent in 2017. However, the level of vulnerability is still high and access to social services remains a challenge in the country. 

In a post COVID-19 world, social security shall be a cardinal pillar in rebuilding the country’s economy and shall help improve on the livelihoods of Ugandan workers. The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 20l9 shall enable the country in this quest for human development.

Lastly, the joint committee received serious concerns regarding knowledge and awareness of the laws concerning social security, including the NSSF Act, Cap 222. The public in general, and workers in particular, are unaware of the rights, benefits and privileges of saving and thus, are not motivated to be part and parcel of the social security sector. The committee calls on Government to intensify awareness of NSSF and related laws. 

The minutes and details are hereby laid on the Table. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: You can lay the minutes on the Table and then we invite the authors of the minority reports. Let me invite hon. Lubogo to read his minority report. Is hon. Anthony Akol here? Has he assigned anyone to read his report?

4.34
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate my chair for recognising my position on the minority report. 

This minority is signed by me and it is in accordance with Rule 202 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I would like to submit a dissenting position from the main report, being a position that was assailed at the committee level, pertaining to the mid-term access to social security upon loss of employment. I raised this matter in the committee and it did not succeed.

The right to life or to live has been defined in several jurisdictions to include the right to access the basics of life such as food and shelter, which make it possible to live. As was defined in the Indian case of Olga and others versus Bombay Municipal Council, the right to life encompasses the means to livelihood, that is, that which makes it possible to live. Accordingly, it is my considered opinion that where a person who has contributed to the social security fund loses his or her job and remains unemployed for years, and is unable to afford the basics of life such as rent for shelter, food, and education for one’s children, such a person should have access to a fraction of his or her savings. 

Madam Speaker, our Constitution considers human life as sacred and life should not be taken away from somebody, whether directly or indirectly. I wish to opine that a denial of a person to access funds that belong to him or her when that member is in a situation where he or she cannot afford the basics of life such as food, rent, clothing, etcetera, such is a violation on one’s right to life. 

It cannot be, and I think it could not have been, the intention of Parliament that one would rather receive one’s social security saving when one has passed on and, therefore, leave it for the beneficiaries or the survivors, other than the labourer himself or herself receiving that payment. Even if that were the intention, I think this House should depart from it. 

I, therefore, implore the House to consider this position and adopt the amendment I have proposed hereunder - Madam Speaker, according to the main report, there is an amendment, which is listed as section 24A; it is my proposal that it should be renumbered by including a new 24A(4) to state as follows: “Where a member loses his or her employment and remains unemployed for a period of not less than three years, such a member shall, upon application, be entitled to 40 per cent of the balance on the member’s account.” 

The justification is: to uphold the right to life by allowing members who lose employment and remain unemployed for a long period, and are in dire conditions, to receive part of their social security and be able to sustain their lives by affording themselves the basics of life.

Madam Speaker, I wish to submit and implore my colleagues to support this position. This money belongs to someone, this person has lost a job, time has passed and this person is suffering. I do not see why we should attach 45 years to that. If somebody is 35 or 38 years old and he has a family but he cannot sustain his family, yet his money is in the National Social Security Fund, why would this person first of all be condemned to die and then the beneficiaries receive the money?

I, therefore, implore my colleagues to receive the minority report with favour and support it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The minority report has been noted. The amendment will be considered together with the other amendments at the committee stage. Where is hon. Akol? - Okay, hon. Ssewungu is standing in for hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Akol. 

4.40
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, they also proceeded under Rule 202. The areas of dissent from hon. Akol and hon. Nandala-Mafabi to the majority report of the committee regarding the recommendation to approve the NSSF Bill with amendments are on the following areas - this is where they dissented:
(a) 	Supervision of NSSF.
(b) 	Mid-term access to benefits.
(c) 	Taxing of the benefits at the time of withdraw.

1. 	Supervision of NSSF 

Clause 12-18 of the Bill proposes to replace the word “Minister” in the principal Act with the words, “minister responsible for finance”. 

It should be noted that the definition of “minister”, as provided for in the interpretation section 1(u) of the principal Act, has been maintained to mean “the minister responsible for social security”. In this case, that is the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. This implies that NSSF will be supervised by two ministers - the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

We, therefore, propose that this provision be deleted so that the minister in charge of social security be left to take charge of NSSF; and the ministry in charge of finance be represented on the NSSF Board to cater for the interests of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Putting the responsibility of implementing the NSSF Act under two ministries may cause conflict, confusion and may result into failure to implement the law.

2. 	Mid-term access to benefits

The Bill restricts mid-term access to only voluntary contributions. Hence, it should be expanded to apply to all contributing members of the fund. While we agree that all contributing members should access mid-term payments, the period a member should have contributed to the fund (10 years) and access of 20 per cent of the accumulated savings is too low. This is because most of the members will not have contributed sufficient funds to allow profitable investment.

Furthermore, many of the contributors have suffered when they lose employment and spend long periods of time without getting employed again. Under the current law, they cannot access their savings with NSSF. Also, in times of national disaster and pandemics like the current one we are facing (COVID-19), some NSSF members have not been able to access their savings despite the suffering they are experiencing. 

Madam Speaker, we therefore recommend the following:

a) 	Mid-term access of 30 per cent of accumulated contributions and interest be allowed, provided a beneficiary has worked for at least 15 years or attained the age of 45 years, whichever comes earlier;

b) 	A beneficiary gets 10 per cent of the accumulated contributions if she or he loses a job and remains unemployed for a period of more than five consecutive years; 

c) 	A beneficiary gets five per cent of the accumulated contribution if he or she is unable to support him or herself when there is a national disaster or outbreak of a pandemic lasting more than six months.

3. 	Taxing of benefits at the time of withdrawal 

Clause 19 of the Bill proposes substitution of section 38 of the principal Act by proposing to exempt a member’s contribution, employer’s contribution and the investment income of the fund; thereafter, tax the member’s benefits at the time of payment except in cases of death or invalidity. Taxation will be at the rate prevailing at the time of payment of benefit. 

This is premised on the fact that it will generate more income for the contributing member and Government, resulting from increased income generation arising from the delay in collecting tax. However, this has been made on an assumption that there is constant return on investment over the period, which may not be the case due to the shocks that happen to the economy. It also does not take into account that the tax rates may rise in the future years and put the contributors at a disadvantage. 

In addition, this provision violates Article 254(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda that provides as follows: 

“The pension payable to any person shall be exempt from tax and shall be subject to periodic review to take account of changes in value of money”. 

It also contravenes section 21(1) (o) and (n) of the Income Tax Act that states –

“The following amounts are exempt from tax… 
(n) 	a pension;  
(o) 	a lump sum payment made by a resident retirement fund to a member of the fund…”

We, therefore, recommend that clause 19 be deleted. Tax should be imposed on the investment income of the pension fund but not on the benefits paid out to a member.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I implore you to support the minority report. I beg to submit. 

It is signed by hon. Anthony Akol, Member of Parliament for Kilak North County, and hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I was just reading on their behalf. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have three positions, which I think we need to study. Equally, hon. Nzoghu had given notice of an intention to move a motion relating to the NSSF access. I told him that he would speak to that motion when we are debating this issue. I would like us, therefore, to defer debate on this until tomorrow. Members should go and study the three reports so that we can handle the Bill tomorrow. Is that okay?

Also, I do not see anyone whipping. Can I ask the whips to whip Members to come tomorrow? 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to request that we whip the minister who has given us time to whip his fellow ministers and the Prime Minister. We need the Prime Minister here. He has every privilege that allows him to move. He is not a constituency Member like us. We need him here to report to us. 

The Prime Minister is the Leader of Government Business. Maybe I can say something brief, Madam Speaker. Recently, I met hon. Kintu Musoke, the former Prime Minister of Uganda, and I asked him about the difference between the current Prime Minister and him. His response was that by that time, he was the Prime Minister of Uganda yet now we have the Prime Minister as the Leader of Government Business. That was his position at the time. 

Now, the current Prime Minister is the Leader of Government Business and they are three under that docket. Hon. Kivejinja is also not a Member of Parliament; so, he should appear here. He should really be here to give us information and whip his ministers. Otherwise, we shall do our work as you have directed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. This is a matter of great concern since we returned from the NRM primary elections.

Madam Speaker, as you can see, we also experienced this yesterday. Here we are, debating matters of great importance, and particularly when it comes to Bills, we prefer dialogue between Parliament and the originators of the Bill. It appears the minister in charge of gender, labour and social development is here because he is keenly following this particular Bill. In other words, if this particular Bill was not on the Order Paper today, possibly he would not even have been here.

Madam Speaker, I think it is important that this matter is raised with the head of state. Parliament is going to be incapacitated because we cannot function without the implementers of the policies, which we pass here. 

It is a very serious observation, Madam Speaker. The absence of the Prime Minister’s team and the ministers responsible for the various sectors – and there is not only one minister in a ministry; there are several ministers in a ministry. For all of them to choose not to be here when a big statement is being made, and it is important that that statement be made public, we debate it and arrive at a way forward - Right now, Madam Speaker, you may be blamed and the House may be blamed for having not passed certain Bills or resolutions when actually, we need both sides of the House. 

Madam Speaker, I am sorry if what I am raising is misplaced but I think it is a very serious observation and it should be brought to the attention of the President as the head of state. We should know which way he is taking this country. 

It is not the fault of Parliament that party primary elections were held and some people lost while others won. As Members of Parliament, as long as you still have a mandate to represent your people - whether you have lost or won in the primaries – you must be in the House. We are trying our best, as you can see. However, the Front Bench has decided to boycott Parliament sittings. Why, when Parliament was not responsible for their loss in the primary elections?

Madam Speaker, I feel that we cannot continue like this. Tomorrow, we will have the same thing; next week, we will have the same thing. Therefore, can some action be taken and Parliament be assured tomorrow by the head of state that he has also observed what is happening and he has done something about it or he is going to do something about it? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Indeed, the matter you raise is very important. In this country, you find Cabinet ministers sitting in Cabinet and reporting that Parliament has failed to do certain things. Because we are not there, there is no one to speak for us - Yes, someone accused me, so I asked the chairperson of the meeting to list down the Bills, which have not been passed. I asked the chairperson to list down the loan requests and budgets that have not been passed. They could not raise anything. If I had not been there in that meeting, the impression would have been that work had not been done in this House. 

It is, therefore, really important that we place on record that we are not able to proceed because the ministers are not here. Before we went for the primaries, all these Bills were here but the ministers were not here. So, how can they accuse me? 

Anyhow, I have given notice that we are supposed to stay here until the Independence recess. Honourable minister, we shall only adjourn for the Independence recess because it is close to the nominations. Until then, you must be here to work. Ministers and all Members must come back here and finish their work. We are still on duty until May next year. Whatever the outcome - whether you have won or lost - you will be on duty until May next year.

Shall we go to item No. 13? There was another Bill for second reading.

BILLS 
SECOND READING
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Where is the mover? The minister is not here.

4.55
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this golden opportunity that I have been longing for. I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the second time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Are there seconders? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded. Give your justification.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, the Bill entitled “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019” seeks to amend the Constitution in the following particular areas:

1. 	It seeks to amend the provisions of the Constitution relating to the constitution of the Electoral Commission; in particular, the appointment of members thereto, the disqualification of members, terms of service of the members, and other matters related thereto.

2. 	The Bill intends to amend the provisions related to the constitution of Parliament, particularly by doing away with the representation of the military, restricting the number of people appointed as ministers to be not more than 21, and also removing those appointed as ministers from being Members of Parliament by way of representing constituencies.

3. 	The Bill seeks to provide for the office of the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General as ex officio Members of Parliament and, therefore, professionalise that office.

4. 	It seeks to provide for the Speaker’s panel and to provide for the involvement of the Parliamentary Commission in the appointment of the Clerk to Parliament.

5. 	The Bill further seeks to allow political parties or organisations or voters to challenge a presidential election.

6. 	Further, it seeks to restrict the presidential term to two terms only.

7. 	The Bill proposes to replace the office of the Vice-President with the office of the Deputy President and also provide for his or her election as a running mate of the President.

8. 	The Bill seeks to repeal the office of the Prime Minister.

9. 	Further, it seeks to provide for the appointment of the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General by the President on the recommendation of the Judicial Service Commission.

10. 	The Bill seeks to increase the tenure of office of members of the Public Service Commission from four to five years, and to mandate the Public Service Commission to determine the salaries and allowances of public officers under Chapter 10 of the Constitution.

11. 	It further seeks to mandate the Public Service Commission, the Education Service Commission and the Health Service Commission to appoint persons to hold or act in the respective office of the rank of head or above, other than the current norm where the appointment is by the President. 

12. 	The Bill further seeks to repeal the office of the Resident District Commissioner. 

13. 	It further seeks to establish and provide for the functions of city land boards.

14. 	It also seeks to provide for other related matters.

I, therefore, implore Members to consider this Bill in the interest of the democratic principles of our country and for the future of this country, and pass it as proposed.

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, do we have the report of the committee? The chairperson is not here. We have received the second reading. The debate will abide the presentation of the report of the committee.

Honourable members, taking into account all the circumstances; we have come to the end of today’s business. I adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. The whips of all the parties must ensure that the members are here. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development must ensure that the Government is here tomorrow. You are not on leave; you are not on holiday. They must all come. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.01 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 17 September 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 
