
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 16 September, 2021

Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I can see the surprise on your faces. This might not be the first time for you see this happening. There might be much more; so, brace yourselves.

In some of these sittings, when matters are serious, we might take extremely long that one presiding officer may not be able to handle. Therefore, this will be a very usual occurrence in the course of the next years of Parliament.

I am here to, specifically, deal with two issues:

One, to give guidance on this matter that has been disturbing us; the issue of saved business of Parliament, from one Parliament to another Parliament.
Two, the issue of the processes of handling them.

With it, there is another question; what happens where a Parliament finishes business such as a Bill, submits to the President for signature and the term of both that Parliament and the President lapses before that Bill is signed or assented to?

I am here to give guidance on these two and, of course, there is need to propose some changes in the law, which I will also suggest. I will find time to discuss the details with the legal people in the Government - the Attorney-General - and consult His Excellency on how to proceed with these matters.

Therefore, this is my guidance on Rule 235 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. If you recall, on 4 June 2021, during my communication at the State-of-the-Nation Address, I made reference to business that remained incomplete by the 10th Parliament.

I noted that, whereas that was the second sitting of the House, the first one having been the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, ordinarily, a motion should have been moved in the sitting to reinstate business that lapsed with the 10th Parliament, in line with Rule 203 and Rule 235(2) of the Rules of Procedure.  I, then, guided that, given the nature of that day’s sitting the motion would be moved at an appropriate future sitting.

On 26 August 2021, again, in my communication, I made reference to business that remained incomplete by the 10th Parliament and questioned the manner in which such business would come to the 11th Parliament, and the difficulty to track the timelines as required in our rules of procedure to execute these assignments.

My guidance, then, was that the business must be reintroduced to Parliament and the date to which it is reintroduced, begins to run then, because we have 45 days to deal with Bills - the last time I checked the rules. Despite my guidance then, I have continued to receive several requests from individual Members of Parliament to have business of the previous Parliament reinstated.
 
Whereas I am aware of Rule 235 of the Rules of Procedure, which I shall quote verbatim as follows: 

“235. Lapse or reinstatement of parliamentary business upon dissolution of the House

(1) A Bill, Petition, Motion or other business before the House or a committee during a term of Parliament lapses upon the dissolution of Parliament.” 

This is the rule on business being handled by a particular Parliament; 10th Parliament, Ninth Parliament, 11th Parliament. The rule is that the business they are handling lapses with that Parliament. Therefore, whatever has not been handled cannot continue. That is the rule.

However, we created an exception:

“(2) Notwithstanding subrule (1), a Bill, Petition, Motion or other business before the House or any of its committees may be reinstated in the next Parliament by a resolution of Parliament;

(3) The reinstatement of a Bill, Petition, Motion or other business before Parliament or a committee shall be treated as a fresh reference to that committee;

(4) The resolution of Parliament referred to in subrule (2) shall be passed in the second sitting of the first session of Parliament;

(5) Business reinstated shall be handled and completed in the first session of Parliament.”

Now, my guidance on this is that business of the 10th Parliament, that remained incomplete, lapsed when the term of the 10th Parliament came to an end. Any Member, or indeed the Government, who is desirous of having the business of the 10th Parliament that was not completed by the end of the Parliament, should have the business reintroduced in the House and the business shall begin afresh.

For example, in the case of:

(a) 	A Government Bill, the Bill should be republished, reprinted and reintroduced in Parliament, in accordance with Rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure.

(b) 	A Private Member’s Bill, the Member should proceed under Rule 122 of the Rules of Procedure - and you know what that rule says.

(c) 	Bills that were passed by the 10th Parliament and are pending presidential assent, if that Bill is returned by the President in accordance with Article 91 of the Constitution but outside the term of the Parliament that passed that Bill, that Bill is also considered business that lapsed in the 10th Parliament. It should be considered as indicated in (a) or (b) above.

In other words, if we processed a Bill in the 10th Parliament, it is completed towards the end of that Parliament, it is submitted to the President for assent within the term of that Parliament and within the term of the President but was not assented to by the time the Parliament expired - the Parliament lapsed - even that business lapses. It is almost exactly the same.

Therefore, the 11th Parliament cannot begin the process of resuscitating something that has completely gone. That applies to some very important Bills that have suffered this.

However, this is for clarity’s purpose because we have had this situation, not once, not twice but a few times. Because of the bigger public purpose that some of these Bills serve, we try our best to navigate through, give interpretations that can facilitate the processes and we always act on the Bill.

Now I am faced with very strong opposition in terms of matters coming before this House and Members’ objection to any other procedure outside the Rules of Procedure, Acts of Parliament Act and the Constitution. Therefore, we need to do things right, like I have always said. 

In the meantime, the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline should look at this matter again and plug those loopholes that we are confronted with. Rules 234 and 235 are problematic. It is my guidance that the committee ceases with the matter and at an appropriate time, reports to the House with some proposals. 

In addition, I invite the Attorney-General to closely scrutinise Article 91 of the Constitution together with the Acts of Parliament Act in order to propose harmonisation to the process in regard to assent and the exercise of the President’s veto on Bills, as passed by Parliament. 

With this guidance, I expect that Members shall continue to embrace the business of the House with enthusiasm and execute their roles with the efficiency and effectiveness that is expected of us, as Members of Parliament. I, therefore, urge the Executive to introduce business, as laid out in the Government legislative agenda.

There is need to review the provisions of the Acts of Parliament Act and Article 91 and the reason is simple. While it is certain for us to know what date the Bill actually left Parliament with the assent copy signed by the Clerk, we can never determine when the President received it and yet the time starts running when we transmit; the 30 days. This is what has created all this confusion. 

We will make a reform to take care of this situation, given what happens in other jurisdictions so that we have a process that gives us a clear timeline with evidence. For example, there should be submission by the Rt hon. Speaker and the Clerk together where it is given to the President in the presence of probably the press that this particular Bill has today been given to the President. Then, the 30 days start running so that we all know the date the President received a particular Bill passed by Parliament. 

Honourable members, now we only read from his letter and sometimes he is generous enough to say “on this date, you sent me a Bill but I have some objections and proposals to make”. We can no longer rely on uncertainties of this nature. 

This is my guidance. Let us have clear rules and timelines so that we do not end up in the situations we have been facing for a long time. Thank you very much, honourable members. [A member rose] Do you want to talk about this?    

2.25
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the guidance you have given. About two to three weeks ago, I expressed concern regarding the modus operandi of the different presiding officers in this House.

As you give guidance, the committee I serve; the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has been considering a Bill referred to it by this House. From your guidance, it is very apparent that, that process automatically collapses. 

THE SPEAKER: It is true.

MR BASALIRWA: You have alluded to the fact that the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline should cease this matter. My humble request is that perhaps you give further guidance on the timelines within which the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline will report to this House on that matter and other matters related thereto. 

THE SPEAKER: The maximum is 45 days from today. When the Clerk extracts the minutes and submits them to the chairperson of the committee, the maximum is 45 days but they can bring it back earlier. 

MR BASALIRWA: Related to that, obviously we would not be in this situation had the Government acted and been diligent in bringing a resolution at the right time. We lost that opportunity and we have found ourselves in a very big dilemma, which is making our work extremely difficult.  Nonetheless, I think all is not lost. 

Mr Speaker, in your response to my earlier concern on this matter, you did further guide that the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline should take an x-ray into these roles. There are certainly a number of issues that are neither here or there and we have just talked about Article 91. 

We are to debate in the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs what amounts to presenting a Bill to the President. However, is it a physical presentation or a mere delivery? Those are issues that we should be contending with. 

My humble request is that perhaps the rules committee should consider over and above the issues that you have guided on and look at other issues where the rules may not be as explicit so that we deal with this matter of the rules once and for all but also create certainty on the side of the presiding officers so that whichever presiding officer is in office on a particular day is certain on how to proceed. 

What is going to happen is that people will begin planning on who will be chairing the House. They will begin to say “I am going to raise the matter because there will be no objection.” I do not think that will contend well for the House. Therefore, on the issue of certainty, it is important that these rules be looked at extensively and the matter is resolved once and for all. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. What we are trying to achieve is certainty because it breeds predictability. When you are certain about something and you take action, you can predict the result of what you are to get. This is what we want to achieve eventually. Now that there are tyres on the tarmac and we have seen the challenges such as potholes and the things that make some of these things difficult, we will try to make it smooth so that we can move. 

2.29 
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me put it on record that I may disagree with you on many other things but I feel safer on matters of law when I am in your hands. I want the record to have that. 

There is a lot of legal engineering by lawyers and they always disqualify us who are not lawyers claiming they are matters of law. Mr Speaker, by your guidance, we are in trouble because there are many Bills that we completed towards the end of the last Parliament and one of them is the NSSF Bill. I do not know how many people have called me and are waiting to go and benefit from the midterm access. 

In the past, there were motions I disagreed with, especially resuscitating business that has died. Mr Speaker, I need to benefit from your guidance on matters that are very personal and occur every day, like the NSSF Bill. What do we do with them as Parliament? 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This guidance has no exception. It applies to all those matters that had been handled by the 10th Parliament. Most of these Bills, like I said in my earlier part of communication, are crucially important for the public. For example, the Succession (Amendment) Bill. If you look at the widows and the children that are suffering because the law leaves some gaps - where they are not able to achieve what they must achieve; the challenges are enormous. There are other Bills; the NSSF Bill, I do not know whether there is concurrence from all sides, as it should be.

However, as of now, honourable members, for us to begin on a clean slate, as the 11th Parliament, let the Government reprint the business that is urgent and bring it back to Parliament, we send them to committees and let us get busy with those urgent Bills that will not merely regulate the lives of our people but also facilitate the enjoyment of their rights and also the progress of the development in this country. Therefore, that guidance that I have given has no exception. 

2.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for giving clarity to this particular matter because it has been confusing not only the private Members but also on the side of Government; we are now clear. 

I must also confess that I was one of those Members in the Eighth Parliament who were in favour of saving the work of Parliament for a number of reasons: 

(i) 	We thought that we would save time for Parliament and we thought that Parliament should be treated as an ongoing concern and therefore, each Parliament that comes should look at the work that the previous Parliament has worked on.

However, there was also a restriction, especially on the part of the Private Members’ Bills - where I had been involved - that required that the Ministry of Finance should give you a Certificate of Financial Implications.

Therefore, some of us who had moved on the anti-Homosexuality Bill had secured the Certificate of Financial Implications. However, when the Eighth Parliament was coming to the end, we thought that if this work is not saved given the debate that was happening in the country and in the world, to get a Certificate of Financial Implications from Government was going to be a big hassle for us. Therefore, we said, let us save this work and therefore, in the Ninth Parliament we just continue.

I wanted to comfort Members, especially the private Members who are going to be moving Private Members’ Bills, that in the subsequent Parliament – the Ninth Parliament, we cured that and in Rule 118 we said, “Notwithstanding Rule 1, 2, and 3, a Certificate of Financial Implications shall be deemed to have been issued after 60 days from the date of request for the certificate.”

It means that now if you put in a request for a certificate and the Ministry of Finance does not give you a certificate, after 60 days, you come and move with your Bill. Therefore, we actually solved what was bothering the private Members to move Bills. This was one of the motivations for us, the private Members who were in the Eighth Parliament, to move and save the work.

I think given that this one is there, I just wanted to comfort private Members that this was resolved and we can now move fast. If we stick to the 45 days - that once a Bill is in the committee, it is worked on in 45 days, we can cover the work that we have not done; in the next three months we should be done. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I will not allow any further comments on this. That is my ruling and if there is disagreement with my ruling, you know what the rules say about that. Now that that has not been done –(Interjection)- no, you do not need to commit - there is no business. Just go reintroduce your Bill and proceed; there is no commitment required at this stage.

We do not have any business pending; we do not have any business saved. So, go and bring for us work. Private Members, go generate work. We want to get busy; we want to do work for this country and our people - let us do work.

(Whereupon the Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, exits the Chamber_)

(House resumed at 2.37 p.m., the Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting and I thank the Rt Hon. Speaker for the guidance that he has given to the House. Based on that, we should walk the talk. 

As I promised yesterday that we were going to continue with the discussion on Emyooga, reports will be presented - with each subregion taking at least 10 minutes, then we hear from the minister, debate and come out with resolutions today to help Government. Can I have the first sub-region?

PRESENTATION OF REPORTS ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EMYOOGA PROGRAMME IN VARIOUS SUB-REGIONS OF THE COUNTRY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my 11th year in this Parliament. There has never been an occasion - except if I missed it - where one sitting is chaired by two Speakers. (Laughter) And I was here even before, as a journalist; so, for me this is the first time. I am very happy it is happening.

One of things that has been bothering me - I visited the Parliament of Tanzania; in a day, you can have four Speakers; Parliament will rise, the only thing we have not done, we rise to see off one Speaker and sit and then we rise up to receive another Speaker.

I am happy, especially having been here in the last Parliament, that you can have two Speakers even chairing one sitting –(Applause). We had a case when they could not even chair one House; I am happy, Madam Speaker.

The only procedural issue I am raising is whether we shouldn’t - because on matters that are not provided for, either the Speakers will guide or we go by the Commonwealth practice. If it is not provided in our rules, borrow the Tanzanian experience; rise up to see off one Speaker, we sit, the arrival of another Speaker is announced and we rise up and receive because the way you came in, Madam speaker, was a bit unceremonious. (Laughter) That is the guidance I am seeking from you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, you actually came in late. You came in when we were already here and one of the Speakers who left was seen off. I came in and here I am. Thank you. (Hon. Opendi rose_)
 
Members, the moment we continue with points of procedure, we will not finish these reports. Members have been waiting for them. Maybe those with matters of national importance, when we finish, let us give a timeline for these reports and then we shall go to your matters of national importance. I know you have a matter and I know it is very urgent.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to appreciate what we have all witnessed today. 

Madam Speaker, the reason I am rising up is that yesterday, I raised an issue that touches us, as women; the NSSF board being constituted with one woman and you directed that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be here, to give us a response. I am rising because I have seen the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development present. So, would it not be procedurally right for the minister to first give us a response before we can proceed to the item?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sarah Opendi of Tororo, I said we will handle. I have amended the Order Paper. Obviously, anything that touches a woman touches me too. (Applause)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want you to debate this report without fear or favour because that is what will help our Ugandans. This is what will help the subsequent financial interventions that Government is going to do. We are not implicating anybody; we only want right things to be done at the right time. Next item, please.

PRESENTATION ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EMYOOGA PROGRAMME IN KIGEZI SUB-REGION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamara.

2.43
MR NICHOLAS KAMARA (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With me here is the Kigezi sub-region status report on the presidential initiative on wealth and job creation, Emyooga.

I would like to first beg that you allow me lay these two copies of reports on the Table. I beg to lay – (Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I am sorry I am not breathing well. I came running because I was told that today, we are blessed with both Speakers in the House and so, I thought that the President would be coming. It is a unique opportunity because for the last five years I was here, I have never noted it. 

Madam Speaker, I, therefore, need your guidance on that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What procedural matter is that? (Laughter) How do they call the border trade? Is it cross border? No, I do not want to mention that word today. Hon. Kamara, please proceed.

MR NICHOLAS KAMARA: Madam Speaker, in accordance with the powers given to the committees under Article 90 of the Constitution and Rule 208 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, legislators were tasked to appraise the impact of Emyooga funds, in their constituencies with the following terms of reference. I will not go through the terms of reference because all of us were given the same terms of reference. 

However, I am presenting on behalf of Kigezi sub-region. If you allow me, I want to quickly read through the names of the people I am representing. It will just take a minute and they are: 
    1. Hon. Nicholas Kamara, Kabale Municipality - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you make your presentation in only 10 minutes? Just give us the summary. We know the people in Kigezi –(Laughter)

MR NICHOLAS KAMARA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Emyooga is a presidential initiative on wealth and job creation. It is a Government initiative centered on various categories of skills-based enterprises, covering majority of Ugandans. 

The overall goal of Emyooga was to contribute to the socio-economic transformation of 68 per cent of Uganda’s households from the subsistence sector to the money economy and market-oriented production. 

The objectives were meant to be met through enabling organised associations of people clustered around a specific skill known as Omwooga access financial support, to establish or boost income generation activities.

In the past, the Government has made several attempts to impact livelihoods of the common person through Entandikwa credit scheme, Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, Boona Bagagawale, NAADS, Operation Wealth Creation (OWC), the Youth Livelihood Fund (YLF) and Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) among others. 

These previous initiatives suffered conceptual, structural, operational and perceptional challenges and did not positively impact on Ugandans as intended. Emyooga initiative is faced with similar hindrances. 

It was, therefore, pertinent that we were sent out on an oversight assessment and fact-finding mission, which was conducted between 5 August – 17 August 2021. 

In performance of the assignment, the honourable members held meetings, oral interviews, random phone engagements, desk review of key documents and stakeholder discussions. Key stakeholders included the Office of the President, Microfinance Support Centre Limited staff, district local government officers, local council leaders, SACCO leaders, and members of various beneficiary associations, among others.

On page 4 there is a table, which summarises some key facts about Emyooga:

    1. It summarises a number of SACCOs that accessed funds in all constituencies in Kigezi sub-region. 

    2. There is a summary of all the SACCOs that accessed funds in all the constituencies.

    3. It also summarises the SACCOs out of those, which access funds, how many have been able to disburse the funds. It also summarises the seed capital, savings and loans disbursed so far.

If I may just give a summary of the whole Kigezi region, Shs 8,420,000,000 has been disbursed in the whole Kigezi region. So far, the banyakigezi have been able to save Shs 1,757,323,225. The loan disbursed so far is Shs 7,701,365,700.

The geographical scope covered the whole of Kigezi region and it covered all the Emyooga as all of us know the 18 Emyoogas, I am not going to repeat and we already know Kigezi sub-region has six districts: Kabale, Kisoro, Rukungiri, Kanungu, Rubanda and Rukiga.

Key findings

Achievements of Emyooga so far:

    (i) It was established that the Microfinance Support Centre released funds amounting to Shs 8,420,000,000 to all respective accounts as stipulated. All the 270 registered SACCOs in Kigezi, received funds.

    (ii) Improved financial literacy skills. Through various trainings conducted by the combined team of the district taskforce and Microfinance Support Centre, some of the SACCO members gained knowledge and skills in the areas of savings and share capital mobilisation, investment loan management and record keeping and governance. For example, in Rukungiri, 324 SACCO leaders from 54 SACCOs, were trained according to the Cooperatives Act and regulations.

There was strengthening of the saving culture in some districts. In Kisoro, the saving rate exceeded the mandatory saving cap of 30 per cent. The saving percentage rate was established at 34.4 per cent with Bufumbira South saving at 40.3 per cent.

Loan recoveries

This being a revolving fund, loan recoveries are vital for the survival of the programme. It was noted that some of the SACCOS were performing well in this regard. For example, in Rukungiri Municipality, it was established that the boda boda SACCO was doing well on loan recoveries. 

In Kabale Municipality, the Women Entrepreneurs SACCO had recovered Shs 5,096,500 by mid-August and saved Shs 21,797,619.

Improved financial inclusion

This was made possible through increased number of Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies (SACCOS) in a short time. Citizens were sensitised about the need to belong to an association. Rubanda West Constituency, for example, registered 17 SACCOS, 566 associations and 11,541 individual members.

In Kanungu, by August, 2,083 groups had registered across the district and got certificates. In Kabale Municipality, the produce dealers’ SACCO alone has 90 associations. 

Challenges

    1. It was established that some of the local associations were formed hurriedly and with a sole target of receiving quick cash. Many SACCOS did not have shared objectives, goals and vision but were formed with the purpose of easy access to funds. The initial planning, screening of associations and sensitisation was inadequate. 

    2. Political interference. The Emyooga programme was rolled out during a political season. Most people misunderstood the Emyooga funds to be a political token. Many beneficiaries believed it to be a “thank you” for voting well. This has posed a big challenge in loan repayments.

    3. Another challenge was COVID-19. The effects of COVID-19 and the lockdown ravaged the Emyooga SACCOS. Associations were unable to congregate for trainings and use the funds for wealth creation. Some of the beneficiaries that received the money before lockdown used it for survival. During the lockdown, some businesses like salon operations, markets, fish mongers and mechanics were affected and some of the start-up businesses have since closed. 

    4. There was no budget directly provided to the district commercial officers and other technocrats for effective monitoring and supervision. Yes, there was a budget but it was passed through the Micro Finance Support Centre. This affected the day-to-day operations of the SACCOs. During our meetings with district officials, we noted that officers in charge were understaffed and with no operational funds at their disposal to execute their tasks. For example, in Kanungu, two staff members in the commercial department were expected to monitor all the associations, which we found to be an uphill task.

    5. There was also delay of disbursement of funds. Most SACCOS that had opened accounts in Post Bank delayed to receive their monies. Post Bank insisted that SACCOS get clearance from the Registrar’s office in Kampala. It was very hard for these SACCOS to travel to Kampala to get certification. In Kanungu District, many groups abandoned the process due to the laborious process after investing in their registration monies. All the seven SACCOS that had not disbursed funds in Kigezi, that is, Kabale Municipatity Taxi Operators, Ndorwa East Restaurant Owners and Ndorwa West Mechanics, Performing Artists, Tailors, Saloon Operators and Youth Leaders, were because Post Bank delayed to disburse the funds. In Rukiga, it was not until June 2021 that the SACCOS started receiving the funds.

    6. Access to loans requires collateral. The revised Cabinet position approved some form of protection of the lender by providing security to access loans. This requirement raised serious issues and discouragement. In Rubanda District, it has been reported by some women that their husbands vehemently rejected this model. As such, some families without security have been locked out of this initiative.

    7. The seed capital grant was inadequate to cater for all the registered members. In Kabale Municipality, the produce dealers comprised of 90 associations was allocated Shs 30 million, which was a drop in the ocean. This challenge was cross-cutting in the entire Kigezi Sub-region. 

    8. There were inconsistencies in loan recovery period and amount of interest to pay. Some Emyooga groups received up to one year and others four and six months for repayment. The amount of interest paid also varied. While some SACCOS in Kabale Municipality charge eight per cent, some have gone up to 15 per cent.

    9. There is mismanagement and embezzlement of funds. In Kinkizi West Journalists’ SACCO, Kanungu, the chairperson and treasurer swindled Shs 11,600,000 meant for the SACCO, among others. This matter is already in court. The Kabale Journalists’ SACCO has faced similar challenges with the chairperson where the audit indicates that the chairperson mismanaged loan disbursement of Shs 29,850,000. He withdrew the money and he has not yet accounted for it to date.

    10. Most of the SACCOS, for fear of high expenses in administrative costs, do not have established offices at constituency level. Some SACCOS are operating “under the tree” offices. Another expense they fear is facilitating SACCO leaders. In Rubanda West, for example, only three out of 17 SACCOS have office space. When I asked about this, they said it is about inclusion and they are supposed to operate anywhere but I believe they should have some office space.

    11. Poor loan recoveries and defaulting of some members. Some members have been arrested due to non-repayment. In Karweru Leaders Group in Maziba Sub-county, Ndorwa East Constituency, one of the members is suspected to have swindled Shs 2,000,000 and has been arrested. In Ndorwa West, the recovery was the lowest in Kigezi Sub-region with only Shs 2,664,000 recovered out of the Shs 385,540,000 that was disbursed.

Recommendations 

We observed that SACCOS with fewer associations, for example, Veteran Emyooga SACCO, the Taxi Operators SACCO, Carpenters SACCO, welders, and others received the same amount of money as the SACCOS with more associations. For example, the SACCO I had talked about in Kabale Municipality, which has eight associations, received the same money as the Veterans’ SACCO, which has two associations. 

We therefore recommend that the SACCOS with bigger membership should receive more funding compared to SACCOS with fewer members. 

The top-bottom approach for this programme did not allow communities to participate in identifying their problems so that the solutions could be meaningful and owned. 

It is our wish that more emphasis be put on education and sensitisation of the masses and the SACCOS’ leadership. The planning phase has to be rigorous and sufficient resources and time invested in the process. We recommend adoption of a bottom-up approach through community participation at all stages.

Volunteerism in running of the SACCOS causes an existential threat. The executive members with no specialised skills were serving on voluntary basis. There was less personal responsibility and these are likely to be fatigued. 

It is our considered recommendation that SACCOS should be empowered with technical personnel for efficiency and proper governance. 

We recommend that emphasis be put on already existing structures. These people have had a lot of costs in form of money and time and it would be unfortunate that the SACCOS, which are already formed – when another programme comes – include the people who have not been paying loans and you start calling them and you have bafere entering SACCOS again. 

We recommend that if there are other new programmes, then the already existing SACCOs should be used. We also recommend that more funding as seed capital be injected in the SACCOs. There are SACCOs which are doing very well but they are sometimes limited by lack of funds. For example, the SACCO which has already given out Shs 21 million and they have 90 associations. Definitely, they need more money.

Before launching another wealth creation initiative, there is need for a proper technical audit of the Emyooga programme. The time provided for the honourable members was insufficient to deal with the dearth of issues. The Emyooga programme needed a robust mechanism of stakeholder identification and consultation.

Members of Parliament and other relevant leaders should be given adequate information for oversight. Political leaders should not be enlisted to only be involved at assessment of the programme but rather, to be involved in the whole process.

We also recommend adequate financial resources for the supervision by the District Commercial Department.

Lastly, we observed that there were safeguards put in place to ensure that funds disbursed are paid back. Some of the safeguards include mandatory 30 per cent savings by each association, payment of registration fee by members, payment of Shs 150,000 by each association and follow up by commercial officers and other Government workers.

However, the safeguards were inadequate. One of the reasons is that SACCO is a separate legal entity, largely independent from any interference from a Government worker. Therefore, we recommend continuous strengthening of these SACCOs. Instead of strengthening the RDCS and commercial officers, we recommend continuous strengthening of the SACCOs to improve management and governance structures.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the report underscores the importance of wealth and job creation through the Emyooga programme. The initiative is geared towards sustainable socio-economic transformation and if well structured, it is capable of improving the access of funding and capital in the citizenry.

Madam Speaker, it is the agreed position of the Kigezi sub-region team that Emyooga programme be supported with more funding, ensure proper sensitisation and requisite modifications to achieve the intended objectives. This initiative has potential to create wealth and improve household incomes of Ugandans, if the challenges are addressed and realignment done. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Kigezi sub-region. 

REPORT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EMYOOGA PROGRAMME IN BUGANDA SUBREGION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Luweero, West Nile and Buganda. Do you have the report for Buganda Subregion? Can you present the report? West Nile, wait for Buganda to finish.

3.04
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, may I take the opportunity to invite hon. Enosi Asiimwe to present on our behalf?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, try to summarise. Remember, we have Prime Minister’s Time at 4.00 p.m. 

3.04
MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay a copy of the report on the Table. I am here to represent the team from Buganda Region. Although my colleague here thinks I am not a Muganda, I come from Buganda. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, considering that most of our colleagues have already talked about the background of the programme and the objectives of the oversight role you had entrusted us –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, just an interruption. I urge all of you to keep your masks on. If you are not comfortable with a mask, go and watch on Zoom. If hon. Atkins Katusabe was here, I would grant him permission to speak. 

MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: Thank you. Madam Speaker, considering that most of our colleagues from the other subregions have given the background of the programme and the objectives of why you sent us, I want to restrict myself to the findings of the teams from Buganda suregion.

When I mention Buganda Subregion, we are looking at Masaka, Greater Luweero, Greater Mukono, Kampala, including where my colleague comes from. Madam Speaker, we made a summary and this is what I am going to present.

There are many observations that we found but we want to restrict ourselves to the generic findings in the different sub-regions. That is what I want to read out.

Findings on disbursement of funds

It was established that in each constituency, funds were disbursed to all the targeted 18 SACCOs. This was verified, based on the lists that were circulated to Members of Parliament by the Microfinance Support Centre and the bank statements that we picked from the Community Development Officers and the leadership of these SACCOs. We confirmed that all the sub-regions had at least gotten money from the Microfinance Support Centre.

We also checked out the safeguards. Some commercial officers have put up safeguard measures, which could prove helpful in the fight against fraud and misuse of the seed capital. For example, the Commercial Officer for Kawempe demands that SACCOs provide accountability for every Shs 10 million of the withdrawn seed capital.

Elsewhere in Sembabule, SACCOs put in place terms and conditions regulating loan disbursement, where a member is only allowed to borrow three times their savings. This same condition was a general requirement from the Microfinance Support Centre and the regulatory agency. They had requested that for one to borrow, you must have saved at least three times of what you intended to borrow.

In Wakiso, associations were required to hold weekly meetings at ward level. This would help to review the loans disbursed and their performance.

We also looked at the identification and establishment of SACCOs. It was established that the Emyooga were identified by Cabinet, with the help of Resident District Commissioners, the Chief Administrative Officers and the District Commercial Officers. They were all directed to mobilise the communities along those enterprises identified, train them in the group dynamics and policy framework information of these SACCOs and parish associations.

This was done, though not effectively. Several would-be intended beneficiaries were left out. Sensitisation was not enough to the point that some communities mistook the fund to be a political handout. 

We also looked at the existence of SACCOs and parish groups. Members obtained detailed lists of the various SACCOs that benefited from the fund from the Microfinance Support Centre and confirmed their existence, through the physical meetings with the SACCO executives and the bank statements that were provided by the District Commercial Officers (DCOs) and SACCO leadership.

However, due to limited time provided for this assignment, it was difficult to ascertain the existence and membership of the various lists of associations that the RDCs and DCOs provided. For most districts which were visited, we managed to get in touch with the leadership, the taskforce at the district and what we call the Apex SACCOs, at the constituency levels. 

Madam Speaker, we never got enough time to go down and check on the associations at parish level. So, we believe that if we had gotten enough time, possibly, we would have gotten to that point.

We also checked on the existence of accountability measures. Members observed that the SACCO members could only meet at the Annual General Meeting to interrogate the running of their business and management of the accounts and to raise complaints or even settle disputes.

It is not well stipulated on how a member of a group or a group of members could do such interrogation before the Annual General Meeting. For example, in Mawokota, we observed that most SACCOs had not disbursed money to associations because they were still waiting for annual general meetings. Some members were restricted because of that.

It was also observed that since accounts become operational, members of the SACCOs have limited powers over the Executive’s decision-making process. This is fuelled by the corrupt tendencies, the poor-managed skills of the leaders and the COVID-19 pandemic where people’s movements were limited. 

Due to the travel limitations during the lockdown, some activities of these SACCOs were being carried out by only the executive members; the chairman, treasurers and the secretaries. Therefore, the other members of the SACCOs were not in the know of what these people were doing. That was another observation. 

Furthermore, the SACCO leaders had limitations on the capacity to mobilise their members to save or even to assess the viability of their members’ businesses before they could apply for or receive loans; later on to pay up their loans. In the circumstances the majority of the SACCOs accounts were drained after lending to only a few of their members, leaving almost the entire SACCO membership with no access to finances at all, even after remitting savings.

Madam Speaker, we also looked at the extortions before funds were disbursed to the accounts. In most of the districts from Buganda Sub-region, we observed that the issue of extortion would not and did not arise. However, extortion is still under investigation for some association’s members who accessed finances from the SACCO managers. 

Being that we only interacted with apex SACCOs, we were unable to assess whether there was extortion beyond the constituency level. That is why in some districts, investigations were left to be taken on by the district taskforces on whether some extortions were being done mostly at the parish level.

We also looked at the training and sensitisation. Most honourable members observed that besides the apex SACCO executive, most members, including the parish associations, lacked a clear understanding of the programme; mostly on the intended outcomes, operations, monitoring and evaluation of the parish associations. 

There was also limited sensitisation to the general public about the Emyooga programme, its requirements, processes, group formations and assessment criteria. This brought several people who speak about Emyooga mostly on radio stations to have insufficient knowledge about the programme.

Though the Microfinance Support Centre insists that they did training, most honourable members observed in their districts that this was not effectively done.

It was also noted that there was inadequate training of beneficiaries; continuous training was expected to be undertaken by the District Commercial Officer (DCO) but due to limited resources for the commercial officer, not much has been done. 

This was attributed to the overwhelming numbers of SACCOS and associations in the constituency that could not be serviced by the existing structure and budget allocation.

According to the Microfinance Support Centre, they tasked the district commercial officers to follow up and do the monitoring and evaluation of this programme but they never made a budget for that. They only assumed the existing structures would support that programme.

We also looked at the profiling of beneficiaries. Registration of beneficiaries was undertaken hurriedly without profiling potential beneficiaries. Emphasis was largely placed on presentation of certificates of registration. Consequently, we have chronic defaulters from other revolving funds, for instance, for women and youth, which were enrolled earlier before this programme.

Furthermore, there was inadequate verification of these enterprises. More still, verification of membership and qualification of members was overlooked. Some were found not to be involved or employed in the enterprise for which they were registered.  An example is in Kalangala where you would find somebody who is a carpenter but is in a SACCO of fishermen. There was that inadequacy.

The failure to profile members violates Section 55C of the Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2000 that requires SACCOs to undertake credit checks on persons applying for credit.

We also looked at the savings requirements; while most beneficiaries were required to present the status of their savings as a precondition of accessing funds, some of the members of the parishes borrowed funds from money lenders and presented them as their savings. Once the funds were disbursed
to their accounts, they would immediately withdraw them without paying back and they run to pay the money lenders. 

This reduced the amount violable for onward lending. This violates section 55AI of the Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2020 that requires apex SACCOs to maintain a deposit of not less than 20 per cent of their total savings and deposits. This was not helped by the fact that there were no set controls on funds withdrawals from the banks. This was attributed to the fact that there was no authority permitting technical staff to regulate bank withdrawals. 

Nevertheless, it was observed that SACCOs and associations that were formed before the establishment of Emyooga - those SACCOs and associations that were existing before the programme, had more savings than those formed later especially in areas of Kampala and Wakiso.

Madam Speaker, we also observed on the issue of administrative costs, the structuring of the Emyooga overlooked the impact of administrative costs of SACCOs - which I had mentioned earlier - on the amount of money available for onward lending to associations. The SACCOs and associations charged their members costs regarding bank charges, verification and transport, among others. 

This is in line with Section 55AO (2) of the Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2020. This empowers SACCOs to run their own activities and charge their own fees. Therefore, there is no limitation or hand by the regulator on what charges they should levy on their cost.

However, the major worrying issue or trend was in Nakaseke District where they were charging associations between Shs 1.5 to 2 million to cover administrative costs like setting up offices. In our observation, as much as the law allows them but some areas were doing way out of range making the seed capital less than what was expected to have gone to the last user. 

Madam Speaker, we also looked at the monitoring of this programme. The overall monitoring of the Emyooga was assigned to the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) and the District Commercial Officers (DCOs). This was mainly attributed to initiating the Emyooga during the campaign period for the recently concluded general elections. 

Besides, the RDCs and the DCOs are not funded to effectively monitor, evaluate and audit all beneficiaries and disbursement of funds.  Specifically, the district commercial officers and the parish commercial officers lack motorcycles or vehicles to supervise the initiative within their areas of jurisdiction. 

Additionally, due to geographical challenges of hard-to-reach areas such as Kalangala, it was hard to monitor the beneficiaries of Emyooga residing on different islands.

The cost of financing

Microfinance Support Centre disbursed the Emyooga funds on the assumption that the interest rate of eight per cent - This was far cheaper than the prevailing lending market rates that range between 17 and 20 per cent in the commercial market.  However, the mandate of lending to the parish association members remains with the parish association management, which in some cases they were lending between 10 and 15 per cent in effect making it costly than the principal policy expectations or target of availing cheap money to these enterprises and individuals.

Advisory areas

As earlier noted, the DCOs were expected to advise the Emyooga beneficiaries. However, we were overwhelmed by the number of beneficiaries. This was also not helped by the only 54 Microfinance Support Centre advisors that were expected to offer advice to these thousands of SACCOs and associations distributed across the 146 districts of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, we also observed that the COVID-19 pandemic affected the level of businesses of the targeted enterprises. Majority were not allowed to operate during the lockdown. This adversely affected the investment of Emyooga funds and their repayments that were expected within the four months. This repayment period was found to be too short, given the battering of the economy by COVID-19. The short period was not favourable for beneficiaries, particularly produce dealers who must rely on seasons of farming. 

We also observed an issue of uniform allocations. Each SACCO, irrespective of the number of members, was expected to access a standard amount of Shs 30 million except the Lenders’ SACCO that accessed Shs 50 million. 

This criterion was not responsive to the level of membership for those with fewer members to access the same amount of funds as those with maximum membership. This, in effect, meant that those with maximum membership had less funds to distribute amongst members as compared to those with less membership. The membership required was to be seven to 30 members but you will find that some SACCOS had less than seven or even had less than 10 but there were others with maximum membership of 30 and you would find that they had little money to access. 

We also looked at the record keeping, Madam Speaker. Almost every beneficiary SACCO and association had their records and books of accounts in order at the time of registration. However, it was observed that little attention was placed on ascertaining whether SACCOS and associations had held annual general meetings to appoint their representatives. 

Furthermore, after accessing the funds, there was gradual decline in maintaining operational structures and record keeping. This was not helped by the fact that not all members were able to obtain free individual passbooks. This compromised accountability and monitoring of the utilisation of the programme funds.

We also looked at membership, which I had already mentioned. Some associations did not meet the criteria of the required membership of the seven members. For example, in Bukoto West Constituency, some associations with less than seven people or members were able to access funds regardless of the guidelines.  

There was also an observation of loose guidelines. The Emyooga programme was operating under draft guidelines. These are not binding and are inconsistent with Section 4 of the Cooperative Society (Amendment) Act, 2020 that requires any Government programme that extends loans to cooperatives to have a law that provides for the existence and operations of such a programme. 

Under our findings, there was a lot of politics. The initiative was marred with political undertones since it was mostly promoted during campaigns for general elections, hence it was marred with political patronisation and beneficiaries had a misconception that the funds were a gift from the President for onward sharing. 

Madam Speaker, those were our findings and they were generic but we also have specific observations from the various districts that could not match the generic observations. 

In Mpigi District, the area Member of Parliament for Mawokota South noted that out of 17 that had received CB capital, only two had loaned out to the parish associations. Guidelines to access these funds had not been accessed. 

In Mubende District, some SACCOS were charging high interest rates compared to the recommended rate. This fails the purpose of cheap money to the local poor. 

In Bukoto West, some enterprises do not exist; say fishing and welders yet money was dispersed by Microfinance Support Centre. The Member of Parliament was to advise on the action plan, as at the time of this report.  

In Kalangala, some beneficiaries could not be categorised in more than one enterprise. For instance, there was close membership in restaurants and market vendor enterprises, hence they were able to access funds for more than one SACCO. You would find somebody in the market vendors enterprises and carpentry benefitting from different SACCOS. 

Though we also have success stories, in Kalangala District, the Boda Boda Sacco was identified as the most successful story in the region. They confirmed to have bought nine Boda Bodas out of their savings and borrowed funds. They were making remittances on a regular basis. It is one of the success stories that we observed in the region. 

We also had another success story in Gomba East Woman Enterprises Emyooga SACCO. They received 30 million which was loaned to 64 association members. Within two months, these have been able to save another 23.3 million out of the Shs 30 million that had been received. 

We also observed in that district that guidelines were followed and sensitisation on usage was effectively done. It is one of the many success stories.

In Buyamba Constituency in Rakai, there was an issue of blocking funds by Microfinance Support Centre. The Shs 50 million that was disbursed to the Leader’s SACCO was blocked and later remitted back to Microfinance Support Centre under unclear circumstances. It has never been returned to the account.

In Wakiso, some SACCOS had not received disbursements due to delays by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives in issuing certificates of registration for cooperatives. 

In Kampala, we have issues of some SACCO accounts in Nakawa Division, which were frozen due to disbursement of excess funds. Dormant members were not allowed to access funds. New members were barred from joining SACCOS on the assertion that they had declined being members before the disbursement of Emyooga funds. 

There was a delay in issuance of certificates of registration for cooperatives by the Ministry of Trade. 

We had an observation of funds amounting to Shs 1.3 billion deposited on SACCO accounts in December 2020 before their legal existence in Kiboga District. This means that Microfinance Support Centre released money even before SACCOS were formed. It was a very big inconsistency. Registration took place in February, formalisation of documentation and minutes for the SACCOS to be formed was done in March and May 2021. That was a challenge. 

We also observed a few areas of strength for this particular programme before we go for our recommendations. We noted that interest earned on loans goes to the associations and not to external service providers. This increases the amount of investment capital available to the communities. 

The programme is savings-based which means that people work with their assets and not with loan liabilities. This increases their livelihood, security and reduces their exposure to risks. 

We also observed the strength of the programme. Transactions are quick, simple and transparent. We also observed that, that eases information sharing and instils financial discipline. As these members are required to meet regularly, they tend to share information and their experiences in the different Emyoogas and this has helped them as communities. 

We also observed the strength of this programme; that it promotes a savings culture within our communities. Originally, most of our members were not so good at saving but since the Emyooga programme, there is a serious positive trend in terms of savings culture within our communities. 

We also observed that direct disbursement of funds to the intended beneficiaries without the involvement of third parties minimises misappropriation and misallocation by the implementing agencies. 

Those are some of the strong points about this programme.   

Recommendations from Buganda Region 

The Emyooga Programme should be changed from targeting individual investments to collective investment by members. This would be more impactful in the short and long-term as envisaged in Kalangala where Boda Boda SACCO members opted to buy boda bodas for the entire SACCO instead of sharing or loaning out to individuals. 

We think, as members of Buganda region, that this programme should emphasise collective investment. Even somewhere in Kampala, where I did not pick something because I came late, some SACCOS were buying minibuses (taxis) and the earnings from those taxis would be taken as savings of the associations.

We recommend that the regulatory agency should insist on collective investment by members.

We recommend that the minister fast-tracks the formation of the cooperative bank as well as the Credit Reference Bureau as required under Sections 19 and 55(a)(b) of the Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2020.

We believe that right now, for all the savings that are being collected from these member associations, if we can have one bank that is taking care of them, the Government would benefit and even the smaller associations in those villages would benefit more. We observed that commercial banks are charging rates that we believe are higher than our targeted rates for the association. Therefore, we recommend that the minister fast-tracks cooperative bank formation.

The operational guidelines of Emyooga should be replaced by a law or gazetted statutory instrument to give them a force of law. This will be in line with Section 55(a)(o)(4) of the Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2020, that requires any programme of Government that extends loans to cooperatives, to be governed by a law that will provide for the existence and operations of such programmes.

We also recommend that the documents concerning Emyooga should be translated into local languages to enable target beneficiaries understand the initiatives and it conditions better.

The Government should largely utilise the local councils and other structures at subcounty and other lower levels as the centres of these programmes. The structures are better placed to organise and monitor the programme because most of the operations were at the district level. Our recommendation, as a group, is that the agency pushes it more to the lower levels.

All beneficiaries should adequately be sensitised and trained before they access the Emyooga funds. This will help communities appreciate SACCO formation and operations like saving, loan repayment, business mind set and commercial production.

We also observed that as much as Microfinance Support Centre did training, we observed that it never reached to the last user, that is, the parish association members and that left a big gap.

There is need to understudy the minimum seed capital being proposed to all the formed SACCOS depending on which activity is being covered by different recipients. It is also envisaged that different SACCOS will require different seed capital levels, depending on what activity is being addressed. Hence, a review mechanism for the seed capital should be carried out and a properly customised plan be rolled out according to the enterprises.

We recommend that a grace period of four months be put in place to allow the beneficiaries to invest the loan and later repay from the accumulated profits. According to the guidelines that we all observed, members were given four months to have started paying back. However, in reality, we thought that this is too short to allow any enterprise to make any sensible business. Therefore, we recommend that they should be given four months before they start paying back.

We also recommend strengthening the monitoring and evolution mechanism through granting District Commercial Officers more powers and authority.

Integrate databases of ongoing revolving funds into the one that is utilised by Microfinance Support Centre to weed out chronic defaulters. Madam speaker, we observed people who had defaulted on youth funds and women funds were the same people that wanted to benefit under the Emyooga.

We recommend that we should have a database as per the Cooperatives Act, have credit rating for this so that we weed out the chronic defaulters.

We recommend minimising the misuse of funds. The Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority should, in the shortest time possible, roll out the credit rating of associations and their members to eliminate the chronic defaulter.

Build capacities of SACCO leaders in financial management, literacy, leadership, governance, savings and credit management.

Quarterly meetings should be encouraged to reduce the administrative window, to ensure that issues are addressed well in time for purposes of SACCOs operational efficiency.

We recommended that a clause be adopted in all associations and SACCOS, addressing the issue of corruption and misrepresentation. This will help in addressing corruption and forgeries in future. 

The Microfinance Support Centre should incorporate administrative and operational costs in the funds disbursed to Emyooga to ovoid them encroaching on funds availed for onward lending to members. Hard-to-reach areas should be allocated more funds, say, the island districts in Kalangala, Buvuma and others.

In conclusion, as Members of Parliament from Buganda region, we appreciate the programme. It was a well-thought out plan. However, it was hurriedly done without adequate sensitisation and training and given that it has operated for less than two years, it is in our considered opinion that when given more time and following the recommendations from the various stakeholders in these regions, there will be a social economic transformation in our country. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

This was a report from all the districts within the region,

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Buganda, for the good report. West Nile, kindly, let us be brief. Members, when you look at these reports, they have cross-cutting recommendations and observations. That is why I am telling the Members to summarise so that we are able to come up with resolutions on what we would want the Government to do for the subsequent programmes and even the current programme, since it is still ongoing.

Hon. Tayebwa, that is your Member; that is why we need some induction.

3.37
MR JACKSON ATIMA (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent West Nile region. Allow me to lay on Table the report the people from West Nile have submitted.

Madam speaker, in the interest of time -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have your phone out first since nobody can have it off.

MR ATIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the interest of time, I will not go through the background. The objectives are the same with the previous speakers. I will just go direct to the methodology used by the people of West Nile.

The exercise covered the entire districts and the constituencies of West Nile, including Arua City. Members used different approaches in conducting the oversight monitoring of the programme.

In some districts, Members worked together as a team, for example, Obongi and Koboko districts while in other districts, each Member of Parliament focused on his/her constituency.

Generally, the following approaches were used – 

    i) Meetings with district level Emyooga Taskforce and other stakeholders, including the security team, technical officers, chief administrative officers, district commercial officers and political leaders were held where the leaders briefed on the terms of reference. 

    ii) Meeting with leaders of SACCOs and parish associations to assess how the programme was managed and the related challenges. 

    iii) Members of Parliament met the chairpersons and executive committees of the SACCOs separately.

    iv) Meetings with individual members of parish and subcounty associations, political leaders, the technical staff, including the subcounty chiefs, development officers, production officers and parish chiefs, to assess their participation and preparation of the programme.

    v) Review of documents such as Emyooga Programme implementation guidelines, loan application forms, minutes of meetings, bank statements as well as district and SACCO reports to ascertain whether accountability measures were adhered enough to.

    vi) Radio talk shows were conducted to sensitise communities about the programme and get the views of people who could not be reached through meetings.

Key findings

The following are the key findings of the parliamentary oversight assessment team in West Nile Sub-region, according to the terms of reference set by the Office of the Speaker. The table below shows the amount of funds released to each district in the region. 

Adjumani, with two constituencies received Shs 1,120,000,000 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Give us your general findings; we know how much you received per district.

MR ATIMA: Okay. The total amount received by the West Nile Region is Shs 12,549,682,900. 

SACCO and groups that registered

The number of SACCOs and parish associations or groups that registered varied from district to district. In most of the constituencies, 18 SACCOs registered in the targeted enterprises, categorised for Emyooga programme by the districts, which in turn were registered by Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

Issued registration certificates and bylaws

A total of 446 SACCOs have been registered in the 26 constituencies of West Nile.

In Terego District, only 33, instead of 36 SACCOs were formed in the two constituencies. Terego West has 17 SACCOs, while Terego East has 16 SACCOs. Terego West that received the funding has not started disbursement of the funds to parish associations, because the SACCOs have not received their certificates from the registrar of cooperatives.

In Yumbe District, only 58 SACCOs out of 72 have been formed and 44 of the 58 SACCOs have received the seed capital. However, the funds have not been used due to inadequate preparation by parish associations. Most associations do not have business premises and stationery. 

Non-payment of membership fees

No or little savings to grant loans against inadequate measures to ensure recovery of borrowed funds. There are bureaucracies from the banks and ineffective utilisation of funds. In Nebbi District, only journalists were able to form a SACCO in time to receive the funds. While in Arua City, 11 SACCO groups are not registered with the registrar of cooperatives.

The criteria for the disbursement of the funds

The funds are disbursed directly to the constituency SACCO accounts held in different commercial banks in the districts by Microfinance Support Centre. This money was supposed to be distributed between the parish associations and members of the SACCOs, based on their shares and work plans.

At parish associations, money was to be loaned to members on the basis of payment of membership fees and savings of each member. However, there were a lot of variations in distributing the funding, among the parishes and individual members of the parish associations. Some SACCOs shared the money equally, for example, restaurant owners and mechanics in Koboko North, while others shared in proportions, which did not have clear criteria. This was the case with women entrepreneurs, boda bodas and produce dealers in Koboko.

Most of the Emyooga SACCOs in the subregion started distributing funds and giving loans to primary associations and beneficiary members respectively. The members that received the loans have started using the funds to implement their programmes. 

With some challenges due to the lockdown, however, in Adjumani East Constituency, mechanics and veteran SACCOs have not been able to access the funds because instead of Shs 30 million, Shs 50 million was received in their accounts.

Who qualifies for these Emyooga funds?

The people who were earmarked to qualify are those that are 18 years and above and they were categorised, among the 18 enterprises. 

Extortion from public officers 

There were no evidences of extortion from public officers overseeing the Emyooga programme except in Terego District, where a group known as “Yellow Brigade” in Arua City, duped associations in Greater Arua and collected Shs 300,000, as an inducement to connect the associations to easily get the Emyooga funds. 

There were also several cases of mismanagement by the leadership of the constituency SACCOs and parish associations. In our meetings, members reported some of the chairpersons and treasurers, who declared less amounts to the groups. For example, it was alleged that the Chairperson, Produce Dealers SACCO in Koboko North, withdrew Shs 25 million but declared only Shs 22 million; hiding Shs 3 million. 

Taxi operators in the constituency seemed not to have had any activity in the area. The group withdrew Shs 28 million, out of the Shs 30 million received in the account and gave it out to members to do business. 

It was observed that some of the chairpersons of the SACCOs deal directly with individual members or parish associations and give them loans directly from the SACCO instead of the leadership of the parish groups. 

The parish associations are now being used and there is discrimination in giving out the loans. 

Some of the members cast doubt on the number of parish associations under some of the SACCOs, especially produce dealers. 

In Arua District, there were elements of theft among the group leaders. A case in point is the performing artists association that withdrew Shs 29 million and the general secretary ran away with the money. He was intercepted at Olepi on his way to Kampala. The CDO and RDC were informed by members after they realised that the gentleman was out of his home. 

Veterans, widows and orphans associations got Shs 29 million which was withdrawn upon the chairperson tricking them to sign and the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you summarise? As I guided, let us have observations – 

MR ATIMA: Madam Speaker, the key challenges that the people of West Nile got are these:

    1. There are no operational funds to effectively monitor and supervise the programme by the offices of the district commercial officer, Resident District Commissioner and other district officials. 

    2. Sub-county level government structures are not involved in the processes of the selection, implementation and monitoring.
    3. The design of the Emyooga programme was a top-down approach with minimum involvement of the local leadership and stakeholders to provide context specific input to the programme. 

    4. The funds for the Emyooga programme were disbursed directly by the Microfinance Support Centre to the accounts of the beneficiary SACCOs with minimum involvement of the office of the CAO and district accounting officer. 

    5. There were no clear guidelines given by the office of the RDCs who chair and coordinate Emyooga programme. 

    6. The amount of funds sent to the groups and constituencies is inadequate to meet the needs of the primary associations and members of the SACCOs. 
    7. The Emyooga programme funds were perceived by most of the communities to be a campaign fund given by His Excellency and that it should be utilised. 

    8. Many members fear to apply for the Emyooga funds because if they misappropriate it, they can be arrested and jailed.

    9. The training provided by the MFSCL was inadequate for them to effectively manage the SACCOs.

Recommendations

    1. Operational funding should be factored in the main grant otherwise, the actual project funds are already being used and tampered with, which will affect the size of the funding.

    2. More accountability mechanisms to be put in place by involvement of the local leaders to monitor, sensitise and hold group leaders accountable.

    3. The central government should engage and consult the district local government stakeholders in the design of rural development programmes such as Emyooga and the parish development model.

    4. Clear guidelines and tools to be provided by the line ministries, departments and agencies such as MFSCL to ensure standardised practices across all districts.

    5. Sufficient capacity building and training be provided for the executives and members of the SACCOs to ensure they are competent to manage the programme. 

    6. Sufficient funding be appropriated to meet the demands for low interest capital for SMEs.

    7. The loan recovery period to be the nature of the business for which the loan is taken.

    8. Increase community mobilisation and education efforts to increase demand and uptake of the revolving fund.

    9. Facilitate community, development and commercial officers to supervise, monitor and report on the performance of Emyooga programme.

    10. Extension workers be recruited to provide technical support for the SACCOs and parish associations on enterprise selection and management. 

    11. RDCs and commercial officers should address management and related challenges of SACCOs which include selection of leadership from one sub-county, non-accountability of committees dealing directly with individuals, theft of funds withdrawn, and verification of enterprises by some of the groups.

    12. MFSCL should provide more technical support to the district taskforce in order to enhance sustainability of the programme.

    13. Decentralisation of certification of the SACCOs and groups in the region for easy accessibility.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, Emyooga programme is a well-conceived programme with promising results. However, there is urgent need to streamline its implementation modalities in order to improve its chances of achieving its intended goal. Critical in improving the performance of the programme is using the local government structures in implementation, supervision and monitoring of the programme. 

Strengthening of the management system of the SACCOs and parish associations and strategic selection of enterprises for rural and urban settings. 

As members of the Parliament from the sub-region, we are committed to ensuring that this programme succeeds. It is, therefore, our sincere hope that the above recommendations will be given the due consideration they deserve. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, as you make a presentation, if something has already been said in another report, I do not think you need to repeat it. 

As I said, most of these observations and recommendations are crosscutting. We need to be as brief as possible. Remember today is Thursday and as per rule 41, the Prime Minister has asked for 20 minutes. She is going to the field. 

She can give her report and leave us to debate it. She has about three questions. 

3.59
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, allow me to present a statement, first for the business of the succeeding week. Rule 28 of our Rules of Procedure requires me to make a statement in the House, regarding the business of the succeeding week.

I am here, therefore, to submit the following business for the succeeding week, from 21st September to 23rd September 2021:

    1. Motion for Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Metropolitan Archbishop, Jonah Lwanga of the Uganda Orthodox Church. 

    2. A statement on the status of roads in the country. I think this one is going to be comprehensive. I have already directed the minister to bring a very comprehensive report.

    3. A statement on the status of the quality of telecommunication in the country; and

    4. A statement on the status of Expo 2020 Dubai.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You can now present the matters.

4.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Allow me to read the questions, in the interest of time. Madam Speaker, this is hon. Naigaga Mariam, Woman MP, Namutumba’s question. Her question reads, “The Ninth Parliament approved a loan for the implementation of the Agriculture Cluster Development Project as a pilot to be implemented in 42 now 57 districts, among them Namutumba District. This project has addressed major constraints faced by farmers such as access to subsidised inputs, construction of post-harvest facilities and now starting to work on few farm access roads. This project will end in March 2022. 

Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister explain to this Parliament the preparations for rollout to the remaining districts, as well as deepening the services in the already benefiting districts?”

Madam Speaker, my response is that the Agriculture Cluster Development Project is financed by an International Development Association credit of $150 million. The project was approved by the World Bank on 9 April 2015. It became effective on 23 January 2017 and is scheduled to close on 31 March 2022.

The Project Development Objective is to raise on-farm productivity, production and marketable volumes produce in l2 geographic clusters, comprising of 57 districts.

Madam Speaker, there are some achievements and these include:

    1. Provision of agro-inputs to beneficiary farmers;
    2. Provision of matching grants to producer organisations; 
    3. Strengthening agro-input and output markets; 

    4. Agricultural water management investments;
    5. Strengthening agricultural statistics;
    6. Web-based, geo-tagged ICT platforms;

    7. E-extension platforms; 
    8. Mobile soil testing application;
    9. E-markets platforms;

    10. Data Analytics System;
    11. Financial Inclusion System and 
    12. Rehabilitation of road chokes.

The procurement of the second set of works in 21 districts, including Namutumba, Kyotera, Masaka, Rakai, Mpigi, Bugiri, Isingiro, Bushenyi, Rubanda, Kabale, Rukiga, Gulu, Nwoya, Omoro, Yumbe, Arua, Maracha, Madi Okollo, Kibale, Kumi and Kakumiro, has been concluded. It is only awaiting signing by the end of this month. That wass question one.

Question two also came from hon. Mariam Naigaga and it read, “In some areas, farmers were not well guided while making the project work plans and missed out the key component of power connections. What is the ministries’ arrangement, in terms of support towards such groups that have failed to start, despite having structures because of power?”

My response, Madam Speaker, is that it is true that some facilities developed are located in areas far away from the national grid. The high cost of extension of power to some sites without power connection has delayed operationalisation of completed facilities. 

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources are implementing a Government programme of rural electrification, to ensure it is extended to farmer organisations to fully utilise the facilities.

This project is a well-designed one. It addresses the entire commodity value-chain and in tandem with the agro-industrialisation agenda of the NRM Government.

Finally as Government, we are negotiating with the World Bank for a no-cost extension of 15 months to enable ongoing contracts for road, the construction of post-harvest storage and management facilities, roll out of digital applications and administrative data collection tools in 57 districts, get done. 

Additionally, we have also started consultations with the World Bank and other stakeholders on the possible financing for a second phase of the project to cover the entire country. An implementation supervision mission by the World Bank is scheduled to run from 20 to 28th September 2021, in which, among other issues, project extension and consideration for the second phase will be discussed.

Question 3 came from hon. Cuthbert Abigaba Mirembe, Member of Parliament for Kibale County, Kamwenge District and it reads, For some time, Kamwenge District has had a number of their people suffer from Podoconiosis - the non-infectious elephantiasis. 

Over the years, the disease has been seen to destroy the communities affected. Majority of the affected communities are in Busiriba Subcounty and Bigodi Town Council but some cases have equally been reported in other neighbouring subcounties. 

What the Ministry of Health has ably done is to explain the disease and possible causes, on paper. 

Then he asked the questions below:

“
    i. When will Government be seen to deliberately come to the rescue of the communities affected through primary healthcare education, treatment-related efforts and some other forms of support to the affected families?

    ii. Why has Government delayed to dispatch a team of multi-discipline experts - that is health, agriculture and Sociology - to Kamwenge District to get first-hand facts about the situation and take action?”

Madam Speaker, my response is that the Ministry of Health is aware of this public health problem in Kamwenge District. The Ministry of Health has worked with Kamwenge District Local Government to put in place several interventions and mitigation measures that include: 

    i) Assessment of the burden of the disease in Kibale Subcounty in particular Busiriba Subcounty, Ntara and Kamwenge subcounties.

    ii) Advocacy and sensitisation meetings have been held in Kamwenge District with the local leaders and the affected sub-counties were educated about the disease and how to manage it.

    iii) The disease has no known cure and is only preventable by continuous sensitisation by avoiding walking barefoot. People who develop secondary infections (wounds) were advised to seek medical care from nearby health facilities where they are provided with antibiotics and painkillers.

    iv) Health workers have been trained on how to manage patients - those who present themselves with those symptoms. 

    v) Those with overlying nodules are referred to health centre lV to undergo surgery. 

    1. Behaviour change and communication about the preventive measures is on-going, conducted by Kamwenge District Health Officer and District Health Educator.

The second question was: why has the Government delayed to dispatch a team?

Madam Speaker, as I said earlier, the Ministry of Health in collaboration with the World Health Organisation (WHO), Makerere School of Public Health and Centre for Disease Control, worked together to investigate cases of the disease in Kamwenge District to find a possible solution. The investigations revealed that females were more affected than male counterparts at a ratio of 3 to 1.

Among those tested, none tested positive for filarial worm which causes elephantiasis. It was, therefore, concluded that the disease was associated with alkaline clay soil, which irritates their skin. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to categorically state that, the Ministry of Health has continuously engaged the district leadership on the severe damage caused by the disease that is podoconiosis and continue to sensitise the communities.

Question four was still from my brother hon. Cuthbert that, over the years, and on many occasions Members, representing areas that neighbour the national game parks, have raised matters relating to wildlife-human conflict and destruction of crops, property and killing of domestic animals. We appreciate the Government for the effort to mitigate the conflicts through:

a) 	The Wildlife Act 2019
b) 	The installation of an electric fence around game parks.

In question one, he asked me to explain why until now the Wildlife Act 2019 is not yet implemented, especially to address sections 82 and 84 of the Act that deal with compensation of individuals and communities that suffer losses due to wildlife invasions.

The other question was to share a road map for extending installation of an electric fence to Kamwenge District, from Rubirizi District where it started and stopped causing all animals to migrate to the Kamwenge side.

My response is that the human-wildlife conflicts are no doubt a growing challenge in Uganda. This situation is largely attributed to an increase in human population against the declining wildlife habitats caused by agricultural expansion, degradation and related factors such as disruption of natural migration patterns. 

It is true sections 82, 83 and 84 of the Uganda Wildlife Act, 2019 make provisions for compensation arising from losses due to wildlife. Section 86 also provides for the minister to make regulations to operationalise some of these sections of the Act. I wish to report that the Uganda Wildlife Compensation Regulations are now before the First Parliamentary Counsel for drafting.

Once this is finalised, the regulations will be gazetted by the minister. However, it is important to note that whereas the Act provides for Uganda Wildlife Authority to put two percent of the revenues collected from services offered by the authority into the compensation scheme, these funds are not sufficient to address the numerous compensations claims from all over the country. 

Besides, as you are already aware, the COVID-19 pandemic has greatly reduced the revenues collected by Uganda Wildlife Authority from tourism activities.

With regard to electric fencing, the Government, through Uganda Wildlife Authority, has so far erected 23km of the fence that is wired and powered in the Murchison Falls National Park, while 42.8 km has been wired and powered in the Queen Elizabeth National Park, making a total of 65.8km of electric fence to date. Now that we have seen that the electric fence is effective in preventing elephants from crossing the national parks to communities, the ministry will prioritise the expansion of the electric fence in the next budget. The Uganda Wildlife Authority has assessed about 1,000km of national park boundary, where an electric fence can be erected.

However, the electric fence is not the only intervention to address human-wildlife conflicts. For example, the electric fence cannot be erected on water bodies or in swamps and hills. Other areas require other interventions which are already ongoing, including trenches covering about 500km in total, bee hives - over 15,000 already established in areas bordering national parks, 19km of stone wall in Mgahinga Gorilla National Park and growing of commercial crops that are not palatable to wildlife but of high commercial value such as tea, tobacco and red chilli. 

To address human-wildlife conflicts, the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and the affiliated agencies will continue with the engagements partnering with stakeholders that can bring in capacity and resources to support mitigation measures and cooperation with the local communities, and political leaders in ensuring that the damages caused by wildlife are reduced and the people's livelihoods enhanced to attain sustainable socio-economic transformation of our communities while securing Uganda’s long-term conservation goals.

The last question came from hon. Agnes Kirabo, Member of Parliament representing the youth in the central region.

On the 20th August 2021, the Executive Director of National Bureau of Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs), in a press conference, declared 54 NGOs suspended with immediate effect on grounds of noncompliance with the NGO Act, 2016, where some NGOs failed to file annual returns and others were operating without valid permits. 

It is surprising that some of these organisations, such as the Youth Equality Centre, complied with all the requirements as called for by the NGO Act, 2016 that is, they operate under a valid permit and filed the returns but were not spared. 

Some of these organisations were disrupted in their operations due to COVID-l9 that has had the country locked down twice by the President, H.E Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for good intentions of saving Ugandans from the COVID-l9 pandemic and thus they were unable to timely file in their returns. 

Some of these non-governmental organisations are youth-led and greatly contribute to the promotion of National Youth Policy Advocacy, human rights, gender equality and life survival skills to the young people and other United Nations Sustainable Development Goals 2030. 

With the challenges facing the youth such as surge in teenage pregnancies, unemployment, mental health concerns and disruptions in education programmes, mostly the finalists at higher institutions of learning, the services of these NGOs have been strongly contributing to the mitigation of these challenges. Halting their suspension has risked the youth in the central region to a complex environment. 

The questions are: 

    1. The National Bureau for NGOs revises the decision for permanently suspending these NGOs and allows them to operate within a time frame of about six months as they check themselves on where they are wrong. 

    2. The Government considers supporting some of these NGOs that have been strongly affected by COVID-l9 so that they are able to continue rendering their services to the youth. 

    3. The Government prioritises dialogue with some of these NGOs who may be sliding off the objectives of the National Bureau for NGOs. 

Madam Speaker, this is the last question. 

As a result of its monitoring and investigation functions, the National Bureau for NGOs discovered that 54 NGOs were non-compliant with the NGO Act of 2016. The NGO Bureau established that: 

    i) 23 NGOs were operating with expired permits contrary to sections 3l (l) and 32 (2) of the NGO Act, 2016.

    ii) 15 NGOs failed to file annual returns and audited books of accounts to the NGO Bureau contrary to sections 39 (2) and (3) of the NGO Act, 20l6. 

    iii) 16 NGOs were operating without registering with the NGO Bureau contrary to sections 29 (l), 3l (l) and 3l (2). 

The affected NGOs that intend to resolve the non-compliance issues have an opportunity to be heard by further engaging the NGO Bureau in enabling them to resolve their compliance issues. This engagement between the affected NGOs and the NGO Bureau is currently ongoing and as of 15 September 2021, 19 of the affected NGOs had written to the NGO Bureau for engagement on the issues. Six of the NGOs are already engaging with the NGO Bureau. Some include youth-led NGOs like Youth Line Forum and Youth Equality Centre. 

Madam Speaker, the Government appreciates the complementary role NGOs play in the development of the country and holding the Government accountable including the youth-led NGOs. The Government is committed to providing a conducive and enabling environment for NGOs operating in the country. 

However, to promote public confidence and have a vibrant NGO sector, NGOs must operate in a streamlined manner by maintaining high standards of governance, transparency and accountability. NGOs must not operate outside the law and should comply with the legal obligations. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

4.26
MS MARIAM NAIGAGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker and Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the response. Since this is my maiden speech in the 11th Parliament, allow me to congratulate you, my sister, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, for winning that seat.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to appreciate your response to my question regarding the Agriculture Cluster Development Project (ACDP). I would like to appreciate, on the same note, that you have clearly highlighted the achievement of this Government programme. 

However, on the issue of power, as one of the benefitting districts of this programme, we have made efforts to write to the Rural Electrification Agency (REA), which is a sister agency to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; the implementing ministry, to give support to these farmers. This was as a result of trying out the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), which asked for a lot of money that the farmers could not afford.  

We wrote a joint letter to REA together with some members from Masaka where still, some facilities have failed to operate due to power supply. I, therefore, want to pray that you join our efforts and bring together the ministries of energy and agriculture and have this matter sorted out, as you engage with the World Bank to roll out the second phase. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this loan has taken a very long time. It is my prayer that the project starts to help farmers in the agro-processing side of both cereals in Busoga and coffee in Buganda. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you could make your commitment to engage those ministries.  

MS NABBANJA: I have taken note of her concern. I pledge that I will invite her and those in other affected areas. I will also invite the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development so that we can resolve this matter conclusively. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we have a response from the Leader of the Opposition?  

4.28 
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this agriculture cluster programme is a crucial one, especially given the administration supreme for socio-economic transformation of the country. 

The World Bank has started with a few districts, including your own, and I saw, in your response, that you were conflicted, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. With due respect, Kakumiro is amongst a few of the beneficiaries of the US $150 million. 

This is an important project because the purpose is for on-farm productivity.

However, Rt Hon. Prime minister, honestly speaking, like we did for SAGE in the 10th Parliament, this wonderful programme should be rolled out to all districts so that we are all beneficiaries or else you will continue to receive complaints from the wanainchi.

The other one of the Rural Electrification Agency, which has now been mainstreamed in the mother ministry, I think I would only request that now that you have made a pledge, you ensure that the second phase project should cover the whole country.

The question from the honourable member from Kamwenge on the threat of elephantiasis - and you say in your response that the team that tested found none of the affected people suffering from elephantiasis, which leaves a lot to be desired in his question. Then something more should be done. At least more experts should be dispatched to conduct a detailed needs assessment and even do confirmatory tests; maybe it is a form of Coronavirus which we do not know and it attacks the feet. What would be required is a scientific confirmatory test on the affected and it should be urgent because it is an emergency of sorts.

The human-wildlife conflicts are indeed a serious challenge in Uganda, Madam Speaker, because this question has come several times to the Prime Minister and this time, the law has been mentioned. In Uganda, it is not about shortage of the law. We have all the laws in place but the challenge is with implementation, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

If the law dealing with compensatory approach is not being applied, then the questions will continue to come because why not compensate the victims? In addition, you have issues with compensation. We have seen even a pending motion on compensation and now you have mentioned numerous compensation claims. I think your administration should reinvent itself and ensure that the pledges you make are honoured in good time.

First things first; if this conflict has been on for ages, why not begin with those measures like the electric fence, trenches, and beehives; are they not affordable before you even tackle the one of compensation? I think there is something lacking –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Madam Speaker, the information I want to give to the House is in regard to the problem we have with co-existence between our animals and the communities living around the park. The last Parliament passed a loan, which was given by the World Bank. This loan is helping both my Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Tourism, where the component of making trenches and electric fences to prevent the animals wandering into the surrounding community is. $78.3 million was secured and we are in the process of implementing that; it is already in the offing. Thank you.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Minister of State for Environment, for that good information. Now that you have secured this money, please ensure that it is put in place to avoid further conflicts.

The last reply I make to the response of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is on the 54 NGOs that have been suspended by her administration.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are attributing it to maybe failure to file annual returns but the truth of the matter is that most of these NGOs, including the very first one - the Democratic Governance Facility (DGF) which was suspended - are held in suspicion for “being in bed” with some political parties, which are not necessarily of course, NRM. But we are in a multiparty dispensation, Madam Prime Minister. 

We are also reliably aware that the NRM is a beneficiary of huge funding from some of these NGOs. So, why not do the right thing to shame the devil other than victimising NGOs just because they are maybe suspected to be associated with some Opposition parties? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you LOP. The good thing the suspicion is not in writing, it is a perception. In addition, if they are “in bed” with anybody, then they should leave the bed and do their work - what brought them to Uganda - other than fighting other people. (Member rose_) There is a procedural matter.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me raise this procedural matter. I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for answering the questions that have been brought before her.

Early last week, I submitted my question - and my neighbour here too said she submitted hers as well. My procedural matter is in regard to how a Member will know whether he or she is in the queue because from today, we have only seen three questions being answered and we are not sure when our questions will be answered. I really need these clarifications and I need to be guided. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, you need to give that clarification to the Members because (i) our Rule 41 says that they shall be put in writing and it shall be by raffle. Therefore, I do not know whether the 15 questions are always forwarded to the Prime Minister. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do you receive the 15 questions?

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, the law is very clear. The Clerk sends me questions and those are the questions that I answer. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, Clerk, we need to know where the other questions are. They should be sent for answering. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have 146 districts and there are only 57 - I heard my brother complaining. I think next time, these people should move to all the districts. I would be happy to hear that Omoro is there, Bukedea is there, Napak is there, Tororo etc. 

We actually urge you, if it is a matter of money, we all want to come back to this House, and we can only come back once we are included in such activities in our districts. An inclusion is very important. Thank you for the response.

On this issue of the sickness, maybe, the scientists – honourable member, your question has been answered. Can you take leave of the Prime Minister? If the sickness in that area, as you have now found out, is not elephantiasis, then the scientists need to do more to find out what the problem could be. Yes, hon. Abigaba.

MR ABIGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for attempting to answer my questions. I had asked two questions but I was not satisfied with her response to the first. And it is the question on Podoconiosis in Kamwenge, which is a very serious matter. I was in the 10th Parliament and I am sure I represented my people very well, reason, they returned me unopposed.

Now, in those five years, we raised this matter several times on the Floor of Parliament. However, it is important to mention that throughout those five years, I never saw anybody from the Ministry of Health in Kamwenge District. The only information I have about this disease - I actually get it from academic journals on the internet.

Therefore, I would like to call upon the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to consider the people of Kamwenge because they have suffered enough. I do not know whether you have the statistics about the people, who have been affected by this disease. Clearly, in your own submission, you rule out elephantiasis yet we also do not know what kind of disease, this one is.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have seen you visit a number of areas –(Interruption) 

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I am surprised to learn that while the honourable member is talking about a unique disease upon which information has been brought to the House several times, but the Government has failed to handle it. 

There are ways to address this issue, for example, by writing to the World Health Organisation to carry out an investigation. I would like to find out why the Prime Minister cannot refer this issue to the World Health Organisation? This is the procedure, where if Government cannot handle such an issue, they write to the World Health Organisation requesting it to conduct an investigation into this unique disease. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had already made a ruling that since they failed to understand what it is, they should refer the matter to the scientists because going to World Health Organisation maybe too fast. We have scientists, who are even better.

Maybe, we need our scientists to find out what the problem could be. We could be sitting on a more dangerous disease. Kindly make a follow up with the Prime Minister’s Office and Ministry of Health.

MR ABIGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I will be delighted to secure an appointment from you to allow me come and we discuss this issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not need an appointment in a political office. Those are your offices.

MR ABIGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.   

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, the honourable members who have really got time to come to my office have never waited. I make sure that Members of Parliament are given priority to reach my office – (Applause) – Hon. Abigaba, I request that you come to my office and then we engage with the scientists. So far, the information I got is what I have given you. I pledge that we can move together and faster. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It would also be good if you visited that team in Kamwenge. They would feel nice, if you reached there, that you care for them.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, this weekend, I am going to Kyegegwa. I think I can also now add Kamwenge so that we interact with the communities on this issue. 

However, it will depend on how fast I can get these scientists. It is not really good for me to just go there because I am not a scientist. So, I will mobilise the scientists this weekend and if I get them in time then I will go to Kamwenge with them.  If I do not - you know they are not readily available. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister.

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, on Tuesday, we tabled an emergency to be handled by Parliament –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are going to discuss that emergency after the discussion on the Emyooga report. I am aware of it and you talked to me about the same. I am surprised you have gotten to the microphone to talk about the same.

MS AOL: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Enosi Asiimwe, come back, we are discussing your report. (Laughter)

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have received very comprehensive and good reports on the Emyooga from the regional representatives. I think we have gotten very important information.

Would it be procedurally right if the reports we have received already, substantively represented on the Floor, can be considered? Also, is it possible for those colleagues, who have not yet presented their reports, to just lay them on the Table, we receive them as a House, since we have got a clear picture of what has happened so, we can start the debate? 

I am saying this because I have just realised that we are repeating the same issues. So, I suggest that we receive all reports at once, receive responses from Opposition and Government, and then we debate, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before, I rule on that, can I hear from the Opposition?

4.44
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): I want to be at per with the Government Chief Whip but with a reservation on the express understanding that the Opposition is not going to respond, it is Government that will respond. 

We also have a report, which is already summarised and it could be presented because it is an alternative to all those others that have been presented from the regions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said before, most of these observations and recommendations, are crosscutting. That is why the Government Chief Whip is saying, we lay on the Table, all the reports. If that is agreeable, then we do so. I think we can lay all reports on the Table before we embark on the debate. We can also get a brief report from the Opposition, debate it and come up with resolutions.

4.47
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, thank you for your indulgence. I beg to lay the report on the performance of presidential initiative on wealth and job creation, the Emyooga project from the Busoga Subregion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Busoga Subregion.

4.48
MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also beg to lay the report from the Sebei Subregion. Having listened to my colleagues, it seems we have the same issues. Therefore, I have no problem. We can proceed with the debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we receive the one from Bunyoro?

4.49
MS HARRIET BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay copies of the report of Emyooga programme in Bunyoro Subregion.

4.50
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Members of Parliament on the Emyooga programme for Bukedi Sub-region. I beg to lay.

4.51
MR RICHARD WANDA (NRM, Bungokho Central County, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to lay on the Table the report for Bugisu Sub-region in relation to Emyooga programme. I beg to lay. 

4.52
MR BASIL BATARINGAYA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the monitoring report for the Emyooga programme as you directed. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which other region is left? I have my personal report for Bukedea. Please lay it.

4.53
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a report on the implementation and performance of Emyooga programme in Bukedea District, compiled by the Office of the Deputy Speaker. I beg to lay. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member.

DR BATUWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We were asked to lay these reports following sub-regions in regard to Emyooga but cities are peculiar. The cost of trading in cities is very different from some of these regions.

We thought that we could seek your leave such that as cities, especially the new cities, we also submit a report in regard to Emyooga due to the peculiarities attached to us. 

The procedural matter is, are we proceeding well when we do not give special preference to the cities given that these have just been brought on board and they are starting to be operational this financial year? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a report from your city? 

DR BATUWA: Madam Speaker, we request you for a week and in the next sitting, we will submit it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. 

DR BATUWA: However, I have one for Jinja City. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lay it if you have it. We sent everybody to the constituencies and that should be within Busoga. Is Jinja outside Busoga? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Are we proceeding well when we set standards and say people should report in regions - and those are our chosen methods - for any one Member not to submit a report in a region and then they come here and ask for special discretion? Are we proceeding well when we allow a Member to behave in such a manner? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The reason I made a personal report for Bukedea is because when the President was making his State-of-the Nation Address, Bukedea was a reference. A minister was sent to Bukedea specifically and that is why we are making a special report; because it was a reference. 

I would like to imagine that Jinja City is part of Busoga region and there is nothing special about your city that is different from Gulu City or from any other city, like the ones in Buganda.

Can we have a brief statement from the minister? 

MR NAMBESHE: Before the minister, the procedural issue I am raising is, it is clear in the Rules of Procedure and even in the Commonwealth practice that even with a general majority report, one may generate a minority report. In the case of Dr Batuwa, his is likely to be a minority report. (Laughter)

Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay to allow it, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not a minority report. Can we have the minister? 

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Allow me to thank you for the decision you took to send Members to their respective constituencies to follow up on the implementation of this wonderful programme. How I wish that this could be extended to all Government programmes. This is because Members of Parliament have done a wonderful job. 

Indeed, ever since they went to follow up on the implementation of Emyooga, key stakeholders that were reluctant to follow up on the implementation of this programme are now busy following up and ensuring that this programme succeeds. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

Because of time, I am not going to talk about the background; we all know it. Allow me to begin with the status update on the progress. 

Shs 260 billion was provided by Parliament for the Emyooga programme. These funds have been disbursed to Micro Finance Support Centre, which was designated as the lead implementing agency for Emyooga programme. 

This financial year, Shs 100 billion was voted by Parliament for the programme.

Madam Speaker, the Microfinance Support Centre is working in collaboration with the district Emyooga taskforces that were set up in all districts and chaired by the Resident District Commissioners. The district taskforces have the composition of Chief Administrative Officers, District Community Development Officers, District Commercial Officers, Microfinance Zonal Officers, LCV Chairpersons, Members of Parliament and representatives of the 18 Emyooga categories.

Colleagues, the Emyooga programme is being implemented in five phases namely; 

    i) Community mobilisation and identification of beneficiaries;
    ii) Registration of parish-based associations and Emyooga SACCOs;
    iii) Training and member education;
    iv) Disbursement of funds and 
    v) Monitoring and supervision by technical officers.

Madam Speaker, I am pleased to report that Emyooga programme has registered the following achievements.

Under mobilisation and identification of beneficiaries; I spearheaded this phase, which involved regional and district sensitisation meetings for leaders, Members of Parliament, local leaders and representatives of Emyooga categories or enterprises. The programme was successfully launched countrywide and 7,023 participants took part in the meetings. 

The registration of parish-based associations and Emyooga SACCOs 

Under this phase, the Microfinance Support Centre has mobilised 205,710 parish-based associations and 6,748 Emyooga SACCOs countrywide, reaching out to 4,114,200 direct beneficiaries, as at end of June 2021.

With support from the Microfinance Support Centre, 6,275 newly created Emyooga SACCOs have been issued with registration certificates by the Registrar of Cooperatives and issuance of certificates is still ongoing.

Training and member education

Under this phase, a total of 2,809 local Government officers - that is the District Commercial Officers and District Community Development Officers, underwent a training of trainers. They support the district Emyooga taskforces to plan, organise, conduct and monitor the quality of training for the members of the parish-based associations and leaders of the Emyooga SACCOs.

I am pleased to report that a total of 1,325,000 members in the parish-based associations and 31,002 leaders from the registered Emyooga SACCOs have so far been trained in the areas of financial literacy, enterprise selection, mindset change, basic financial management, record keeping, to mention but a few.

Madam Speaker, Microfinance Support Centre has deployed 54 –(Interruption)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, when we presented our reports from the different regions, my thinking was that the minister would respond to the reports and issues that we raised in the different regions.

Unfortunately, I have realised that the minister is also giving his own report. I am wondering how we are going to proceed in this situation. I am even beginning to think backwards to how you send Members to monitor the issue of COVID-19 and how you divided people into several regions. They returned and there was a central committee that received the reports from the different regions and later, the minister looked into that and came back to report.

Why don’t we use that same model, instead of reporting from a different region? Some people even laid the report here, which the minister has never even read. Yet, he is also giving a separate report. Madam Speaker, I think if you do not mind, can we give time to the minister to read through all that we have submitted from the different regions and then he can come to respond to the issues that we raised. (Applause) Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is giving us his report and we will get a report from the Opposition. For your information, I have looked at all these reports and we are going to give orders to the minister, based on what we have seen in all of them, after the debate.

Even if we gave them to a committee, they would still come back with the same resolutions; nothing is going to change. The truth is: what you found on the ground is what is there. The best we can do now is to advise what should be done to avoid waiting for an audit report after a number of years. What we need to do is to arrest the situation now, other than managing the post-mortem. 

MR KASOLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On community mobilisation – I have talked about this one.

Disbursement of funds
Microfinance Support Centre entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with various banks to open up accounts for Emyooga SACCOs and ensure that the members benefit from affordable transaction costs and favourable terms and account features.
Madam Speaker, as at end of July 2021, Microfinance Support Centre had disbursed Shs 213,064,000,000 directly –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, maybe to allay your fears, I compiled all the recommendations for all the regions into one document that I will read to you on what should be done, in addition to the generic recommendations that were made.

MR KASOLO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for that guidance.

On disbursement of funds, I was saying that the Microfinance Support Centre has so far disbursed Shs 213 billion –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we know what the Microfinance Support Centre has disbursed. Actually, if I were you, I would hear from Members what is happening.

MR KASOLO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a very good report from –

MR KASOLO: On response to emerging issues, Madam Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister finish. You have heard at least a number of issues.

MR KASOLO: Concerning the criteria of determining Microfinance Support Centre as a sole responsibility centre for disbursement of funds, the answer is that the Microfinance Support Centre is a Government company, incorporated in 2001, with the mandate to deliver affordable –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I expect you to respond to issues that have been raised like the guidelines not being clear. Now, what is the way forward on your side? People have not been trained on these monies. What is the way forward?

Actually, when I saw you appreciating the findings, I thought you were just going to concede and say, “This is what we are going to do to correct the problem”.

MR HARUNA KASOLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. However, it is on record that you directed me to come back with the answer as to why we chose Microfinance Support Centre and an implementing agency.

However, going by your advice, Madam Speaker, about the Emyooga SACCOs that have not yet received funds, the process is still continuous and once the district taskforce qualifies an Emyooga SACCO, it is supposed to be sent for payment to Microfinance Support Centre. Therefore, the Microfinance Support Centre does not have the mandate and capacity to pay an Emyooga SACCO unless it has been forwarded and recommended by the district Emyooga taskforce.

About political and other challenges, yes I concede –(Interruption)-
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I have seen a procedural matter. Why don’t you lay your report as it may be? First of all, honourable minister you need to appreciate one thing – that you do not need to micro-manage. How does the Microfinance Support Centre start disbursing money from here to a village down there when they do not know whether those people exist? 

You heard from what hon. Enosi Asiimwe said that they only get a certificate. Why wouldn’t you take these money to be managed by the CAOs and they would monitor its use? Why would you have the money in the centre?

You approved the money to be given out and you are not giving it out; where is it going? Do you want us to imagine that you are putting it on a fixed deposit account somewhere?

MR HARUNA KASOLO: Madam Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not asking you to respond. There is somebody with a procedural matter. Please lay your paper on the Table; we will consider it and let Members raise their issues.

MR HARUNA KASOLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the responses to the matters raised on the implementation of the presidential initiative by members of Parliament and the progress together with the annexure. I beg to lay.

MR AVUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the sub-regional presenters that presented the findings of our oversight visits to our different constituencies. I listened very keenly to what hon. Enosi Asiimwe presented. They are pertinent issues that cut across this country, that I thought that the Minister of State for Microfinance would take interest in.

One of such issues was lack of adequate training and the other was disbursement of funds beyond the amount that some SACCOs should have got. The other that I noted was that one SACCO in Rakai got Shs 50 million, and it was returned to the Microfinance Support Centre under unclear circumstances.

I thought those observations and recommendations that came out of these reports is what the minister would be responding to. If he is not ready, I thought he would today request that he should be given more time to consult with the Microfinance Support Centre and come back and report to Parliament. Or, he would have told us what they are already doing or going to do.

Madam Speaker, are we therefore proceeding right with a minister that we are seeing trying to gamble here and there with responses? The report he started with clearly indicates that he has not come ready to respond. However, he was giving us a status quo of the disbursement of Emyooga funds from the Microfinance Support Centre. Are we therefore proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if I were you, I would be very attentive to what Members are raising because this helps your ministry and you. The truth be told, Emyooga has not helped our people.

Whereas, the intention was very good, the mismanagement of this fund, the micromanagement by the Microfinance Support Centre - actually the Microfinance Support Centre and you are the same because there is no way you can manage money in Kampala when that money is supposed to go to Gulu. You are not even issuing an EFT for that money to be transferred to those accounts.

Honourable members, this matter is open to debate. However, before we conclude, how do we end this matter? I am getting five people to look at the resolutions that we came up with after looking at all the reports. They will look at those five resolutions as we debate, then they will come back and present the resolutions that I came up with from my office.

Hon. Ann, you are part of the team that is going to look at the resolutions with hon. Tayebwa, hon. Kivumbi, hon. Sarah and the minister.

MS ANNA ADEKE: Madam Speaker, you had earlier on guided that after the minister presented his statement, the Leader of the Opposition would be given an opportunity to also lay – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have agreed with the Leader of the Opposition on the issue of the resolutions. It should be embedded in that.

5.16
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank all the whips from the different regions and all Members of Parliament for the job well done.

Almost each and every report brings out a problem of failure by the Government to train the beneficiaries of these funds. Madam Speaker, when you give seeds to any farmer when that farmer has not prepared a garden, it means the most adjacent alternative is to eat the seeds. Therefore, when people misuse this money, it is because they were not prepared to receive the money. This is not the first time people are receiving money when they are not prepared. 

From that, I conclude that the Government needs to first train the people who are going to receive the money. When we were talking about the parish development model, each and every person was lobbying the people who are preparing for the project. We were lobbying that we should give out the money yet we had not seen how this Emyooga fund has been used.

Secondly, the name Emyooga means “skills” and when you give out money for skills, you expect people to have skills. However, the people did not have skills. That is why you find that some people who are carpenters were now in the associations or SACCOs of fishermen. 

In my county, there was a man who did not know how to catch mudfish but he was a member of the fisheries SACCO. It has happened everywhere. 

Lastly, as I prepare to give my proposal, I would like to say that there is a problem in this country. For example, we go out to make sure that people benefit but where did we get this money from? It is part of their taxes and borrowed money. So, how do we, at the same time, expect those people to use the money when their hospitals and health centres are not operating normally? 

We also expect those people to use that money –(Member timed out.) 

5.19 
MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with you on the fact that the purpose of the Emyooga programme was good. However, I think it is time we interested ourselves in the plans of each project before we rush into implementation. This should be the road map to implement the upcoming Parish Model. 

I am saying this because we are confusing our people on ground. What happened with the Emyooga? What we found on ground is that we rushed to send the money. In fact, we found out that the money was sent into bank accounts before some of the names of the groups were verified and certified and a case in point is the Acholi sub-region. 

A coordination point was put up in Lira and certificates took almost nine months. That is why, to date, some of the group members are still confused and do not know what Emyooga is for. Therefore, apart from the name “Emyooga” which is difficult for our people to pronounce and is confusing them, there is also confusion on what the money was supposed to be used for. 

These are my prayers: 

    1. That the minister sends out new guidelines and gives some time for people to make the payments rather than the four months that were given for repayment. This is because the people do not understand why they got the money; and

    2. The minister needs to send clear guidelines, once and for all, for our people on the ground to follow. I was sympathetic with the district leaders because they were being told different things. 

I pray that these two issues are handled. Let us give a grace period for people who picked the money to start repayment in eight months and not four months, like it was stated. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The guideline is that we should have an enabling law to support the Emyooga programme and the subsequent funds being given. When they are giving out this money - not everything is about money.  When you look at a boda boda group, maybe they would prefer motorcycles to cash. You need to do what hon. Enosi said; the bottoms-top approach to understand what the people require. 

MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek your guidance on this. Considering that every one of us contributed to the reports that we just laid on the Table, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to give the honourable minister and the team you have just selected time to look at all the recommendations and conclusions? This will enable them give us a comprehensive response to what we have all raised, instead of debating the matter.  

This is because when you look at what my honourable colleague has just raised, it is already in the report; we mentioned the four months not being enough for the beneficiaries. You will find that most of us are raising the same issues. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Enosi Asiimwe, you have compiled your report and spoken but there are people who have not mentioned what they think should have been done. As the other report is being reconciled – because it brings all the recommendations together – allow Members to air out their views. 

5.24
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Thank you for the opportunity, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the reports that were presented in the House from the different regions. 

I would like to comment on the arrival time of this project, which I think caused discomfort and created some kind of perception within the community. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that the Emyooga programme came to be known, in most of the parts of the country, during the high political period when we were all very busy with politics and things were at their height. In my opinion, this also contributed to a certain perception that was built on by the voters. 

The issue of training gaps was noted in all the reports from the different regions. Most of the trainings were conducted by the Microfinance Support Centre but you are aware that a number of programmes in the country, in the past, have been tackling SACCOs. We are all aware of the high levels of debts amongst SACCOs in the past. 

I would like to recommend that the Minister of Trade and Cooperatives also takes time to reinforce the Microfinance Support Centre in building the capacities of these SACCOs in order for them to know their work. 

We are all aware that the SACCOs are established at constituency level and the associations at the parish level. Therefore, there is need to reinforce the SACCOs at the constituency level. 

On the issue of funding, when you look at this programme, you will realise that it is basically one of those which have been designed with strategies to transform at least 68 per cent of Uganda’s households from subsistence to market-oriented production. 

The Emyooga programme has come with its design at constituency level, which trickles down to the parish level but look at the funding allocated; Shs 30 million at the constituency level. Take a case in point of the boda boda riders under their cooperatives. Another group is that of veterans, as was mentioned in one of the reports from the regions. When you transmit Shs 30 million down to the final person in the community or cooperative society or association, I do not think that it can contribute meaningfully to transforming lives at that level. 

After analysing our reports, maybe in the final stage when all these mix-ups have been cleared by the ministry concerned, I will recommend the need for us, as Parliament, to add more money to this programme for it to be successful and cause the much needed transformation. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We can only add money if the issues affecting the associations are resolved. We also need to strengthen Uganda microfinance regulatory associations plus the SACCOs. We need a law that will have sanctions to that effect. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is, Members are discussing critical issues that the Minister of State for Microfinance should be – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister is here. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Does he know the Emyooga programme properly because it is hon. Kasolo who is actually -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, SACCOs are managed by cooperatives - I will come there.

5.28
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (Independent, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The big problem of Emyooga was about the guidelines. I was lucky that when I was going, somebody told me there was a guideline that the commercial officers had. However, there was also another guideline issued by the Microfinance Support Centre. What people used was what they got from the Microfinance Support Centre. For example, there was a conflict on whether they should charge interest rate of 8 per cent or 12 per cent. The original guideline was talking about 8 per cent. The one of the Microfinance Support Centre was talking about 12 per cent.

There was also an issue about the security. The one of the original guideline was about the members but the new guideline from Microfinance was collateral – security, land and the rest. That means the poor people could not access this money.

There was also an issue about the membership which was made open - that you can be in this and another SACCO. There are so many issues.

The last one was about the lending period. Some people were given four months, others six and there was no grace period yet the original guideline was talking about the grace period.
Therefore, my observation and recommendation is that the minister should come out properly on the guidelines because that is what is disturbing people –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the guidelines must come out clearly on the lending and how the money should be used and on belonging - whether you should belong to one or several associations, the guideline should be clear. The only thing that these people did was to give out the money without giving the guidelines and people thought that was a kasiimo.

5.31
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern with this money is about data disaggregation, especially with regard to women, youth and the elderly. When you talk about skills, I do not think that most of them are in those skills things. 

When you look at the current Parish Model that is coming, it is also generalised yet the other funds were being amalgamated into all those Parish Models and Emyooga. Don’t you think that the women and youth are going to be left out of these programmes?

I wish I could know from the minister how many women are benefiting from this Emyooga vis-à-vis the money that was dispersed for Emyooga countrywide and at different village levels and district levels. Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am rising on procedural matter. I think you mentioned something, which is very important. When we are giving money, there must be some legal framework to manage that money. However, as of now, we can talk until the cows come back home but it is all about money being given - the way some people took advantage of the Prime Minister’s humanitarian approach recently.

Madam Speaker, what we should be zeroing on is bringing a Bill that will regulate the use of this money. Whether you like it or not, this money was political and it has been mismanaged. You can talk about anything but we are going to talk - whether you are in the NRM or in the Opposition, this money was used against you - you probably did not know but you are lucky to have won -(Interjection)- that is a fact. I want to tell you the truth. I am too old to hide anything now. Others will fear to tell you but let me tell you.

That money was actually used for political reasons. It was managed by RDCs. Therefore, we really need a law. The minister should concentrate, not on the response which he has given. I am happy that it was not read. Madam Speaker, I am telling you that (Members rose_) -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is on procedure. Honourable members, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, much as we need the law, I do not want us to just say that money was used for politics. It is not true that the money was used for politics; for me, I was not fought. The money was given to the people but it is the misunderstanding that was there.

5.34
MS CHRISTINE AKELLO (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you Madam Speaker. I just want to talk about the terms and conditions that were given to the beneficiaries upon getting the loans. Most of us go for loans when we do not have money and we know the terms and conditions we always meet when we go for loans. 

However, Emyooga has caused more harm. As I speak, beneficiaries were forced to get loans which they did with some interest. Some people got Shs 7,500 and it is multiplied by three and after that, they are supposed to pay back to the person who gave them and they remained with noting; they got from money lenders. Those who had money just put it but did not give to the beneficiaries. 

Therefore, it has caused more harm than solving the problem. As I stand now, people are scared. They do not have anything. They did not benefit and they are saying we need to speak for them for their safety; they are scared that they will be arrested anytime from now. I beg to submit.

5.36
MR JULIUS TUSIIME (Independent, Rwampara East County, Rwampara): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your wisdom when you decided that we go and monitor this programme. The challenges raised by colleagues notwithstanding, I would like to mention that during the monitoring, we realised that there are successes. 

Some of the successes of Emyooga, especially in Rwampara District, were because of those associations that took on ventures and linked their SACCOS to the skills they were doing. For example, people like taxi operators who bought the omnibuses to keep earning, are doing well. People in produce and those in carpentry are doing well.

It also realised during our monitoring that groups that were meeting regularly were able to strengthen their cohesion and are pooling resources together.

Despite the challenges, including inadequate training and the limited seed capital that was given to them, I would like to say that out there, there are successes and Ugandans are happy that they received this money. We can look at those successes, benchmark and streamline the whole Emyooga programme. However, we should not be quick to hurl many stones. Thank you very much.

5.38
DR ELISA RUTAHIGWA (NRM, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to appreciate the programme and its initiator, His Excellency the President. I also want to appreciate the people of Rukungiri Municipality because they have at least implemented well and they have got success stories to talk about.

However, let me start with Emyooga, as the name of the programme. It is a Runyankore dialect. In fact, the real name of the programme does not match well with the word. We need to get another word for this programme; maybe, we can call it the Presidential Initiative on Wealth and Job Creation (PWJ) so that people from other areas do not have a problem with pronouncing it. 

Madam Speaker, I want to talk about the beneficiaries; basically Ugandans, who are economically active at the age of 18 years and above, but are low-income earners and those in the informal sector. When you look at the identified groups, you wonder whether they fall into that category, for example, the elected leaders. You wonder if they are low-income earners –(Member timed out.) 

5.40
MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Government of Uganda for supporting our people. Why am I doing so? This is because in my constituency, all the groups chosen received their money in their accounts.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank your office for the wise decision that we go and see what is taking place on the ground. We are very happy. When we were on ground, we observed many things, which took place in our constituencies, as the report has captured.

I would like to report that there are some serious local governments, which are trying their best to see that this programme succeeds and is implemented. One of them is Adjumani District Local Government and I would like to thank them.  When we reached the ground, they were able to give us their support; we were able to move with them to all the groups to ascertain what exactly was taking place. I wish that was the move in all the districts, we would achieve all the Government programmes.

However, there are a few challenges we experienced while we were carrying out our activities. One of the challenges is that the district commercial officers do not know what to do as far as Emyooga is concerned. One of their concerns is that they were not facilitated at the beginning of the programme.

Therefore, we would like to implore the minister to give –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order on what?

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, the Member on the Floor has praised the district officials for doing their best on Emyooga and the commercial officers, who are part of the district officials are the ones doing the work. The same Member is saying the commercial officers did not know what they were doing. Is he in order to confuse the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what he is saying is that all the groups got the money. However, the commercial officers did not know what they were doing. Otherwise, they have received the money but the district commercial officer – Now, that brings a problem in repayment because if the commercial officer has recommended any group, you will realise that there will be a problem in loan recovery. 

Why don’t we leave the Member to finish? Maybe, he has something better.

MR MAMAWI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for protecting me –(Interruption)

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, for the record, when we make a blanket judgement of a whole group in society, for example, you say “district commercial officers do not know what they are doing” and it goes on the Hansard, without specifying, which of them you know - It means that we have declared the whole country. I think we need to be specific.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, he is talking about his constituency.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: This is general.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one is your constituency?

MR MAMAWI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for protecting me. The information we are presenting to Parliament is what we got on ground. The commercial officers told us that at first, they did not receive awareness of this programme. They actually requested that they needed to be trained together with the group members. This is why we are saying that at first, they did not know. Otherwise, thank you very much, for protecting me.

Lastly –(Member timed out.)

5.45
MR GERALD NANGOLI (NRM, Elgon North County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the honourable minister that as we discussed last week, my people got money yesterday, for the last eight months. At last, they got the money yesterday –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when was that project started, and how come they got money yesterday, after Members have gone to the constituencies?

MR NANGOLI: They got the money yesterday, at around 11.00 a.m. –(Interruption)

MS NAJJUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Member is saying that SACCOs in his constituency received money yesterday. I would like to inform the House that there are other SACCOs that have money on their accounts, but they have not accessed it because they have not fulfilled the requirements. To date, there are SACCOs with money on their accounts but they have not yet accessed it. Thank you very much.

MR NANGOLI: Mine is different. They had put their savings on the account to a tune of Shs 9.7 million, for the last eight months. However, they had not received seed capital and those are the boda bodas.

Last week, I brought it to the attention of the Microfinance Support Centre and honourable minister. At last, yesterday, they received the money; the seed capital of Shs 30 million on the account. My issue is completely different from yours. You are saying that people have the money on their account but they have not yet accessed it. Mine is that the money was not there until yesterday, at around 11.00 a.m. 

Honourable minister, I would like to thank you very much. However, there are a number of things that we need to work out as Members of Parliament to ensure that people understand this programme better – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we need an explanation as to why an association fails to get money in time? Secondly, why would money go into an association’s account but the signatories cannot access that money? Write down the questions because we need the answers. 

5.48
MS JOVANICE TWINOBUSINGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy that the people of Kiruhura gave me the mandate to represent them in the 11th Parliament. 

My concerns are on three issues; the first one is the guidelines. As we speak, there are no proper guidelines. We have about three sets of guidelines. I would recommend that we come up with one set of guidelines and share it with Members of Parliament so that we can go back, educate our people and help them. 

The other issue is on funds. The money that was given to these SACCOs – For instance, I have a SACCO that has 51 associations. That is the produce dealers’ SACCO in Kiruhura, Nyabushozi Constituency. Imagine 51 associations sharing Shs 30 million. That is very little. I would recommend that such associations or SACCOs, where we have many associations, be given more funds such that people can benefit. 

The third one is the issue of sensitisation. Up to today, people are not aware of how to utilise the funds. I would recommend that we go on and do sensitisation although we have already received the money. Thank you very much. I beg to submit. 

5.50
MR JOHN LEMATIA (NRM, Ayivu Division West, Arua): I have two issues on this programme. The first one is that the initial information on the Emyooga programme remains confusing. 

Initially, they said that 30 people would get Shs 30 million but at the end of the day, when the latest information was released that different SACCO groups would form and get that Shs 30 million, people perceived it wrongly. Up to now, there is still confusion on the ground. 

Second are the guidelines on disbursement of money. You will realise that on the ground, banks have their own guidelines for withdrawing money. Even the RCCs and RDCs have their own guidelines for disbursement. 

It is on record that a group may wish to withdraw Shs 27 million but they will be regulated to withdraw Shs 8 or 10 million. Imagine Shs 8 or 10 million to different SACCO groups. How will it help to transform them? 

I concur with the first person that let the minister give us a proper set of guidelines for this programme. I beg to submit. 

5.51
MR BASHIR LUBEGA (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since it is my maiden submission, I hope the self-appointed prefects of the august House will accord me considerable latitude such that the global population can feel the freshness of the ideas from Mubende Municipality. (Laughter)

I would like to concur with my colleagues that this was a well thought-out programme. I happened to have personally participated before I became a Member of Parliament. I would also like to agree that the implementation of this economic transformation programme was political and haphazard. That is where we have a big problem. We should not be timid to mention that politics came in and obstructed the would-be advantages of a very good programme. 

For example, people accessing money before they even get certificates of registration from the ministry of cooperatives, accessing money before you are legally present - What is that if it is not politics? 

Look at the facilitation of a very big programme like this one –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bashir, let her first talk. I will give you another chance. 

5.54
MS HOPE NAKAZIBWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This programme was well thought out like has been mentioned by my colleagues. It however came with challenges. 

We appreciate the initiative from the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, but we realise that some leaders of the SACCOs intentionally kept the members unaware of what was supposed to be happening in the programme for their own benefit. An example is the commercial officers who did not educate our people or the members of the associations in order for them to benefit. You realise that some associations or SACCOs received the money but the members in the different associations did not realise that the money had come. 

Some SACCOs had lent out more than Shs 16 million in addition to what they had received. We realised that some SACCOs like the political leaders’ SACCOs that received Shs 50 million had only lent out about Shs 3 million yet a SACCO that had received Shs 30 million had lent out Shs 46 million. It was intentional from some of the people that were mandated to lead the programme. I beg to submit.

5.55
MR WILLAM MUSEVENI (Independent, Buwekula South County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I confine my concerns to the 30 per cent saving requirement. This requirement is rendering this programme useless. Imagine a situation where just one person saves 30 per cent and takes all the money then all the members are bound to pay yet they never took that money. We are sitting on a time bomb. Any time, this programme is going to be no more and this is because of this saving system. 

Others have gone to money lenders. These ones lend money at 20 or 30 per cent but because the people want money, they will just sign for it. At the end of the day, when they get the Emyooga funds, they just switch it to the money lenders and then they will not pay back. 

I, therefore, request that the saving of 30 per cent be scrapped from the guidelines. I submit. 

5.56
MR FADIL TWALLA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Emyooga programme was initiated by His Excellency the President to eradicate poverty from this country. It is unfortunate to tell a local person to first save to a tune of Shs 300,000 to access Shs 900,000. Where does the Shs 300,000 go? This means that what is given is actually Shs 600,000. 

My prayer, therefore, is to request that we relax the guidelines on saving first before accessing the money.

In Tingey County in Kapchorwa, where I come from, there are also nine associations that have saved to a tune of three million shillings each. The produce SACCO is given Shs 30 million, of which if one has saved Shs 3 million shillings, it means they are in position to access Shs 3 million. How then will the other ones access the money? It means the Shs 30 million can benefit only three associations.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that they scrap the saving system. Thank you.

5.58
MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the initiative of the Emyooga programme. Despite its challenges, it has performed well in my area. However, let me bring out the challenges that my people are facing.

First, there is a cluster that was left out - those ones involved in brick making. The cluster of produce is so much compressed in that there are many groups in it. 

We realised that we need to create a voluntary board in the constituency to monitor the operations of the Emyooga programme. We realised that there is no mobility for those involved in the exercise. The CDO and the chairpersons of constituency SACCOs have no means of transport, yet they have to move from one group to another. For instance, in Kamuli District, the bank we are using is in Jinja yet there is no provision for a transport facility.

We also realised the challenge of political mobilisation – it is lacking. We had a meeting with the chairpersons and they all claimed that they were not involved in this exercise. So, it is a challenge, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

6.00
MR SULAIMAN HASHIM (NRM, Nebbi Municipality, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. First of all, I thank my colleagues from the different regions for the good reports they have presented on the Emyooga programme. I have a few observations to make on the report.

There is one thing that I got on the ground when we went there for the operation. There is this issue of operational costs, especially to the commercial officers. I think to make the Emyooga programme to really succeed and serve the purpose, the commercial officers should really be considered for operational costs. We cannot put all this money in the grassroots without proper monitoring. 

For instance, in Nebbi District, we received Shs 1,090,000,000 but the monitoring is very poor. People are simply using the money without the commercial officers seriously monitoring it. Their claim is that they do not have operational costs.

For continuation, I add my voice to comment on the amount of money; the Shs 30 million is so small. The minister could even furnish us with information for this financial year today. When are the SACCOs going to receive the money as a top up to the Shs 30 million sent earlier?

Sensitisation is very crucial. The masses are not really sensitised and so, they know very little about the programme. When we went to the ground is when people started understanding what Emyooga is all about and for those who understood, they are now appreciating it.

Therefore, I would also advocate that there should be room for more sensitization for the people to know more about this programme. Thank you.

6.02
MR RICHARD WANDA (NRM, Bungokho County Central, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for this opportunity. I want to go straight to the point, as raised by hon. Enosi Asiimwe and the Woman Member of Parliament for Kiruhura.

Madam Speaker, the Emyooga programme is good. However, there must have been consideration for the beneficiaries, in terms of numbers. The produce dealers in my constituency have 85 associations in one Emyooga. That means their resource envelope is very small.

I want to invite our honourable ministers to always look at the criteria that will enable people to benefit from a service. We are headed for the Parish Development Model and for example, when we say that every parish shall get such and such an amount, I think it is right to also look at the composition or number of the people involved. I know parishes in this country, which are larger than some sub-counties. 

So, I invite the honourable minister to reconsider certain Emyooga groups in terms of their size, such that the amounts provided are more. When we go to the Parish Development Model, it is also my prayer that we look at – (Member timed out.)

6.04
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This programme is a good initiative with good intentions. It only lacks design. All these issues being mentioned here are rotating around its design.

Issues such as why the other existing SACCOs could not, for example, fall into this programme or could fall there should have been handled at the design stage. Madam Speaker, it was supposed to be at the design stage where, for example, it would be established why we should form new groups yet we have existing groups that have actually lived the test of time. 

When you go on ground, you will find that out of a group that has been existing and doing well, some few members now formed another small group for the purpose of Emyooga. This was caused by the poor design at the initial stage.

Through you, Madam Speaker, I think the honourable minister needs to tell us what was wrong with the already existing SACCOs. I do not agree to the fact that we may need a new law because you are aware that some SACCOs have been receiving money from the Microfinance Support Centre.

Rural Financial Services Programme has been remitting funds. So, what is important is simply to redesigning. My prayer is that –(Member timed out.)

6.06
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issues of Emyooga, I am wondering why the programme is under the RDCs’ office, when we have accounting officers. We have the CAOS at district level. At the town council level, we have the town clerks and at the sub-county level, we have the sub-county chiefs.

When we were monitoring the programme, we realised that while the CAOs knew that the Emyooga exist, they did not know much about the money and groups that are benefitting. Some RDCs are partisan. The programme is not moving well because it is coordinated in RDCs’ offices.

My worry is that at the end of it, this programme is going to collapse. No one is making a follow up.

Madam Speaker, I request the honourable minister to capture the issue of integrating the programme into the local government structures. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

6.07
MR DAVID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues to thank His Excellency the President for this programme.

However, as we discuss Emyooga, there is another programme which is coming: the Parish Development Model. It is also like this one. We have not seen any success in this programme of Emyooga.

For example, in my constituency, there are many categories of these people, like the journalists, but we do not have them at the village or parish level. However, they say that this group should be there to benefit from this programme. We do not have ponds; the fishermen are not in the villages. However, there is a leaders’ SACCO for fishermen, for journalists and others. I don’t think there is any progress with this programme. We need to go back and reorganise properly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What hon. Xavier said - at design level, we lost it. Whoever advised the President at design level misguided him. 

Whereas the President had good intentions, the implementation is now the problem. Honourable minister, whether you look at me or not, the truth is that there is a problem that must be resolved. You misled the President and you are still going to mislead him on the Parish Development Model.

You say that Emyooga is doing very well but Emyooga is not doing well at all. (Applause) By the way, for your information, the Government Chief Whip arrested somebody. So, do not even convince him. He is here as a Member of Parliament.

6.10
MS RACHAEL MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugweri): I thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech and I would like to congratulate you on getting this position as Deputy Speaker, and also congratulate all my colleagues on joining Parliament.

On the Emyooga programme, I disagree with some of our friends who say that it is a total failure. In my constituency, there are some which are doing well. Like my colleague said, systemic problems are the ones failing. We need to go back to the drawing table and figure out where the biggest problem is.

In my opinion, the district SACCOS cannot organise the associations at the parish level because you cannot get a tailor from one subcounty to be in the same SACCO with a tailor from another subcounty: they do not know each other.

The only way people can cooperate is that, the association has to be member-owned, member-used and member-managed. Therefore, the fact that people are coming from all over going into a SACCO, the top management are the ones who are taking all the advantages of the money that has come as Emyooga.

I believe, like you have mentioned and guided, that we need to go back to the drawing table and use the cooperative mentality to run the associations. If the money could go directly to the association, we would benefit better than having the district-made SACCOS. I beg to submit. Thank you.

6.12
MS MIDIUS NATUKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to also appreciate Emyooga programme and differ with them because I see some successes.

One Member said that they should scrap off the savings of 30 per cent. I disagree with you because we are here trying to say that our people need to be taught a saving culture. Therefore, in this Emyooga programme, we are trying to teach our people how to save. They must save if they are to invest. Therefore, this is one of the benefits of the Emyooga programme.

The challenge I found in my district is that the women entrepreneurs were left out and up to now they have not yet got anything. Normally, the Government usually considers women at the forefront of every project but in this Emyooga programme, women have been left out.

We see the political leaders were given Shs 50 million and they combined the women entrepreneurs which forms every aspect of Emyooga - women are everywhere – and they get Shs 30 million yet up to this time, the women entrepreneurs in my district have not yet got anything.

Therefore, when you are designing other projects like the parish model, please, consider the women. I thank you. 

6.13
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibaale County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We were excited when the country was told that they were supposed to benefit from a funding to help improve the livelihoods of the people.

However, the way they introduced the programme, we must agree, was not fair. We have experts in the ministries - finance, trade and others - and the entire country is aware that we are not at the same footing. For some of us, it is an open fact that we represent regions that have been declared the poorest regions in the country.

Therefore, for you to bring money and give it at a para pursue and at the same level on that assumption, it means that there was no justice as far as the assistance or the intention to uplift the livelihoods of the people was concerned. 

Madam Speaker, going forward there is a need to revisit and review the modus operandi and the amounts of money that were allocated to the different regions. Some regions, areas and constituencies are bigger. Some SACCOS were already pre-existing and some places did not even have a village saving group.

Therefore, it was very difficult that you assumed that everybody was on the same footing because it became a bonanza in some places, while in other areas, it was misery.

Butebo District, for example -(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the contribution that members are being told to give - what people do is that, they go and get money from money lenders and contribute to the association. That is not saving or building a savings culture.

Now, when they put money in the association, the commercial officer just gives a certificate. On top of the commercial officer, there is no control. Who else checks that there are 30 members in that committee?

I would like to give an example in my constituency where a commercial officer gave out a certificate and there were only eight people in the association. Those people belong to almost ten other associations.

It is a matter of getting Shs 30 million from here and you go to other associations and put it in for you to get more money. At the end of the day, it is the few people who are very “clever” that get the money. We are there drumming that Emyooga has done well, and yet it is not. (Applause)

6.17 
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Emyooga programme arose after the President had a countrywide tour and realised that people needed capital in order to engage in different businesses. Unfortunately, the design of the entire programme has proven to be too complex for the people that are supposed to benefit from this money. 

I met the various groups and what was shocking is that the Microfinance Support Centre dictated the bank, where the Emyooga groups must bank their money; all the groups were in DFCU Bank. What was surprising is that when I called them to inform them that their money was in the DFCU Bank, they had no idea yet the money had been banked way back in April.  Imagine I was meeting them –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sarah, just hold on a minute. Do we have shares in DFCU Bank, as a country? Why wouldn’t you use Post Bank or Centenary Rural Development Bank Ltd, which is the people’s bank? (Applause)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I informed these groups that from the list the CAO had given me, they had received money but they had no knowledge of ever opening an account in DFCU Bank. When I told them to go, they went but they were told they could not access the money until they get a phone call from the commercial office. 

That is one anomaly. You cannot force me to bank with a specific bank. First of all, the banks have different bank charges. This is why some people go to Post Bank, Centenary bank and others. 

The other issue was on the certificates. As much as the groups had fulfilled whatever was required, it took them forever to get certificates from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives that was supposed to issue these certificates. This was another challenge.

The other bigger problem was that when I met these groups, one of the SACCOs told me, “While you are looking at Shs 30 million, there are other SACCOs behind.” At the end of the day, if one group has 600 members and each of the members was to borrow, they would get Shs 50,000. Can you do business with Shs 50,000? Yes, you can, if you want to do something small but for those who are thinking big, this money is not going to be of any use.

Madam Speaker, there is another challenge. We have a group of musicians who are still in a lockdown –(Interjection) – Please, I have limited time. These people have no business; they are still in a lockdown. The bars are closed. This was also another concern. They asked me to tell the President to open up so that they could use this money properly. Otherwise, they will be arrested tomorrow. You are borrowing money to use and you are being told to save yet your businesses are closed. This is another challenge. 

I would like to end by stating that the money has already gone out. I have just been calling one of the groups and they said they are just going to access the money. The Microfinance Support Centre put money in these people’s accounts in April. It was only when you sent us, Madam Speaker, to go back to the constituencies that these people fidgeted to organise training programmes. Who was supposed to be a beneficiary? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, don’t you see that I helped you? 

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I thank you but I would like to also state that we had issues with the Youth Livelihood Programme. At the end of the day, Members of Parliament will be called to go and support these people when they are arrested tomorrow. 

Madam Speaker, whatever has been released should remain there and we monitor it. I would like to urge Members that we halt further release until we have streamlined this whole Emyooga thing. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we should agree in this House that Government programmes should not be rolled out before we streamline the processes, know how Emyooga has performed and only when Members are involved. Actually, if the next programme fails, the blame should be on Members because you are supposed to be involved in monitoring all the Government programmes. 

6.23
MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): I would like to thank the President for this initiative. I would like to also agree with my colleagues who have talked about the failure in design. I think the biggest problem is design. Emyooga failed before it left Kampala. 

As I talk, the entire Sebei region still has money in the account. T’oo County has money in the account amounting to Shs 560 million. In Kween County, it is the same thing and the same applies to Soi and Penge Counties. I think these ones just use little money. Emyooga failed in design and I would like to entirely blame the people who designed it. 

I would like to thank God that we are all here, as Members of Parliament. When it comes to the issue of fighting poverty, the Government and the Opposition should come together. Good enough our Government Chief Whip is a very good businessman. We are going to redesign this thing so that it fits the interests of our people. 

I propose that in my constituency, we get the Shs 560 million in the account, form one SACCO for the whole constituency and then the associations come and borrow money directly from the SACCO so that management costs are less –(Member timed out.)

6.25
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Madam Speaker, the Karamoja report was not laid. My chairman is still in Karamoja running after criminals who are killing people and stealing cows. I hope the report will be laid on the Table next week, if you allow. 

From my findings, the groups had not yet received any money by the time of our visit. A number of groups were formed for purposes of accessing the money but they had never existed. We had groups of fishermen without fish and journalists without a radio station or a newsroom outlet where they are practising journalism yet, many of the groups are targeting to receive the money. 

The other finding is that people do not expect this to be a loan; they think it is a Government grant. When I told them that they would be paying back this loan, they refused to believe. They do not expect the Government to be a lender of money. That is where the biggest problem is. 

Madam Speaker, there are things that have forced the Government to be a lender. It is not supposed to be our job, as the Government, to be a lender but because we have failed to monitor the institutions that are supposed to regulate the Microfinance Support Centre - Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority is supposed to regulate the money lenders - we have just left them on the loose. They can charge anything they want to our citizens. Many Ugandans are enslaved because that area is not being regulated. 

When Bank of Uganda is charging nine per cent interest, they charge 40 per cent and we are not even interested in solving that. We are going –(Member timed out.) 

6.27
MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A good Government programme with implementation gaps. Even the Local Government leaders were not given adequate time to prepare and organise the beneficiaries.

There is need to engage the Microfinance Support Centre, which contributed to the failure by the districts. One of the issues that happened was that they even delayed to give saving books. It took a long time before the associations could get the saving books; it is really a big challenge.

I thank my commercial officers because they tried. As I speak, they have savings of up to Shs 970 million but the prayer of the beneficiaries is that Government helps them to have the repayment rescheduled because of the effects of drought and the lockdown -  they were not able to utilise the money that was given to them. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of theory and paperwork in offices is going to make us fail to achieve the objectives of Government in terms of fighting poverty. (Interjection) I do not need any information now. (Laughter) Therefore, it is important that something is done in terms of promoting fieldwork. That is when we shall be able to discover more. 

When I compare Emyooga with the Parish Development Model; we have not yet started. However, if you go on the ground right now, I do not think there is anybody who has not heard about the Parish Development Model. Meaning that a lot should be spoken first about the Government programme before implementation is –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, it is only very important that I give my MP information. I am the MP for Kumi Municipality but she is the woman representative for the district; that is why it is very important that I give information. 

We discovered that in Kumi, commercial officers were not facilitated at all; they were struggling. How would they do the work without facilitation, this was a major concern. That is the information I wanted to give.

6.30
MR OJARA MAPENDUZI (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. When I interacted with the Town Clerk of Gulu City, the answer he gave me was that he could not talk about Emyooga; they are not involved and therefore, nobody can hold him accountable. The rest of the technical people we interacted with said there is no way they could get involved because there is no guideline that empowers them to get involved.

I am tempted to think that there is a group of Ugandans who deliberately do things to either defraud or fail well-intended programmes; that is what I am tempted to think.

Madam Speaker, I keep on asking myself why money would arrive in January and up to September, money is lying redundant on the account. Is it an attempt to generate money out of it through fixed depositing? I also keep asking myself; why would a group struggle for over six months to get a certificate? Is there some level of connivance? Are there people who are planning to delay the processes so they can find ways of defrauding the system? These things keep on disturbing us.

Therefore, it is quite absurd, that every time - there is a Member who said there is another programme - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you see for us to rule out what you are suspecting, we will request for an audit on Emyooga. We will request for an audit before we roll it out -

6.32
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (Independent, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to participate in the discussion on Emyooga. I also appreciate you for that wise decision you took to send us to the ground. Like other Members have reported and said, things do not seem to be working out as Government would have expected. When you go on the ground like in Namayingo, some groups have not yet received the money. Like the Member has said, for nine months; there must be a problem.

I heard you saying that Emyooga money is about - let me give you information. As I speak, in Namayingo, money for the Parish Development Model has already reached. I was with the Chief Administrative Office last week and she told me the money is there. Therefore, we may be talking about Emyooga when the Parish Development Model money has already reached the district.

Therefore, we are behaving like the Bourbon Monarchs who learnt nothing and forgot nothing -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, the money that has been sent to the constituencies is for recruitment of parish chiefs. The real disbursement of Parish Development Model money has not yet gone. However, what we would also require out of them is not to put the money at the Microfinance Support Centre. The money should be managed by the CAO so that he/she is able to monitor. Now for us we want the money to be at the headquarters so that we get some fixed deposit interest.

MS MAKHOHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe the CAO misinformed me but the truth of the matter is that she told me the money is already there and they are only waiting to recruit a few parish chiefs before disbursement of the money can be kick-started.

Therefore, I want to pray that before the money is released, let the leaders also be involved. People are ignorant of what is happening and now we, who, are leaders also have no information. It is like we are ending up failing on many of these programmes. 

I urge Government that even if we have good intentions of helping our people out of poverty, let us put things right so that at least our people can benefit or else we shall end up having programmes like Entandikwa, which failed and the Youth Livelihood Programme which is not functioning well, simply because we are not organised. Let us put our house in order so that our people can benefit. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.35
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (Independent, Chua East County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not want to repeat what other people have said. However, I want to tell the House what I got on the ground. The money was sent to the district account by December 2020. It was ring-fenced -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to make a correction; the money has never been sent to the district account.

MS LAMWAKA: I think so but it was ring-fenced. In my district –(Interruption)

MS CHRISTINE APOLOT: The money was under the control of the Microfinance Support Centre and they are the ones who were sending money directly to the groups. The money did not pass through the district accounts.

MS LAMWAKA: Thank you. However, what I am saying is that people were informed; why did my people in the district get over Shs 150 million by 2020? Where did they get the money from?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the district officials, including the commercial officers and CAOs, were not informed. There were a lot of irregularities from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. When I talked to the beneficiaries, they told me that they were asked to remit 30 per cent. That meant that if one was borrowing Shs 100,000 or Shs 30 million, they had to first remit 30 per cent of the Shs 30 million; of which, every month one was to pay eight per cent. That means –(Member timed out.)

6.37
MR SAUDA KAUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you because I thought I had missed out on this opportunity. I have not yet felt this microphone in the Chambers. 

Anyhow, I would like to bring out one critical point for the ministers to take note of. At least, it should be part of the guidelines for the team that is going to handle this. 

The point is that they forgot to include the insurance policy. For example, if a member who has subscribed and received the money, passes on, the burden is shifted to the other members of the association. I think that the honourable minister should take that as an important point. For all Government programmes –(Interruption) 

MR MAPENDUZI: Madam Speaker, just to link to what she has just said, in Gulu, we detected that the commercial officer had allowed some individual boda boda rider to get money. The gentleman has disappeared. We asked the police to recover the money, they have also failed. 

There are people who are running way and others are crossing – Member timed out.)

6.38
MS LUCY AKELLO: (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like, in a special way, to thank you, for this initiative. I would implore the minister to listen very carefully to the information being given, to improve the programme. 

The Chinese have a saying, which says that it is good to teach someone how to fish rather than giving them the fish. That is a very beautiful saying. What I expected, before the monies were disbursed to these various clusters, is the fact that they should have been trained, sensitised and skilled to help them use the money well. However, from what we are seeing, you gave these groups fish and they have eaten the fish and forgotten about the skills; even the bones have been eaten.

I would like to implore the minister that as we work on redesigning the programme, like hon. Xavier Kyooma put it rightly, let us put some of these things into consideration. The question I also kept asking myself and, which was brought out very clearly by my brother hon. Xavier Kyooma, is why did we leave out some of these experienced existing SACCOs? I also asked myself why the clusters? Is it the fishermen, boda boda –(Member timed out.)  

6.41
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One thing is about the opening of those offices. Right now, those who got the money have all lost it. These associations were running without offices. Why?

When they borrow this money, it is supposed to take only four months. Why? Four months is too short. It should at least be one or two years. RDC’s office to be used as an implementer as well as monitor is something that should be improved.

The Microfinance Support Centre needs to do a little better. I want to also say that the 30 per cent, which the group has to first deposit before getting the money is too much on the people. People with disabilities cannot afford this money. I remember one time when the Youth Venture Fund was given to the banks and the youth could not access it, the strategy was changed. 

Can we define the people who are going through what we are discussing here - especially the weaknesses more than the strength? Do not focus on the achievements. This fund is for good intentions but it is also too little; Shs 500 million is too small for 400 associations. Please let the money be added, especially for the associations. Do not force people –(Member timed out.)   

6.43
MR DAVID KALWANGA (NUP, Busujju County, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this golden opportunity, to express my views over the Emyooga fund. We should act like people that have been in Uganda not like people from Heaven. Whatever happened on the Emyooga programme was centred somewhere and it is high time, we talked about it.

I am now looking at Busujju constituency. It was not about the Emyooga money as you are seeing it; it was typical politics. (Text expunged.)

MR KALWANGA: Madam Speaker, where the gesture of everything came from - we had three guidelines coming from different directions. State House had its own guidelines; the minister had his guidelines; and even the support centre –(Member timed out.)   

6.45
MR FRED SSIMBWA (NUP, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The first thing, and which I found, is that SACCO formations by associations were done in panic because they wanted to get the money.

Secondly, the eight per cent interest was not talked about during the training, thus communities were unaware of it. I found some Members here talking about five and others 12, but in my constituency, there was eight per cent interest, but which is very high for my community. 

The loan payment of six months was also not availed to people by the commercial officers. The commercial officers misled the people of Nakifuma. The money was given to associations to benefit groups but instead, individuals have benefitted from it because of the 30 per cent that is supposed to be deposited first –(Member timed out.) 

6.47
MR FRANCIS KATABAAZI (NUP, Kalungu East County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, finally. (Laughter)

About Emyooga, this is a cooperative kind of thing and the principle of cooperation is unity. I think that was the point behind it. 

If you want to move ahead, history should guide you. We have had other programmes like Entandikwa, Operation Wealth Creation, Boona Bagagawale – I think they might formulate another one in Ateso or Lugisu -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why Ateso? (Laughter)

MR KATABAAZI: Or Samia. I think it is just changing the name but it is the same thing. It is a thing, which is aimed at making people rich but I do not think people have become rich. 

One of the things I discovered in Kalungu East is that all these people were not from the same area and they did not know each other. Therefore, appraisal was very hard. 

For those who have done some microfinance and banking, if you want to lend to someone, you have to do credit appraisal to find out if the borrower is fit. Some people might borrow for reasons which do not reproduce money and at the end of the day, they will not be able to pay. 

Many people borrowed thinking it was a grant at first instead of – (Member timed out.)

6.49
MS TEDDY NAMBOOZE (NUP, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would, first of all, like to appreciate the programme. However, we should focus on SACCOS that were already in existence for at least two to five years. This is because I believe that they would have gained experience in managing funds. 

Secondly, monitoring teams or technical teams, that is district commercial officers, should be facilitated well because they are very close to the beneficiaries and can easily offer guidance to these SACCOS before they mess up. 

This is how the intentions of upcoming programmes like the Parish Development Model shall be realised. Thank you. 

6.51
MS SUSAN MUGABI (NUP, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

I am wondering at the way the Government is trying to fool us around that they are removing people from poverty – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Susan, no Government is fooling anybody around. You are actually fooling yourselves. (Laughter)

MS MUGABI: Madam Speaker, I withdraw what I said. The way the Government is trying to dodge – actually, the way this programme was phrased; the RDCs were saying one thing, the commercial officers saying another and the chiefs also another. 

In Buvuma District, there is the fishing SAACO, which has over 150 associations with each association having 30 members. They were asked to contribute Shs 20,000 each. That is almost Shs 90 million. The people in these associations cannot access that money to do their own businesses. They are being told that money is for the SACCO. 

The Government should provide money to the associations not SACCOS because our people cannot afford. 

6.52
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think there was no clarity on who should get this money. You find head teachers of Government primary schools who can go to commercial banks and use their salaries to get money registered as produce dealers and they are getting money yet this money is meant for those people who do not have any other alternative; who do not have collateral security. 

However, people with salaries like district staff members – In Buhweju, a hilly area, you find “fishermen”. When you try to find out who these people are, they are district staff members who already have government salaries. They can go to banks and access money but they also come for this. There was no clarity and money ended up going to people who should not have received it. 

Secondly, generalisation is also a problem. Why should you say, “fishermen”? That should be for the fishing areas and then in Buhweju, you can talk about nursery bed operators and distillers so that it is from the districts that you get the Emyooga groups and SACCOS. 

When you generalise and say “fishermen”, honourable minister, where will you get fishermen in Buhweju? They will tell you we eat fish so, we registered but when you eat fish, you do not become a fisherman. 

There was a challenge of community development officers (CDOs) who came up with ghost groups. Together with hon. Koyekyenga, in Buhweju, we arrested three. I do not know where these cases will end. I hope the minister will take this up so that those CDOs who are extorting money from the local poor –(Member timed out.)

6.54
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Key on this issue, which I think the minister should take seriously, is about using Microfinance Support Centre to run the programme. It should be noted that Microfinance Support Centre is not in all the regions of Uganda. 

I, therefore, recommend that we use the bank that the Government has shares in. A case in point is Post Bank, which is in almost all the regions in Uganda. 

Secondly, I would like to bring to your attention that in a situation where commercial officers realised that a certain category did not have enough number of people that were required by the guidelines, they were adding their own names and ghost names. This is important. For example, some constituencies do not have performing artists. So, there were ghost people that were recruited by commercial officers. 

Thirdly, the criteria of deciding the amount that should be given to the different SACCOS should be the number of associations under the SACCOS. You cannot give the same amount to the boda boda riders and journalists and the performing artists when in certain areas, there are only five people. That criterion should be worked out very well. Thank you.

6.56
MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I can summarise the Emyooga programme in Kole North; it was a vehicle that was designed well in shape but unfortunately, they put the engine of a motorcycle and the tyres of a bicycle and it failed to take off. 

There are two things that I want to emphasise. The first is on the cash transactions and this is where the biggest challenge is. From the Microfinance Support Centre, there were cash transactions to the SACCOs and from the SACCOs to the parish associations; there were cash transactions not cashless ones. As a result of that, somebody who had never held a million shillings in his hands went to the bank and withdrew Shs 41 million. We saw more than 10 cases of this. We need to ensure there are cashless transactions. The associations said they preferred opening their own bank accounts to receive money.

Lastly, on the issue of extortion; we saw extortion with impunity at registration and at the entry point of disbursement itself, in my constituency.

Madam Speaker, one of the biggest challenges we noticed is that when we arrested the District Commercial Officers and tried to charge them with extortion, we realised that the section in the Penal Code on extortion was repealed years ago. The provisions in the Anti-Corruption Act provide that you must have the money in cash for you to charge them for anything to do with solicitation.

So, I appeal to this House to amend our laws to ensure that we can be able to prosecute this category because they are doing it with impunity. We arrested them but in 48 hours, they were released. They are moving within the community and they are saying there is nothing that can be done to them. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you said they are moving with impunity, I saw the minister clapping. I am surprised you are condoning that kind of act. (Laughter)

6.58
MR DAVID SSERUKENYA (NUP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very painful that the Emyooga officials never involved stakeholders. For example, in Bunamwaya, we do not have a lake but we have fishermen on the module, which is very bad. They left out people who could benefit from this money, for example, the private school teachers.

Madam Speaker, allow me to bring to your attention that private school teachers were left out yet they have been hit badly by the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were they in the category that was being given?

MR SSERUKENYA: No, they are not anywhere.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kasolo, are they in the category?

MR SSERUKENYA: No. They were left out. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, that is the proposal you need to bring next time.

MR SSERUKENYA: I would like to give more information that in the first lockdown, the President gave a grant but private school teachers never accessed this money because the ministry did not have their data.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the Emyooga money?

MR SSERUKENYA: No, it is the first grant, which was made by the President.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are discussing Emyooga; we are not discussing the teachers’ money.

MR SSERUKENYA: So, my prayer is that the private school teachers be considered and put in the programme. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what takes you to what hon. Xavier Kyooma was talking about.

7.00
MR ALOYSIUS MUKASA (NUP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would say that one of the objects of that money was to act as a catalyst to boost people of specific skills and professions. 

I visited and scrutinised most of the groups. You would see tailors masquerading as carpenters. That disadvantaged most people in the specific groups. So, the object of money was failed by lack of scrutiny in registering members of those specific SACCOs. Therefore, I urge the honourable minister that next time, when designing such a good objective mission, put some of the key issues into consideration. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is one thing that the honourable minister needs to know. This is your docket, hon. Kasolo. The person who has messed up the project is not you; it is the people who are implementing it. Since these people are mismanaging this project, after this debate, we want you to take action. We want you to make recommendations on what should be done to these people because they are making you fail to work. 

Otherwise, it is not you who has failed; it is the people down there. I do not expect you to move from one constituency to another on a daily basis to monitor. This is why we are saying this money should be decentralised such that we hold accounting officers of every district accountable. (Applause)

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister was on Television saying that mafias had hijacked this Emyooga programme. So, he needs to appreciate what you are saying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not hear it. (Laughter)

7.02
DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also second the idea that we give the honourable minister the privilege to come up with a list of members who should be censored because to our knowledge, this project has not gone well.

The minister himself and those members would include on the list a designed boat yet the boat had holes; they were hidden. They put the boat on the water to float and the boat sank. 

Madam Speaker, this money is an International Monetary Fund (IMF) loan with zero interest. Giving it out to these groups without anybody responsible to ensure that it is collected means that we are driving this country badly. 

Secondly, I want the Government to appreciate the difference between –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not driving the country badly. Our people are messing it up; it is our people in our constituencies not the country.

DR BATUWA: Much obliged. Madam Speaker, I want the Government to appreciate the difference between equity and equality. Whereas equality requires you to give equal resources and opportunities, equity requires you to acknowledge that certain areas are challenged. The islands are hard-to-reach. 

When opening up working space in a city, you pay high rent. Why do you give us the same resources? The same amount of money you are sending to the districts is the same amount of money you are sending to cities yet you came up with a devolution policy. Up to now, we have failed to understand why you established cities. Madam Speaker, this should be handled well. 

Lastly, there is a pass book, which does not track savings –(Member timed out.)

7.04
MS MANJERI KYEBAKUTIKA (NUP, Woman Representative, Jinja City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Emyooga project is a wonderful programme. However, the challenge is that this programme was launched and introduced, prior or towards the campaigns of 2021. I am reporting live from Jinja City. This is what happened. (Laughter) 

Members were selected based on the party structures of the National Resistance Movement. (Applause) Yes, this is what was happening in Jinja City. Before other members were registered, they were asked to mention their political parties. 

My humble request, Madam Speaker, is that we should restructure the structures that were used in selecting members who were to benefit from Emyooga. Actually, since the first disbursement was for NRM cadres, we should introduce another disbursement for all categories of people so that all Ugandans benefit, regardless of their political parties. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How do you determine that this one is an NRM cadre?

MS KYEBAKUTIKA: Yes, the people who were selecting people were asking them whether they belong to the National Resistance – (Member timed out.)

7.06
MS ANNA ADEKE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the Shadow Minister for Cooperatives and Microfinance, I have a statement here moved under Rule 25(2)(l) of the Rules of Procedure which I beg to lay on the Table for the record. I beg to lay this report.

Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about the Emyooga programme and I would like to make general observations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What were you laying on the Table?

MS OPENDI: Can she just state the title of the report that she is laying on the Table?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What are you laying on the Table?

MS ADEKE: A statement by the Shadow Minister for Cooperatives and Microfinance on the Emyooga programme moved under Rule 25(2)(l) of our Rules of Procedure. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I would like to make general observations. The issue of how politicised the programme has been are not made from this side of the House in order to spite the Government. It is because it is honestly what we found on the ground.

What informs that view is:

    1. The timing of the programme and its implementation. It was done close to the general election cycle. People were not adequately trained and informed about the programme; neither were clear guidelines given. 

The mind-set that people had when they were receiving the money is that it was a grant because elections were approaching. Our victory needed to be secured by a certain candidate who was in charge of the Government.

Therefore, it is not that we would like to spite the Government but the truth is that it was politically given. Resident district commissioners are presidential appointees; they are not civil servants who are recruited through the Ministry of Public Service. They are presidential appointees and the President has a political party.

Madam Speaker, when we say that it is political, it is because of those nascent but very influential factors. You cannot give an RDC who has no knowledge or experience about managing cooperatives to handle such a programme and head a district taskforce. 

An honourable member here, spoke about the history of cooperatives which I would like us to look back to if we are to revive cooperatives. There are fast-growing economies worldwide with first-class economies like China and Canada and they have a grass-root economy composed of cooperatives. If we want to reach there, then we must also borrow examples from how they grew their cooperatives.

Number one, what happened to the cooperative banks? We are blaming the Microfinance Support Centre for sending money to commercial banks. We should not even be dealing with commercial banks; it should be cooperative banks in charge. They know how to handle cooperators. They are well-informed and have studied and have the requisite skills to handle cooperators.

I have heard members speaking about education and training. In the early 1960s, we had cooperative colleges; there was Kigumba Cooperative College in Kiryandongo. What happened to it? Part of its land was given to the Uganda Petroleum Institute. This is where we would be training. 

The minister has given us figures that 2,000 people trained, but for a population of 41 million-plus and you have 2,000 people trained? If we needed to have people who are skilled then we would invest in cooperative education; Kigumba would now be a university.

President Yoweri Museveni was a lecturer in Moshi; it was a cooperative college in Tanzania but it is now a university. SACCOs in Kenya own buildings and have vehicles; they are wealthy because they have invested in training.

Our few cooperative colleges in Tororo and Kigumba, have had their land sold and are therefore stagnant. People undertake cooperative education up to PhD level. We used to have cooperative officers in every district and they had assistants in every subcounty. 

Honourable members, you wouldn’t be here dealing with political appointees - (Applause) - you would be dealing with professionals who have the adequate knowledge and skill on how to train our grass-root people about good cooperative building.

Madam Speaker, I bet you all did not know that previously, the department of cooperatives at the ministry was more fully-fledged than it is. In the 1990s, it became a small department with only three people at the ministry. Honestly, we have not invested in it -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Adeke, can you summarise?

MS ADEKE: Madam Speaker, I am doing well for this House because I am giving you good information. Nonetheless, I appreciate the time you have given me. I would like to make a case for legislative reform - legislative reform in regard to the management of SACCOs. The good thing is, I have tabled my report; so thank you for the time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will expect from you legislative reform. Honourable minister of Emyooga, Sir.

7.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much and I thank the honourable colleagues. I take note of their observations and recommendations.

However, I wish to highlight some of the issues raised. Allow me to start with the genesis of this programme - how it came about. The decision on who would benefit - the 18 categories - was made by the Cabinet. The decision on who should chair the district taskforce was also discussed and resolved by Cabinet. Therefore, for many of these issues, the guidelines were approved by the Cabinet.
 
However, Madam Speaker, some of the concerns of the honourable members, I take note of. Going forward, I would like you to give me time and we work together because I cannot know what is happening in your constituencies. It is you, the Members of Parliament, who should know what is happening in your constituencies then we sit - 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request for your indulgence that going forward, you allow me to closely work with the regional caucuses quite often so that we can see how we can solve some of these challenges and how we can achieve the objectives of Emyooga.

First of all, honourable colleagues, this programme targeted the 18 categories and most of them are into business; the boda boda, taxi operators to mention but a few. Therefore, we are trying to encourage the culture, concept or principle of saving.

Honourable colleagues, I thought that I deserved credit because –(Interjection)- give me time. I will give you time to ask for clarification.

In one sub-region, for instance, the Kigezi Subregion, we have received reports that members have mobilised savings worth Shs 1 billion. This programme has been here for one and a half years. I know there are some challenges but we should not forget the fact that there are also some achievements. Let us capitalise on those achievements to see how to move forward and how we can address the challenges. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of 35 per cent saving requirement – With the SACCO methodology, members are not supposed to mortgage or present security for them to get the loan. Therefore, what qualifies a member and what proves the capability of a member to pay back are the savings. That is the reality. 

Honourable colleagues, here in the basement, we have our Parliamentary SACCO for Members of Parliament and employees. If you do not save with it and you go there to ask for a loan – when they deny you that loan – you do not go to the Speaker to report them because you have not saved with them.  We must, therefore, encourage our people to embrace the saving culture – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kasolo, the members agree that we must instil the saving culture in people. However, the people who are getting the money are abusing it. They go and borrow the money from a money lender, deposit it in the association, get the loan, use the same loan to go and put it in another association. That is why the monitoring and evaluation is very important. 

MR KASOLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Continuous mind-set change training is also very important. We trained them to embrace the saving culture but we never told them to go and get money from a money lender in order for them to do – We trained them to save. We now need to go back and continue with mind-set change meetings so that people can appreciate and embrace the saving culture. 

Honourable colleagues, you talked about the commercial officers that dictate the terms by which these SACCOs are supposed to be managed. We should appreciate that the commercial officer is charged with the responsibility of helping in the registration of a SACCO in the first year. 

The Ministry of Trade issues a temporary certificate, which expires after a year. Within that period, a commercial officer is supposed to nurture, supervise and follow-up how a SACCO is running. I must – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, who does the commercial officer report to? 

MR KASOLO: The commercial officer is supervised by the chief administrative officer. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not correct. We are giving you this information and it is not good for you to -

MR KASOLO: If that is not what is being done then we are going to rectify it as well.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not what is being done. The CAOs have nothing to do with Emyooga. If I were the two ministers, I would appreciate the information being given. Minister, can you summarise and finish? 

MR KASOLO: About the money that is still stuck in the accounts, honourable colleagues, we trained the SACCO beneficiaries, only that the training was limited because of COVID-19 restrictions – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us wait for the minister to conclude. It is on our record and reports that the training was not sufficient. In some areas, training did not even take place. 

MR KASOLO: I admit but we were restricted by COVID-19. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you conclude?

MR KASOLO: Yes, I am concluding, Madam Speaker. I was talking about the money stuck in the accounts. The signatories on those accounts are the leaders of those SACCOs elected by the members themselves; they were not appointed by Government or the Microfinance Support Centre. The money is there and the leaders elected by Emyooga SACCOs are the signatories and so, they are supposed to supervise and follow-up what is happening. 

On whether this project was political or not, the answer is no. If it were to be for politics, we would have allowed people to have access to the money without any conditions but as you know, we regulated it to the extent that in order for someone to have access to this money, they had to save. This was supposed to help them develop a sense of ownership. 
The reason as to why the past programmes probably failed is because there was no sense of ownership or contribution but this programme – I tell you, honourable colleagues, give me the benefit of doubt and after some time, we will all appreciate it. 

Honourable colleagues, I appreciate all your concerns. I request the Speaker to always allow me have interactions with Members of Parliament in their respective regional caucuses so that we can move as – Because this programme was originated in Cabinet, I am going to take all the recommendations of Parliament. Then, I will work out a Cabinet paper and go and present it to Cabinet. Thereafter, I will ask the Speaker to give me time to come and report to Parliament on how far we shall have modified the programme; the implementation and guidelines. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, first of all, as a House, we will want you to give us a monthly report on the progress of the Emyooga programme. From the various reports we have received, the recommendations are good and should be adopted as standard practice for this and other similar Government programmes that will follow.

Some of the recommendations that we really need to adopt in this is that, the Government needs to develop guidelines on implementation of programmes with effective controls prior to disbursement of funds.

Guidelines for eligibility and operations of the Emyooga programme and other similar programmes should be standardised and disseminated countrywide. These guidelines should be inclusive.

There should be fairness in these guidelines, equity in determining the qualification for the beneficiaries, guiding principles for the disbursements, management and accountability of these funds. This will ensure that the various segments of the population, namely, the women - we have been complaining that women are left out - the youth, people with disabilities, widows and vulnerable groups - are catered for in these kinds of programmes. Therefore, the minister must put that in his report.

There should be a bottom-top approach in determining the needs of the people in an area - you do not just go and give people a project and say, “Here is a project.” If you are talking about boda bodas, maybe they need physical boda bodas. So, honourable minister, next time, you need a bottom-top approach.

There should be serious education of both beneficiaries and the implementers of these programmes. The programme is failing because there is no information; they were not educated on what to do. Therefore, they need to appreciate what the programme is and how it should be run.

In terms of consumer protection in microfinance, it is imperative that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development devises modalities for protecting the beneficiary groups and the members from abuse, extortion, misinformation, and manipulation of others. You have heard in some areas that there was extortion. Therefore, you need to have that consumer protection. Such consumer protection modalities should address the level of indebtedness of the group, fair and respectful treatment of the groups, privacy of the data and the mechanism of dispute resolution in case there is a dispute in a particular group.

Citizens should be empowered to hold the implementers of this programme accountable. I must really thank hon. Tayebwa, not as a minister but as hon. Tayebwa: he was able to arrest a person who was misusing this money. Now, the issue is, when you arrest today, what happens tomorrow? The person is released because there are no laws in place that help us to hold these people accountable. 

Funds for such projects should be decentralised and managed by the CAO as opposed to being released from the Microfinance Support Centre, at the headquarters. That will help in the monitoring and evaluation of this money because the commercial officers are directly under the CAOs of every district.

The structures on ground should not involve politicians but technical persons who can be held liable properly for mismanagement of funds.

In terms of legislative oversight of Emyooga and other micro-credit interventions, relevant parliamentary committees of finance and trade should tailor their work plan to accommodate the oversight over Emyooga and other micro-credit interventions that the Government is making to our people.

The minister in charge of microfinance should table annual reports on the performance of the Government programmes to help the Members of Parliament in their oversight role.

Regarding the involvement of local leaders in the monitoring of the programme, the Government should devise mechanism for the institutionalisation of the involvement of local leaders, including Members of Parliament and district officials, in the routine monitoring and implementation, strengthening and giving us feedback on what is happening with these programmes.

Funds for such important Government programmes should be disbursed through an EFT, not backdoors as we are doing - that it must be a particular bank. We need a clear system of how this money goes. When you disburse through an EFT, then you know that it is easy for you to do an audit trail of how the money came in and how it went out.

There should be a forensic audit on the Microfinance Support Centre and the districts to establish whether the funds were put to their desired use. 

All those found culpable of abuse or misappropriation of these funds must be held liable for their acts. You know we have anticorruption units in Uganda.

In the current project, there should be a post-implementation audit to assess the impact of the funds disbursed and determine whether the objectives were met. We talked about the design, so, we need a post-implementation audit on the design to see whether what we wanted to achieve has been achieved and whether, if we continue the same way we are doing, we will get what we want.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should initiate relevant amendments to the existing microfinance legislation to strengthen the regulation of the sector through further empowering Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority. As hon. Anna said, as the shadow minister, we need regulation on this.

Honourable members, you have heard everything about Emyooga. How I pray that before you rush into the Parish Model, you first resolve the existing problems. (Applause) There are real problems. We cannot afford to lose taxpayers’ money year in, year out on the same yet it is going to be misused.

Having heard that, Members, I now put the question that the reports as presented by various regions and the recommendations be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Reports adopted.

7.35
MS BETTY AOL: (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, we have an issue of very urgent importance about students of Gulu College of Health Sciences (Gulu Clinical Officers’ Training School), who are on the streets. I thought you were leaving. We have been waiting for that and it is an emergency. I am wondering if we cannot pronounce ourselves on that, especially by the Minister of Education. If these students go home and miss their upcoming exams, we should say it here. If we care for them, can we hear from the minister? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Aol, this was supposed to be a response by the minister. The minister came to me and said that the team were on their way to Gulu on the same issue. Hon. Thomas Tayebwa, is that the correct position? Go on the microphone.

7.36
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): That is the right position, Madam Speaker. A team from the Ministry of Education and Sports is on the way to Gulu – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Headed by Dr Muyingo himself. Can I agree with the Gulu team to have a meeting first thing tomorrow at 9.00 a.m. If it means going to Gulu, we shall go –(Applause)- Please, let us have a meeting in my office over that issue so that we have it resolved. There are documents that are supposed to be presented by – 

7.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We presented a loan to this House on Uganda Secondary Education Expansion Project and –(Interruption)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I have not heard the loan that is about to be presented read on the Order Paper yet the minister has stood up to present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The loan is not being presented now; it was presented before but we asked them to provide us with some information. Those are the documents we asked the ministry to come with.

MR KASOLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the required documents including: 

    1. The National Planning Authority approval letter and socio-economic impact assessment report, 
    2. Performance report for all the projects being implemented by the sector,
    3. Evidence of consistence with NDP and sector strategy,
    4. Evidence of availability of counterpart funds in the budget,
    5. Procurement plan, 
    6. Project appraisal document, 
    7. Project implementation plan,
    8. The settlement action plan and performance of passed loan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yesterday, you were supposed to give us a report on the NSSF board.

MR KASOLO: Madam Speaker, you guided that you do not need a report but action. It is true that there is only one woman and that is –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is only one lady -

MR KASOLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that correction. We are going to Cabinet to ensure that we form a board, which respects the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Cabinet is sitting on Monday. Can you report on Tuesday?

MR KASOLO: Madam Speaker, I request that you give us one week because there are constituents we are supposed to consult so that they send their representatives.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many weeks do you need?

MR KASOLO: One week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tayebwa, you are supposed to report on power in Nsambya Police Barracks. Otherwise, up to date, there is no power. No, let him tell us what is happening.

7.40
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, indeed, we verified and it is true there has been a blackout. The issue is lack of finances. We are linking up with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that we get sufficient payment for power in Nsambya. We are going to address that issue, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Member for raising it.

The issue is just to buy Yaka; the barracks are connected on prepaid metres and so, we are going to ensure that indeed – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tayebwa, for security reasons, let us take this matter very seriously. We need power in Nsambya Police Barracks and army barracks. It is for our own good. If we cannot cater for our own police personnel, then whom shall we cater for? Is it money that you do not have? Otherwise, you could bring a supplementary? 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I, personally, took it up with even the accounting officer of the police, Mr Aggrey Wunyi. The power that had been bought for Nsambya Police Barracks, uploaded for a month, was consumed before the month could elapse. This is Yaka and Government projects - 

However, we have known the problem is that we need to get more tokens.  We are going to do that, Madam Speaker. I think that is what is important and we are sorting it –(Interruption)  

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, the issue of power in Nsambya happens every month. Every month, they have power for about 10 days. It is not something that is one-off. As long as I have been a shadow minister, I have been battling with this issue. 

Every time, you have to come to Parliament and beg that the barracks should have power. We keep requesting how much money they require to ensure that our men and women in uniform have power 24/7, 30 days a month. This is something that you have to do.

Look at the budget of the police and power is budgeted for in the barracks. Madam Speaker, this Parliament passed Shs 10 billion. We gave it to the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs to go to Kololo and put a solar provision to provide power but not a single panel exists at Kololo Airstrip. 
 
This is a big issue with the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Ministry of Security. Huge corruption that happens on fuel - We have a lot of fuel for top Government officials but District Police Commanders (DPCs) have zero. We need a deeper inquiry into the conduct of the Police and how they go about their finances.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tayebwa, the Member is talking to you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, it is a bigger issue than just power. We need a holistic solution and a statement on how they manage their finances. I sit on the Committee on Budget – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tayebwa, can you come with what the honourable is asking? You will not manage –(Laughter) 

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is that this matter is meant for a particular minister. I see now hon. Tayebwa is really suffering for what he is not supposed to be answering. 

I would like to beg that this House institutes a select committee to inquire into these matters, and come up with a very serious report so that we debate and come up with resolutions that are sustainable.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I want the issue to be handled by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and report back on Tuesday. The House is adjourned to Tuesday.

(The House rose at 7.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 21 September 2021.)



