Wednesday, 10 September 2014

Parliament met at 10.14 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We have four reports today and one motion. If we could finish this today, that will be very helpful. It will pave way for the financial Bills to also be handled.

10.16
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise issues of national concern. Yesterday, as I moved out of our parking, I saw a lady who usually serves food at the subway restaurant – it is called Amo Restaurant - where some of us usually go for lunch. Their things were being thrown all over. I was with hon. Gilbert Olanyah and some other members and when we moved near, we found the food that had been prepared being poured down together with her water and her charcoal stove; the KCCA enforcement officers were in action.

It was a sad scene! One of the ladies was just crying for mercy but I was told that these people were given notice by KCCA that the person who was renting that place had issues with KCCA. They wrote back to KCCA asking that if the place has issues, they would not object to move out but needed at least one month for them to relocate. But before they got a reply from KCCA, they were stormed.

What happened, in my view and that of Ugandans out there, is condemnable. We should condemn the method of work by the KCCA enforcement officers. Well, they could be under instruction to do the evictions but they should do it in a humane way. Otherwise pouring food off the fire – I also saw them doing it down the market before – leaves a lot to be desired because if they had been there before and told them not to come back the next day and they insisted coming, that would be a different thing, Mr Speaker. But these people, having written to them officially - and actually, I cross-checked with the legal team of KCCA and indeed they admitted that they gave notice and these people appealed to be given a one-month grace period but instead of replying – they told me that the person who was originally renting that place was planning to take them to court and so they had to act to the detriment of these poor women who are earning a living with all their capital thrown out.

Mr Speaker, I am raising this matter so that KCCA should be taken on. They should have a human face when enforcing their regulations. Secondly, these people who even operate next to us as an institution of Parliament – take note, Mr Speaker, that most of our members eat unhealthy food even from our canteen. This was an alternative for us to go and have good food. If they could make a better arrangement, we would have no problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the point is made.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

10.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue that my colleague is raising is one where I think she should have immediately got a telephone and called the Minister in charge of Kampala but she is raising it now when people have suffered. But also I would like to suggest that as members of Parliament –(Interruption)– okay, I think I am safe. Mr Speaker, I will inform the Minister for Kampala and see if he is available or if he will send somebody to give us response before close of business today.

But, Mr Speaker, on the issue that the member has raised that the Parliament Canteen prepares underserving food, I think the Member is being unfair to the Parliamentary Commission because I don’t think the member has ever raised this matter with the Parliamentary Commission, which is chaired by the Speaker and both sides of this House are represented. I suggest that members should stop making statements to which they implicate our own leaders yet they have never raised such issues with them. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I always say that we need to preserve the integrity of this House and its leaders. If there are administrative processes that we need to raise concerns about, there are better ways of doing it. But that is it. We will wait for a response from the – 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

10.23
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2014” be read for the first time.

In accordance with Section 10 of the Budget Act, the Bill is accompanied with a Certificate of Financial Implications. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the Bill. It stands committed to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for expeditious handling and reporting to the House.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EAST AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

10.24
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the East African Development Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2013 be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS LUMUMBA: I also beg to lay on Table the Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill is received and committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and that is the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is committed for expeditious handling within the timeframe of the Rules of Procedure.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SHS 675 BILLION FROM THE DOMESTIC MARKET TO FINANCE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE AND SHORTFALLS IN FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is part of the proposals that would feed into the Supplementary Appropriation Bill which has to be brought to this House to close the business of the last financial year; so, we need to handle this today.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
    1) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2013/2014
    2) THE BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015

    A) CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF A SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND THE BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

10.27
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Mr Speaker, I am here to present a report of the parliamentary sectoral Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the ministerial policy statement and proposed budget for the financial year 2014/2015.

This committee oversees two sectors and that is the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Lands, Housing And Urban Development.

In accordance with Articles 90 and 155 (4) of the Constitution and Rule 177 of the parliamentary Rules of Procedure, the committees’ mandate is hereby outlined. I will go to methodology and I think it is important for this meeting and deliberations. The committee used the following methodology –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What areas are you covering? It is important for the record.

MR BIRAARO: We are covering: 
    1. Vote 012, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development
    2. Vote 156, the Uganda Land Commission
    3. Vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport
    4. Vote 113, Uganda National Road Authority 
    5. Vote 118, the Uganda Road Fund
    6. Votes 500-850, Local Governments.

Methodology

The committee used the following methodology in scrutinising the respective ministerial policy statements:
    i. Formally inviting the respective ministers to present their policy statements and defend them.
    ii. Analyzing both the alternative and Government Ministerial Policy Statements together with the relevant materials regarding the sectors (policies, laws, regulations and write ups).
    iii. Raising questions on the policy statements for –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, we have been facilitated in this Parliament to be computer complaint so that we are able to follow all these reports on our iPads and I do not know what my colleagues are experiencing but personally and from the few friends that I have consulted, these documents are not opening up. Can you, Mr Speaker, cause the IT department to work so that we are able to follow? Otherwise, now all these iPads are just handbags, more or less.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Steps have already been taken. The clerk has been instructed to reload the reports on the iPads. The chairperson says it is on now; please check. I can see the ones that are open of the honourable minister, the chairperson and all the others. Check yours now.

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, I think these are individual problems because I have it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member for Oyam has it open. 

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, we reviewed Parliament’s recommendations on the National Budget Framework paper FY 2014/2015 up to 2018/2019 and recommendations made on the Budget Policy Statements for FY 2013/2014.
 
This report is presented in three main sections: 
    i. Section I: The introduction
    ii. Section II: Works and Transport Sector; and
    iii. Section III: Lands, Housing and Urban Development Sector.

Section II: Works and Transport Sector

Ministry’s Mission Statement

The mission statement of UNRA is there, the one of the Road Fund is also available for members to read.

VOTE 016: MINISTRY OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

The budget performance is found in table 1 and it is very clear and I think members can read but in total, it performed up to 73 percent. 

The committee was concerned about the low release of the wage at 78 percent by the end of the fourth quarter of the year, instead of the expected 100 percent as wage is a non-discretionary expenditure and has to be paid by the end of the financial year. The committee was informed that the low release performance was due to delayed recruitment by Public Service Commission. 

The committee was further concerned about the low release under the Donor Budget category at 62 percent and taxes at 0 percent. The committee was informed that the low release was due to delays in the construction of one-stop border facilities at Malaba, Busia, Mutukula, Mirama Hills and Katuna Border Post and the Railway Inland Container Depot (ICD) in Mukono under the East Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation Project.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport should expedite the process of relocating border agencies at customs, immigration and police; settle land disputes at Mutukula, Mukono and resolve the contractor-client differences at Mutukula and Mirama Hills in order to ensure speedy implementation of this project and avert similar occurrence of delayed releases this financial year 2014/2015.

The proposed budget for the financial year 2014/15; Mr Speaker, we have table 2 which shows all the figures as they are indicated but the proposed budget for Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport amounts to Shs 122.365 billion of which Shs 32.929 billion is for recurrent, Shs 89.363 billion is for development while Shs 0.013 billion is for taxes. The recurrent budget accounts for 27 percent of the total vote allocation while 73 percent is for development activities. 

The committee noted that the allocation for the financial year 2014/2015 is projected to reduce by Shs 21.866 billion which is 15 percent of the previous. The reduction is a result of reduced Government of Uganda and donor budgets by two percent and 14 percent respectively. In addition, no provision for taxes has been made in the financial year 2014/2015. We will refer to the table above for the details.

Table 3 shows the budget performance for 2013/2014 of the Uganda National Roads Authority. It performed up to 77 percent in total. The total budget approved for Vote 113 amounted to Shs 1,943.67 billion of which Shs 18.3 billion was for wage, Shs 18.23 billion was for non-wage, Shs 1,243.2 billion for Government of Uganda development, Shs 653.94 billion for donor while Shs 10 billion was for taxes. 

By the end of the third quarter, Mr Speaker, a total of Shs 946.42 billion had been released which was 49 percent. The detailed release performance is provided in the table above. 

The committee was concerned about the low release under the non-wage category as it renders execution of works very difficult. This renders monitoring and supervision inadequate leading to delayed implementation of works and shoddy works on some projects.

Overtime, Parliament has been recommending the inclusion of donor budget releases into the IFMIS to ease budget performance assessment but this has not been complied with. As a result, it was not possible to ascertain financial performance of the development budget in totality. The committee was further concerned about the low release performance for taxes of five percent.

The committee was further concerned that funds are appropriated for projects which are still in the pipeline hence tying up funds that would otherwise have been utilised by projects already underway. Subsequently, UNRA is forced to re-allocate the funds, an action that could have earlier been avoided during the budgeting period. Examples are given in Table 4 below. Re-allocation of funds after they have been budgeted for specific projects is bound to lead to diversion of funds by unscrupulous persons in the department.

The committee was further informed that the observed under expenditure was due to delayed procurement and slow progress of design consultants. For example, out of Shs 793.9 billion appropriated to selected projects, only Shs 310.45 billion had been spent by the end of March 2014 which is 39 percent leaving the balance tied-up on such projects while others remain unfunded. See from the table below that from No. 1 to 13, all those projects were affected.

3.3.2	UNRA proposed budget the financial year 2014/2015

The total budget proposed for Vote 113 - UNRA amounts to Shs 1,728.78 billion of which Shs 36.3 billion which is 2.1 percent is for recurrent and Shs 1,690.84 billion which is 98 percent is for development activities. 

The budget is projected to reduce by Shs 214.89 billion from its financial year 2014/2015 level of Shs 1,943.67 billion. This reduction is due to a projected reduction of Shs 196.3 billion under donor, Shs 10 billion under the Government of Uganda and Shs 8.59 billion reduction in taxes. Refer to Table 5 below for details. 

The committee was concerned that the observed reduction will result into delayed payments to contractors and accrued interest, delay in commencement of programmed projects and accumulation of debts on works done and services provided by contractors already on site. Table 5, refers.

VOTE 118 -UGANDA ROAD FUND

We have Table 6 which shows the budget performance for the Financial Year 2013/2014. The road fund received a total of Shs 352.85 billion for the Financial Year 2013/2014 of which Shs 350.86 billion is for road maintenance and non-wage activities under the Uganda Road Fund Secretariat while Shs 2 billion is for Wage.  

The committee was informed that by the end of the financial year, UNRA had received Shs 254.4 billion and absorbed a total of Shs 214.4 billion which was 84.2 percent leaving Shs 40 billion unspent, KCCA received Shs 12.4 billion and absorbed it 100 percent while DUCAR received a total of Shs 91.19 billion. Refer to table 6 above for details of what we are talking about.

Mr Speaker, Table 7 is about the proposed budget for the sector for 2014/2015. The committee commended Government’s effort to increase the budget for road maintenance under Uganda Road Fund to Shs 428.102 billion from Shs 352.852 billion appropriated in the previous financial year. We refer to Table 7 above for details. 

However, it should be noted that this has been achieved through cuts from the budget under UNRA for national road construction with far reaching consequences. 

The committee noted that financing for road maintenance should be sources from road user charges as stated in section 6 of the Road Fund Act, 2008. 

The committee was concerned that despite Parliament’s recommendation to have the Road Fund operationalized, this has not been honoured yet by Government due to an existing conflict between the Road Fund Act and the URA Act and this requires an amendment to ensure that road funds are remitted directly to the Road Fund account.

Table 8, as members will read, refers to the budget performance of Votes 501 – 850; Local Governments.
The committee noted that despite the inadequate funding under this arrangement, only 50 percent of the appropriated Budget had been released by the end of the third quarter of the last financial year.

The committee noted that the budget for the financial year 2014/2015 is projected to remain the same, although Government pledges to have this allocation increased to Shs 413.22 billion in financial year 2016/2017. In addition, the committee was concerned about the inadequate capacity of local contractors rendering road project implementation sluggish.

Committee observations and recommendations

The committee was concerned about persistent delays for a number of road projects despite Parliament appropriating money to have them implemented although the committee was informed that the low absorption was due to a result of delays in the procurement process. 

It was noted that most road construction delays are associated by procedures accruing from land compensation hence affecting timely completion of government programmes.

The committee, Mr Speaker, recommends review of the land policy together with the Land Act in order to propose ways through which all road corridors should be surveyed and gazetted as public land way ahead of commencing work on such bridges. Further, sensitization of the populace about the relevant laws should be carried out on a regular basis in order to keep the populace abreast with the law.

The committee noted with concern the rampant connivance by some public officials with the locals to set up new developments along road corridors and reserves in anticipation of getting handsome compensation before actual implementation of government projects. This action impacts heavily on the initial budgeted funds for the road constructions as Government ends up spending more on compensations.

The committee strongly condemns this act and recommends that Government investigates the matter and carries out punitive measures to curb the act and discourage any related transactions in the future. 

The committee observed that several road projects have been designed without taking into account future trends in infrastructural development as well as future economic growth trends, and projections resulting into budgetary wastage and unprecedented delays as road designs have to undergo revisions mid-way into their implementation and yet this could have been avoided during the preliminary designs.

Examples of such projects include Tororo – Mbale – Soroti, Kampala Northern Bypass and Kawempe – Kafu and Fortportal – Bundibugyo – Lamia roads which resulted into huge cost variations. For the case of Tororo – Mbale – Soroti road, which is currently under rehabilitation and yet it is being redesigned for reconstruction, strengthening and widening to take into account the heavy traffic plying from Kenya and eastern Uganda to Juba in South Sudan.

The committee therefore recommends that the ministry undertakes comprehensive research in future roads developments to cater for the changing trends in infrastructural development before embarking on committing any road designs. 

In addition, the ministry should ensure that future road designs should integrate both motorised and non-motorised modes of transport as well as provision for persons with disabilities (especially in urban centres).

The committee was concerned about the poor quality and state of the road equipment and units in the districts and other implementing agencies with most of them broken down especially the graders. Further, the committee noted the lack of substantive district engineers in most districts.

The committee therefore recommends and recognizes the need for every district to have its own complete road units that would facilitate proper road maintenance and strongly urges the government to equip the designated agencies and regions with good quality road equipment. The committee further recommends that the districts works and technical departments be provided more finances and requisite manpower in order to improve their effectiveness.

The committee observed that most regional workshops are ill-equipped to handle the repair and maintenance of the road units. In addition, the committee observed that the government materials laboratories are ill-equipped and at times government has to pay to be able to use the contractors’ equipment for testing materials. This is not only costly but may affect the credibility of results obtained yet they form the basis for certifying the quality of works done by the contractor.

The committee therefore recommends that Government adopts a policy of procuring adequate up-to-date material testing equipment for all its laboratories and desist from hiring those of the contractors. In addition, a possibility of acquiring material testing equipment from the contractor when the road contract is completed to minimise costs should be exploited.

The committee further recommends that the ministry carries out an inventory of all its regional equipment with the aim of re-equipping them with adequate and better quality equipment. 

The committee noted the continued encroachment on road reserves and railway reserves which affects implementation of government programmes.

The committee recommends that MoWT fast tracks the process of identifying, protecting, titling and demarcating all roads and railway reserves as well as surveying its landing sites and ports. 

Further, Government is urged to adopt a sector wide approach in planning by involving other relevant stakeholders, for instance the National Forestry Authority could be mandated to plant trees along all national road reserves. This could serve a duo-purpose of protecting the environment and the road reserves from encroachment.

The committee noted with concern that though the East Africa Civil Aviation Academy (EACAA) Soroti, is jointly owned by the East African Community, its maintenance and associated operational costs are currently incurred by the Government of Uganda only. The committee therefore recommends that Government of Uganda initiates consultations with the East African Community in order to orchestrate joint maintenance and operation of the academy or alternatively to apply for sole proprietorship.

The committee observed that Government owes Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) an outstanding debt of Shs 56.7 billion accruing majorly from services offered to its ministries and departments. This un-cleared debt has affected the effective operation of the CAA and the implementation of its master plan. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development develops a monthly re-payment plan with the concerned ministries and government departments to enable them clear their outstanding debts with CAA. This should be done not later than six months from the time of adopting this report.

The committee reiterates its earlier concern regarding the continued absence of a national carrier to hoist Uganda’s flag. It should be noted that the absence of a national carrier is limiting the tourism potential with negative impacts on the economy. This is more so because Uganda being landlocked is highly dependent on air transport to link to the rest of the world.

The committee recommends that Cabinet expeditiously concludes decision on this matter to revive the national carrier, and report to Parliament within a period of six months from adoption of this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, are you reading the whole report? I see a summary but looks like you are reading the whole report. We may not have that time.

MR BIRAARO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. About the expansion of the airport, the committee recommended that Government should actualise its commitment towards the renewed interest and revival of the Uganda Airlines and expedite the process of acquiring land adjacent to the airport currently owned by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries for the expansion of the airport as a matter of urgency. In addition, Government should provide the required resources to implement the master plan provided in a phased manner starting with next FY 2015/2016.

The committee further recommends that Government strengthens the capacity of the CAA through carrying out urgent regulatory reforms.

Mr Speaker, I think it is important to note that the committee observed that there is laxity in management, supervision and monitoring of road construction projects by the Ministry of Works and Transport which has led to project implementation challenges such as unprecedented cost variations resulting into escalated road construction costs. 

Examples of projects with huge cost variations are the rehabilitation of Tororo - Mbale - Soroti, Fort Portal – Bundibugyo, Kabale - Kisoro Roads and the Northern Bypass among others. 

During the consideration of the Ministerial Budget Policy Statement for FY 2014/2015, a number of controversial issues surrounding these projects came-up. Among them was the Mukono-Kyetume-Katosi-Nyenga Road and the procurement of the Standard Gauge Railway. All these are clear testimony to the current laxity by the ministry in ensuring that there is value for money spent by Government.

Consequently, the committee has swung into action to investigate these allegations with a view of reaching to the bottom of the alleged mismanagement and at the appropriate time a report will be tabled on the Floor of this House.

Mr Speaker, let us go to section 3, which is the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Refer to table 3.1 which talks about the performance of the sector and the total budget approved in the previous year.

The committee was informed that the low release under wage was due to failure to recruit staff as had been programmed as the term of office for Public Service Commission had expired at that time. The committee was further informed that donor funds are disbursed outside the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMIS) making it difficult to capture the donor releases into the IFMIS. 

The committee was concerned that the continued delay in recruitment of staff has affected execution of programmed activities and resulted in failure by the ministry to deliver services to the people as per their mandate. The table below 3.2 shows that aspect.

The proposed budget for Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development amounts to Shs 26.72 billion (excluding non-taxable revenue). That is the table above showing that aspect. 

The committee noted that the ministry’s budget is inadequate given its core mandate. This leaves many critical programmes underfunded and unfunded. For example, the ministry lacks funding to undertake the following activities:

    1. Survey and demarcation of international borders (Uganda – DRC, Uganda – South Sudan, Uganda – Rwanda, Uganda - Tanzania and Uganda-Kenya). You know of the Migingo case but they lack funds.
    2. There is also lack of money to plan for the Albertine Graben.
    3. Implementation of Greater Kampala Metropolitan Master Plan is affected by funding.
    4. Compensation of the ranchers.
    5. Implementation of the Physical Planning Act and
    6. Implementation of Land Use Plan and Land Policy.

The committee was further concerned about continued challenges under the land registration division, which include missing land title pages, forgeries and duplication of land titles and unclear land registration procedures, which have escalated land disputes in many parts of the country.

Observations and recommendations

The committee observed that although the ministry has plans to develop a national physical development plan to be operational by 2016, it has been reluctant in prioritising its development for the last three financial years; 2011 to date despite the committee’s continued recommendation. Further, the committee observed that there is still a glaring gap accruing from lack of adequate funding and staffing.

The committee therefore recommends that there is need for fast tracking the National Physical Development Plan in order to enhance optimal utilisation of land and to curb the various physical development challenges being faced countrywide due to its absence. 

Further, the committee recommends that adequate funds be availed for the development of the National Physical Development Plan. These funds should be phased out to be paid within the medium term.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development considers reviewing the implementation of the Act as this will go a long way in addressing most of the land disputes and conflicts countrywide.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development considers further review of the implementation of the Act. Furthermore, the committee recommends that in the meantime, the ministry disseminates guidelines on implementation of the Land (Amendment) Act, 2010 and also carry out countrywide sensitisation of the various stakeholders.

The committee observed that Uganda’s international borders with Kenya including Migingo Island, Rwanda, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Tanzania and South Sudan remain unclear and require demarcation.

The committee urges the ministry to fast track the process of re-surveying and securing all Uganda’s international borders.

About the Greater Kampala Physical Development Framework, the committee recommended that the ministry and the various stakeholders, both at district and national level including Kampala Capital City Authority, Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, collaborate to fast track the development and realisation of the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area. 

Government is further urged to provide funding worth Shs 2.5 billion, which is required for the operationalization of the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area Plan. These should be preceded by the relevant enabling laws.

About the Albertine Graben, the committee recommended that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the concerned stakeholders including the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the local governments collaborate to fast track the development, dissemination and implementation of the Regional Physical Development Plan.

Mr Speaker, about the zonal offices, the committee recommends that the ministry prioritises its restructuring and recruitment process taking into account the new technological challenges and increase in the volume of work in the zonal offices with a properly motivated and trained staff for improved and effective service delivery while also observing the official working hours (from 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m.)

Mr Speaker, we learnt that in these zonal offices, people report at around 10.00 a.m. and leave at midday so that people who have any cases regarding land do not find any staff. That is why the committee makes this recommendation.

The committee further recommends that the ministry fortifies its land registration system by providing adequate controls at the regional offices to prevent unauthorised alteration of registry records in order to minimize and eventually eliminate forgeries.

The committee recommends that Government endeavours to avail funds for implementation of the public servants housing loan scheme.

Mr Speaker, there is rapid population growth and rural-urban migration, which has escalated a lot of peri-urban problems. The committee therefore recommends that the ministry closely coordinates with other concerned ministries and stakeholders to ensure slum upgrade that is comprehensive in nature with a model for land development and slum growth reduction that is in line with aiding the under privileged members of the society. 

Further, the committee noted the need to sensitise the population on matters pertaining to physical compensation contrary to monetary compensation.

Mr Speaker, with me are some documents that culminated into the origination of this report. These are minutes of the committee when it sat considering the ministerial policy statements, alternative policy statement for both the government and the Opposition shadow Ministers for Lands and Physical Planning, Housing and Urban Development, and Works and Transport.

We have also got responses from the ministers and the ministerial policy statements from Works and Transport, and Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay all those documents on Table and I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and thank you members of the committee, for this very elaborate work encompassing all those sectors you have covered.

Honourable members, I propose the question for your debate. The question is that the report of the sectoral Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the Financial Year 2014/2015 be adopted. That is the motion for your debate. Debate starts now and the timeframe we know is three minutes.

11.04
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee members for the report and for particularly building the report while taking into account the alternative policy statements. I think that was positive of you, Mr Chairman and this should be emulated by all committees.

Mr Speaker, I have a concern about matters that arose in the course of the committee’s work. Particular reference has been made by the chairman about the Mukono-Katosi road, which I think was good for the committee to swing into action. However, Mr Speaker, I humbly request for guidance on how the committee can seek clarification from the President on the matter because we have read about the committee writing to the President to guide Parliament and I found it a bit unique in our parliamentary procedures; that once a matter within the ambit of the committee has arisen, the President has to be consulted to guide Parliament. I do not know since when the President has been guiding Parliament in the course of its activities. So, I would wish to have the chairman clarify this. But I found it a bit outside our purview as Parliament and certainly unless advised otherwise by your Chair, I do not see anywhere how the committee can seek guidance from the President on matters that are within the purview of a committee of Parliament. 

Two, I think we need to set into motion the timely effort and intervention that can be made on that road - the IGG, the CID and the officials being suspended; who is there to speak on their behalf? If the actions were related to Government and it is Government that recommended UTAU and the minister was quoted saying “Yes, we knew the contractors and on that basis they were awarded the contract” and we go down to the civil servants who are helpless and cannot defend themselves. Those who are responsible continue in their offices but the people we forced to take action and decisions are thrown out of office – (Member timed out.)

11.07
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee chairperson and the members for this very comprehensive report they have submitted. I want to go straight to asking specific questions from both the chairman and the minister. 

On the issue of the national flag carrier; can the minister come up with a roadmap as to when we will have the national flag carrier. Uganda is the only oldest country in Africa – even the youngest state, South Sudan has got a national flag carrier; Kenya, Rwanda, Burundi – every country in our vicinity has got a national flag carrier. When are we having our own on ground?

Secondly, the issue of border conflicts, both internal and external; last week the political leadership of Moyo was arrested in South Sudan in Kajokeji where they slept for two or three days under incarceration because of border conflicts until H.E the President talked to his counterpart in Juba. But what if the president was outside the country and could not be reached? Are our people going to continue suffering and being denied services because of this unending border conflict that the minister for lands cannot execute? When are you settling this problem of South Sudan–Uganda border conflict? 

Thirdly is on the issue of alternative airport services. Uganda is at the centre and Entebbe is where main aircrafts land. What if we get a problem in Entebbe, where can we divert our flights? Even here in next-door Kenya, they had a problem but within the shortest time possible, they were able to organise an alternative terminal. When will Uganda ever have an alternative terminal to receive international flights? Is Gulu prepared, is Arua prepared, and is Kasese prepared?

Fourth, honourable Minister for Works, you personally went to Arua when we complained that the duo-carriage road which is under construction was being reduced to one. The two buildings which were supposed to be demolished and compensated – I came back from Arua on Monday and saw both of those buildings being circumvented; they are trying to save them. Are you aware that the agreed plan to compensate for these buildings is not being implemented and when will you make sure that these buildings are demolished and the road opened as agreed?

Then on the issue of roads under UNRA; UNRA because very extravagant in terms of interest. They took on so many roads. I do not know whether it was for political expedience but many roads which were hitherto under districts were taken over by UNRA –(Member timed out_)

11.10
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take it a notch higher from hon. Wadri’s submission on UNRA roads. Why is it that the district local governments which get very little money from the centre have better road networks than those that are under UNRA? Right now as I speak, I cannot access my sub country called Nabiyoga, the bridge broke two weeks ago. Why is it so? And when these roads are being made at Shs 5 million per kilometre, their work is merely to run through with a grader. Is that how we gravel roads? Is there value for money? And after two weeks, rain water washes them away.

On infrastructure planning, do we have a master plan not only for the Albertine Graben Region - Uganda requires one. This is a developing country. Look at our neighbouring countries like Kenya; the cost of compensation is too high. You say the money for compensation delayed the procurement process and construction of roads – that is because we do not plan ahead of time. If Uganda, through the Ministry of Finance and Works can provide a master plan for infrastructure development, we would have a better country instead of hearing there is a road here, the next day there is a road passing near your home. You built the Southern Bypass and it passes close to my land. Now, when I build you will say I am speculating. 

Why can’t we be told where roads will pass ahead of time other than blackmailing people that they are building in road reserves? I call upon the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Lands and Works to plan ahead of time. We want quality infrastructure network in this country; declare district roads as possible roads that can be upgraded. The population is growing, people are buying cars; we need a better infrastructure network in Uganda. 

On an alternative airport, we should not be the ones proposing this. Hon. Minister of Works, you have been outside Uganda –(Member timed out.)

11.14
COL. FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues to thank the committee for the good report. However, I join my other colleagues to state that I am rather perturbed and still concerned about the lack of planning in this government because it is a big concern to discuss these matters when we hear that a government project or a strategic industry like the one of Tororo is delayed because compensation has to be done first, yet the Constitution is very clear that for any land to be acquired by Government, adequate compensation prior taking over that property should be paid. 

So, I am asking the government; why don’t you plan ahead? Why don’t you pay the affected citizens promptly before a project is delayed? And of course you know that when a project is delayed, Government continues paying that contractor. So, really, this is lack of planning. If you walk like a person without a plan – so, this obscurantism should stop.

Mr Speaker, I asked the Minister of Works and Transport this same question last financial year and he promised that Uganda would have an airline of its own. But up to now – even the routes have been leased to other airlines. Why can’t Uganda have its own airline? For how long are we going to continue like this? This is big concern because it is shaming our government. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

11.16
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues to thank the chairperson for the report presented. I will however begin by seeking for clarifications from the chairperson of the committee. I do not find the observations of the committee matching with the recommendations. Let me refer you to page 7. When you look at the budget performance of UNRA – there are even areas of 7 percent performance, 14 percent performance. Let me read 3.3.2, which says that the total budget proposal for Vote 113 for UNRA amounts to Shs 1728.78 – then you go on – but of course you are saying this is a performance of about 86 percent, leaving unspent balances. However, you go on to recommend that the budget be increased. On what basis are you recommending budget increase of a sector that has underperformed?

Two, when you look at URF under Vote 118, they budgeted for Shs 352.86, they received Shs 254 by the end of the financial but only used Shs 214 leaving a balance of Shs 40 billion unspent but you are proposing an increment for this sector. What is the rationale of proposing a budget increment for a sector that has unspent balances?

Mr Speaker, it is even perturbing for the committee to observe that under UNRA, there are unspent balances – and as if that is not bad enough, there are even reallocations of funds. But you have gone ahead to propose that we increase the budget from Shs 136 to Shs 176 billion without telling us about the key issues that they dealt with for you to increase the budget and that you are not going to have these problems –(Interruption)

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give to the House is that normally when works begin after the contracts have been signed, they take more than one year. So, some of the unspent balances - for example, there are roads that are supposed to be constructed but which take about three years. So, you don’t expect the money to be used in one year; they overlap.

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, in the observations of the committee, they say actually even said “we wondered”; they were concerned - how I wish this was brought out clearly in the committee the way the member has done so; that would have been of value but the committee says that they were extremely concerned and perturbed that this was the trend under this sector, which means there is a deficiency which they have not healed – (Member timed out.)

11.20
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee talks about the sluggish way of implementing Government projects. Last year, we approved money to construct the Masaka-Bukakata Road. However, since then I have made inquiries at the Ministry of Works and UNRA and they have given me the same answer; that they have written to the funders and are waiting for a letter of no objection. I don’t know how long this takes. 

So, I would like to find out from the minister if we are not going to get into the same problems that happened with the Mukono-Katosi Road. It is important to know this because if money was given and a contractor was identified too, then I don’t know why it is taking so long for us to see progress on that road. I have already talked and convinced my people on the compensation and they accepted that they will work with Government in seeing this project take off. The people are anxiously waiting.

On the issue of sensitising the communities, I request all the sectors to work together - that is the Ministry of Works and Transport and that of Local Government. These projects come with a lot of excitement and I am sure the Ministry of Local Government would wish to work with your ministry to ensure the people get to understand this project. So, if you used the community development officers who are technical at dealing with the communities, I think it can make work very easy for the ministry to access the communities and come out positively on sensitisation.

Mr Speaker, I thank you so much for giving me this opportunity because I had to speak for the people of Bukoto East on the issue of Bukakata Road.

11.22
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start by saying that the road sector has taken the lion’s share of the national budget for the last five years but when you look at the appropriation that has been given to the sector visa-avis the standard of the work being done on the roads, it is worrying.

Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, you travel with me along the Kampala-Gulu Road, which has been worked on for the last four years beyond the actual contract period – and this is not the only road. Several roads have been constructed by contractors who do substandard work either because – I have now seen the committee report saying that there is laxity by the technical staff in the monitoring, management and supervision on the roads contracted. Why is that so? Couldn’t it be that what we are reading about Mukono-Katosi Road where the technical staff receive kick-backs that makes them fail to oversee, monitor and ensure quality work on the rods, wouldn’t that be the conclusion? Because when you look at the roads that are being done, after one year or six months the new road is being redone by this company called Dott Services and that is everywhere. Surely, isn’t that a conspiracy? 

We need to understand that this sector is being run under a mafia-like arrangement to stifle the money that we appropriate to that sector? There are some roads that have been in existence for more than 10 years and they are always read in every budget speech – five, seven years in the budget but have never been done. Actually this Mukono-Katosi Road had been in the budget for 10 years before it was finally started on. 

For example the Masindi-Apac-Lira-Kitgum Road, – a very strategic road that the President has pledged several times, and every time they say the road is going to be made, they say the design is being completed but you never see it being done. What is the criteria of allocation of the roads that are being done? We need to know. If you look at the amount of money being used per kilometre to get the gravel road to a tarmac is almost Shs 2 billion per kilometre. Surely if you look at the region, the amount of money they use per kilometre, Uganda is exceptional and even with that exception you do not see the standard of work. That is why every time we are standing up and giving reference to Rwanda. It is a shame that we give reference to Rwanda that was born a few years ago, they have standard work, standard roads but in this country the amount of money we are putting on the roads you still cannot - if you look at the huge cost of valuation mentioned by the committee such as the Kampala Bypass, the Soroti- Mbale Road where huge valuation costs are done by the technical staff. They set the road to be made for a certain amount and change this in the middle of the work and increase it by 50 percent of the total amount that was already planned. Why would that be? Is it a conspiracy?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow me to correct the Hansard. When the honourable member for Oyam started her speech she said she travels with the Speaker – (Laughter) - what she meant was that we use the same road. Given that other members of the House have very close relationships with the honourable member, it could cause issues to the Speaker. 

11.28
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker and for livening up the House. I will just address myself to three areas. Before the NRM came to power, most districts far off from Kampala had airstrips but with the advent of the NRM, most of these airstrips have either been given away or nobody knows what has happened to them. So, I wanted to know from the minister when the airstrip in my district and constituency will be revamped, for purposes of improving the tourism sector in our area of course in addition to the national carrier. 

Secondly, the UNRA roads; does UNRA have a rota of maintaining the roads under its care? Why should we, members of Parliament, always have to first complain and beg UNRA to work on the roads as if they do not know their mandate? Do they have a rota and if they don’t when can they develop one so that we get to know that these particular roads will be worked on every three or six months.

Is the minister aware that we actually have a National Physical Planning Act and that actually the whole country is a slum? When you concentrate on planning for the Albertine region and the Kampala metropolitan area, what about the rest of the country? Do you know how our people are living in squalid conditions in unplanned areas even in rural areas? So when is the minister coming up with a concrete programme of enforcing the Physical Planning Act. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery this morning we have pupils and teachers of Kireka Grammar Primary School represented by hon. Rosemary Seninde, Woman MP Wakiso and hon. Ssemujju Ibrahim Nganda, MP Kyadondo East. They have come to observe the proceedings please join me in welcoming them.

11.30
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye West Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson for the report but I want to comment on three issue: My colleagues have talked about planning and as we begun this session, my colleague Mama Mabira talked about demolitions. We have the physical planning department in the ministry of lands and we have many town boards, town councils and municipalities cropping up. I would want to request Minister of Lands to have a master plan for these town councils so that people know how town councils are supposed to look like how municipalities would like so that we avoid issues of demolition whenever we come up with new municipalities and town councils.

The other one is about the land offices, when the Ministry of Lands came up with a decentralisation process of the land offices, they opened up offices in Wakiso, Mukono, Masaka, Bukalasa but the problem that was at the land registry here was now shifted to these districts and many people are suffering, people have lost their land because of the corruption and the bad activities that are going on in these offices. May I request the Minister for Lands to brief the Parliament on what is happening in these offices so that we can know how far this programme has gone?

Lastly is about UNRA; what happened with the Mukono-Katosi road is an eye-opener. Recently PAC was looking at the audit report where Shs 36 billion were lost. May I request that this House comes up with a resolution calling on the Auditor-General to come up with a forensic audit and find out the monies that are being lost in UNRA because we are giving them a lot of money we cannot sit here to just read papers here about money being lost in UNRA. Can this House have a resolution calling up the Auditor-General to investigate, come up with a forensic report audit so that we know how much money is being lost in this institution? If we don’t do that much more money will be lost when Parliament is just looking on.

11.33
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice in thanking the committee for the report. However, I have a few questions to the ministers. Hon. Minister, when will the Mbale-Budaka border be drawn because the people are still antagonistic. Secondly, I would like to know whether the gazetted children’s parks in the country have been re-gazetted to be residential areas because this is an observation in Mbale that all children’s parks have buildings coming up; even when the committee came to Mbale to observe what was going on, after they left, buildings are being erected in those areas. We would want to know whether they have been re-gazetted to be residential areas.

We would like also to know the status of the road that was blocked in Mbale and the minister authorised that it should be reopened because a school was built across a road but even when it was authorised to open, it has never been opened but the school has been fully opened and it is across the road and people on the other side cannot access the other side of the road.

Lastly, hon. Minister, we want to know whether what we are reading in the papers about Bulambuli – the compensation of Shs 8 billion to resettle the people of Bududa was “air” because it was written in the newspapers that the minister was almost lynched. One of the people in Bulambuli was warning the people in Mbale on Sunday that they should not dare come to Bulambuli because the land – (Interruption)

MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Speaker, my sister hon. Connie Galiwango is a person from Bugisu and she knows what is going on with the mudslides in Bududa, even in her constituency of Bulambuli and other places. Government has secured land in Bulambuli and so is she in order to say that they bought ‘air’? Has she been there to confirm that there is ‘air’? Are you in order to mislead the House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should know that this is a vital part of the year for the men of Bugisu and so, we should be careful what we say –(Laughter)– but you need to verify your facts before you make statements of that nature, please.

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you. On Sunday in Mbale, one of the people of Bulambuli was warning people around Namatala that if anybody knows people who are coming to Bulambuli to occupy land there, that land is not for them. I was among the people who were being addressed. So, I am not speaking ‘air’ but was seeking clarification on whether it was true that that land was not bought. I did not imply as my brother imagines but was only seeking clarification from the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you yielding to information?

MR SSASAGA: The information that I am giving my sister is that the fact of the matter is that the land which was procured by the OPM to resettle the affected people in those mountains has issues. The land belongs to people and those who procured it gazetted the land without the consultation of the local masses. The people are now rising up and saying, “No. Unless we are compensated for our land, Government cannot take it like that.” This is information that I am giving her. Of course some colleagues and even officials from the Ministry of Lands and the Office of the Prime Minister are behind this. 

So, what the honourable member is raising is very true and I have more information about that. I do not know if hon. Mudimi is part of that or not and if he is not convinced about it, then we can meet after this and we shall give you more information about it. That is the information that I was giving you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, have you closed? Thank you.

11.40
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish you could give me more time because I speak for the two constituencies, including Kinkizi West. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, this is to confirm that I have authorised him to speak for me. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That means that you take three minutes.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Prime Minister who speaks for Government and I speak for the people of Kanungu in the House. 

I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report well done. I have a few issues for clarification for the minister. We have a lot of issues as people of Kanungu with the ministry and UNRA and I have noted all of them.

The first one is the issue of the roads that were taken up by UNRA a few years ago. They are about 10,000 kilometres. Why have you failed to build the capacity of UNRA to be able to maintain these roads as some of my colleagues have been asking? 

Mr Speaker, yesterday, I received a distress call from a chairperson of a sub-county in my constituency. I think that he has been attacked by people because the road connecting Kanungu to Kabale is now cut off and yet this is a road that has been contracted to a certain firm to maintain it for three years but they are failing to work on the road. So the budget has to be on a Member of Parliament to run to UNRA or the minister and to also look for the contractor. So, why does UNRA fail to build its capacity so that it can routinely maintain most of these roads which it took up?  

Secondly, I want to know from the minister the formula that is used to determine the unit cost with respect to roads maintained by local government because some of us represent areas that are mountainous while some of you represent areas that are flat. Why does the ministry use the same unit cost because to maintain roads in Kanungu, Kabale, Kisoro and Bugisu is extremely difficult? Right now, I cannot access most parts of my constituency because the district cannot maintain most of these roads. So, we would want to appeal and request Government to have different unit costs for areas, which are extremely mountainous and difficult to access like Kigezi and other parts of the country.

Lastly, there are a number of roads which had been earmarked for tarmacking and they were advertised and were supposed to be funded through contractor financing but it appears that there is a disagreement between the Ministry of Works and that of Finance on how to finance these roads. We would want to get a clarification from the minister – (Member timed out.)

11.43
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you. I want to add my voice to my colleagues’ that have thanked the committee for the good work that they have done. I also thank Government for the first time because the Mbale-Soroti Road is near completion and I now drive from Bukedea to Mbale within 30 minutes. I only have a problem with the design; the bridges are narrow, the road is wide enough to contain the huge traffic from South Sudan to Kenya and I do not know - maybe the minister will clarify who is supposed to work on these bridges. Is that the design that you have? Is it modern that the road cannot be wide enough to contain enough traffic and when at the bridge the vehicles have to wait before they cross? 

Every financial year, physical infrastructure committee has talked about the Road Fund and amending the Uganda Revenue Authority Act. I do not know who is supposed to amend this Act? Is it the Uganda Revenue Authority that is supposed to come here or the Ministry of Finance that is supposed to originate this? Because UNRA cannot maintain the national roads and due to the delay in working on this Mbale-Soroti Road, all that heavy traffic was diverted to all our murram roads. Central roads are all destroyed. The small bridges we have there are all destroyed. UNRA cannot work on our roads because they lack funds. Why should the road fund still be with the Ministry of Finance? When are these Acts going to be amended in this House because this is a main challenge?

Mr Speaker, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure sometime back went all over the eastern region because we had issues of boundaries but that report has never been availed; I do not know what is happening. The committee chairperson should clarify this. Why should you be given assignments and you do not report to this committee?

Mr Speaker, I also have the issue of the ferry. There was a presidential pledge – a ferry that was supposed to serve around Bysinia Lake serving the people of Magoro, Oyino and areas of eastern Uganda. In this budget, I have not seen any provision for it. When are we having this ferry? We are soon going for elections. What shall we tell the people of Teso because you do not have this ferry in place? These are concerns; otherwise, Mr Speaker, I am happy with what Government has done to give us the Tororo- Mbale- Soroti road. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, there is an issue and each time it comes, the Attorney-General is not here. There is this issue of the funds that have been created by Acts of Parliament –for example the Environment Fund, the Road Fund – they were created by Acts of Parliament. Now the issue is that monies that are collected which are supposed to go to those funds are sent by the Uganda Revenue Authority directly to the Consolidated Fund. Isn’t it already an automatic appropriation by Parliament through an Act of Parliament that such funds collected under those particular items should go to those funds strictly? Is there a contradiction? Can somebody advise us how we can proceed with this issue because we are saying we want to amend the law the amendment law is not coming, the funds are still going somewhere instead of going where the law says it should go. We will need to be guided on this subject. 

11.47
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a comment on - As the House may recall, the Uganda Road Fund Act was passed in order to modernise us into the second generation of road maintenance whereby funds for road maintenance would automatically be taken straight to the Road Fund. However, we have been overtaken by two major factors: first of all the sources of revenue that were pinpointed for the road user fund have since reduced. First of all, items such as road user licences were removed, transit charges under EAC and COMESA are on the way out and the fuel levy exists but it is a source of contention and we are into the second factor of reforms. 

We had several reforms in public financial management endorsed by this august House to ensure that all monies go to the Consolidated Fund from where they are consciously appropriated by Parliament each year. This has been shown by Parliament’s resistance to earmarking, Parliament’s resistance to entities retailing funds at source. Under the public financial management reforms, we have introduced the Treasury Single Account which makes sure that all money of Government is utilised most effectively. We weren’t having money lined in one place whereas you might have a deficit in another place. By returning all monies to the national Treasury every quarter, we will make sure that all monies are used most efficiently. 

The committee has commended us for increasing the allocations of money to the Road Fund and, Mr Speaker, I wish to assure you that we are working together with Cabinet to make sure we harmonise all these legislations. For instance –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am getting increasingly uncomfortable. You guided this House and requested the government to explain the discrepancy between what Parliament had confirmed that the funds collected on behalf of another institution of Government should be remitted to that institution and you rightly mentioned the Road Fund, the Environmental Fund which has been actually a problem. And the Minister of Finance, where there have been a problem, when funds are collected and remitted to them, they are supposed to remit to the respective institutions. Is the hon. Minister proceeding well by saying that when there is a deficit in some sector of Government they should utilise that without coming back to Parliament to warrant? Because if they had come back and we agreed on that, we wouldn’t be raising this question. Is she proceeding well on that? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that she comes back?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: At this time I am not able to rule on the point of procedure because she hasn’t finished. 

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. For instance, you have read in the report that the Uganda Road Fund spent less than 100 percent of the money that was released to it. That other 20 percent was because of, I am sure, transparency and accountability issues. That money could have been used in things like the Environmental Fund if it had been coming back to the Treasury Single Account. 

Mr Speaker, under decentralisation, we have removed the unnecessary expensive layers between money getting to the source of usage. The Road Fund and road maintenance are also benefiting from this whereby the Treasury would transit the funds directly to the districts, directly to the other sources of road maintenance and in this way, the Road Fund will operate as a monitor, as an evaluator and an advisor to Treasury. Where there are discrepancies or misbehaviour, they say don’t release that money or as we prefer now, rather than refusing to release money and punishing innocent inhabitants and other potential beneficiaries, we are emphasising enforcing penalties on the accounting officers.

Mr Speaker, I will end by saying that the Secretary to the Treasury allocates over Shs 8 trillion shillings and none of this money passes through his office. It goes straight from the Bank of Uganda to the source of consumption where he acts as –(Interruption)

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, this Parliament passed a law; the Bill was brought by Government – the Road Fund Act and it has its mandate. If the minister is saying that the road fund operates in a certain law by the creation of a Single Treasury Account and they have not come here to repeal the law and Parliament made the law, is she in order to proceed and tell this House that what we passed into law is not now being operational; that it was taken over by events and they didn’t come here to tell us? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, these issues keep coming up – the Uganda Communications Commission, the NEMA Environmental Levy, the Uganda Road Fund, the Energy Fund, all created by Acts of Parliament that certain items or certain headings of charges on the people of Uganda should go to those accounts, those funds. You have apparently unilaterally as the Ministry of Finance decided that it is proper to do it that way and always we are saying you need to mend the URA Act or some Act like that but now you have not mentioned that. So there is an issue that you need to - What is the status of the law?

MS KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, I was about to conclude before the various interventions by the honourable members. We are working together with the Uganda Road Fund and all actors to make sure we harmonise all these laws.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but you see honourable minister, it looks like you are acting like a charity to the Road Fund. You donate when you so wish. Please, Rt Hon. Prime Minister-

11.55
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Under Article 153(1) of our Constitution, all revenue is payable into the Consolidated Fund. Under clause (2), monies which have been earmarked by an Act of Parliament for a specific purpose are payable to that purpose. That is the Constitution. Because I do not have the specific provisions, I will ask the Attorney-General to look at the laws and see the terms under these various Acts that create the various funds that you have mentioned and to see how that fund can be handled and the role of the Treasury. I will ask the Attorney-General to come and give a statement on that to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

11.56
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. However, I have a few specific challenges, which I want to address to the ministry. 

Mr Speaker, you are all aware that it is the mandate of the Ministry of Works and Transport to ensure safe transport on water bodies. Many of you may have read in the media yesterday and today that we almost lost people on Lake Victoria. About 400 people survived drowning because of unsafe transport and this is a result of the absence of the MV Kalangala ship, which was taken to Mwanza for annual service.

In the initial communication, the ministry informed the nation that this marine vessel was going to stay for not more than two months but as we talk, it is coming to close to nine months. I have raised this matter on a number of occasions on this Floor and, Mr Speaker, even last week you instructed the Minister of Works to come and give an explanation but on all these occasions, the ministry has stayed adamant and refused to come and make a statement. We now smell a rat; we do not know why they are shy. Either they are shy or they are hiding something or they are not aware of what is happening to the vessel in Mwanza. So, we want the minister to give an explanation and we also want the minister to tell us what the plan is for other islands including those of our colleagues like Namayingo and sigulu. This is because these Ugandans who live in the islands have no alternative means of transport apart from using marine vessels.

In addition, Mr Speaker, generally the facilities at the landing sites in the whole country are very poor and it is the mandate of the same ministry to upgrade these landing facilities. Sometimes we feel bad when we get tourists coming to visit the islands because the impression they get when they reach these facilities is very bad. So what is the ministry doing about this?

Mr Speaker, there is a plan in the East African arrangement to have an alternative southern route to the Northern-Southern route, which goes to Mombasa. The alternative is to go to Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. In that bigger project, Tanzania has its part and as we talk, Tanzania has almost fulfilled its part but Uganda is yet to play its part of putting up an inland port in Bukasa. As we talk, nothing is being done or mentioned. Land is being encroached on while the government looks on. What is all this? What is Government planning to do about this?

Lastly – (Member timed out.)

12.01
REV. PETER BAKALUBA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for this wonderful work. On behalf of the people of Mukono South constituency, we want to thank Government for at least trying to begin fulfilling its pledge of tarmacking the Kyetume-Katosi-Nyenga road.

The incidents we see of what is happening are however very unfortunate and we do not know who to blame now, whether it is the technocrats or the minister. There has been a lot of talk all over. So, I think the minister should come up and explain to the nation so that you can assure our people that there is something being done. We have been patient for quite a long time - 15 years - and it really pains me to see that patience is not paying us at all.

We also have another problem in that in the course of having these contractors taking our money, there is also the issue of compensation. Our people have not been compensated and they had started demonstrating and before that is solved, now this big saga, which is both local and international, has cropped up. But I am sure that the NRM Government will be in charge. The Prime Minister is listening and I think they will do something.

Some of us even fear to explain to our people what is happening. Is it broad day theft? Is this robbery, fraud or a failed state? I do not know. We really need to shape up so that we can avoid such occurrences.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, in this report they have talked about the district works road unit. You remember some time back we received the road units from China and on the Floor of this House, I actually reported that most of the equipment that we received in our areas were not performing to the right standards. The Chinese equipment was weak; it cannot be compared to the Caterpillar or the Komatishu equipment. So, I think as we plan to get a new road unit for every district, we should think of where we are going to get this equipment.

These poor deals of landing on everyone moving with a briefcase and we say, we take this one is really finishing this country –(Member timed out.)

12.04
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the report well presented. Mr Speaker, I would like to start by saying that in my district, the central government roads, which are maintained by UNRA are very bad compared to the district roads and yet we give UNRA a lot of money compared to the money which is given to all the districts in Uganda. Mr Speaker, may I know from the minister whether it is not possible for them as the centre to give some of the roads to the districts and accompany them with some money? When you consider the money given to districts and you compare the district roads with those of the central government, you see that at least the districts are trying to do better work. 

Secondly, I would like to know from the minister the criteria used in selecting the roads to be developed. Once again in my district, I have a road which I think is very important and as far as I know, one of the criteria used is the economic viability of the road. This road from Aye-Aboke up to Bobi is one of the very important and economically viable roads. 

Mr Speaker, there are so many trucks using this road because in Lango sub-region, we do not have any road connecting us to the North. And this road I am talking about is called the great North road – all the way from our eastern countries via Tororo–Soroti through Gulu to Sudan – and through your constituency, Mr Speaker. This road appeared in the 2012/13 budget and afterward it disappeared. May I know from the minister when this road is coming back on the list of roads to be considered? 

My sister from Oyam South talked about the road from Apac via Lira to Kitgum. This too is a very important road and I wonder why it does not appear. There is nothing coming up for the whole of Lango sub region and yet the document given to us by the Uganda National Road Authority shows a well-developed road network. Where is the road network if we cannot connect our region to the North? 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee once again –(Member timed out.)


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, 15 members have contributed; can we reduce the time to two minutes so that we can accommodate all? I still have a long list of members to contribute; so, let us do two minutes please. 

12.07
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I also want to thank the committee for the good work done. I want to comment on the loans that we borrow. We have been told by the committee that there are loans that were not utilised because the commission was not fully constituted. To me, this is lack of planning for our work. Why do you borrow money when you are not ready to utilise it? We have borrowed a lot of money and we are paying interest on monies lying on the accounts not being utilised. Honourable minister, didn’t you foresee that the commission was not fully constituted? Why did you go on to bring a loan here?

Secondly, I want to comment on the road units that are being distributed to our districts. This equipment was all the same and was distributed to the districts irrespective of the terrain. When you go to mountainous areas, the road equipment is lying at the district headquarters. When it rains, they cannot manage the terrain and we are even failing to utilise them. As the chairman stated, the quality of road equipment that was given to us is not very good. The committee has recommended that each district must have its own road equipment. When you go to purchase more equipment, put into consideration the terrain of the different districts – (Member timed out.)

12.10
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report. My problem is not with the committee; they have done a good job. My problem is with the UNRA and the Ministry of Works and this is in reference to the Tororo - Kampala Road. For some years, this road has been overhauled but we still get the same problems. It looks like the engineers in the Ministry of Works do not know that the roads from Mombasa are heavy duty. Some of the load is reduced when the tankers come from Kampala, because they are empty but the side of the road on which the trucks from Mombasa travel always sinks faster than that from Jinja. This has been done several times but all the time that side sinks faster than the side from Jinja or Kampala. I do not know why they do not reinforce the side from Mombasa so that they can depreciate at the same time. It has started again; the road from Malaba to Jinja was done not too long ago but it has started sinking. 

My second problem is about five years ago, there were some spots which were earmarked as black-spots on the Jinja – Kampala Road and they were done – (Member timed out.)

12.12
MR JOHNY SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Mr Speaker, the committee has definitely done a good work. My concern is on UNRA. If you got a scanner and looked through the roads done by UNRA and those done by the local governments, definitely the UNRA roads have more problems. 
Honourable minister, who are the mafias in your ministry and in UNRA? They even own the companies you pre-qualify under UNRA to carry out the contracts. For instance the Namagumba -Budadiri Road was contracted by Omega and we hear that Omega Company is attached to one of the senior officials in your ministry. So who are these mafias? We would gladly increase your budget, but these are the challenges we get from our constituents. What they want are good roads to reduce on the cost of going to referral hospitals, to reduce on the cost of doing business. But you even went an extra mile and got some of the district roads and took them under UNRA to increase your budget and when we appropriate the money, you do not touch them. What do you want us to do? 

Honourable minister, can you get rid of those mafias and those companies which contract those roads – (Member timed out_)

12.14
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I sympathise with the minister who is defending his budget under trade but I also want to thank the chairperson and the committee for a job well done. As my colleague the reverend stated, the truth will set you free and it is good to say it. 

Mr Speaker, we have been here budgeting; I have been in this Parliament and this is my second term but the government in power is running towards concluding 30 years in power. When I travel to my constituency, Kitgum, I always wonder whether we belong to South Sudan or Uganda. That is why one time I even stated that if we don’t belong to this good country called Uganda, we are better off going to the Nile Republic because the issue of the bad roads that I have in my constituency – (Interruptions)

MR LOKII: Mr Speaker, I would like to say that Uganda has been one country since independence. This knowledge has been taught in schools including the school where the honourable holding the Floor has been to. At one time it was expressed that people in the North wanted to create a breakaway republic called the Nile Republic. So, is she in order to begin claiming that Kitgum District is in South Sudan?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what I heard the hon. Beatrice Anywar say was that when she travels along the roads in her constituency, she wonders whether that district is in South Sudan or in Uganda?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. It is getting quite cold because of the air conditioning, one can easily dose off and miss some points. But what I was emphasizing is the fact that even the committees that have travelled to Northern Uganda – the little tarmac we have in the middle of Kitgum Town – and Mr Chairperson, look at me very critically – it was constructed by the Obote I Government and from Gulu to Kitgum is only 100 kilometres but for 30 years in power, for heaven’s sake, couldn’t the powers that be have looked at Northern Uganda and seen that we deserve a tarmacked road? Every year we always have some projects going somewhere else and actually one day a diplomat made a joke –(Interruptions)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is my sister, hon. Beatrice Anywar, in order to insinuate that the people of Northern Uganda have not been served with tarmac roads? Even now, there is work going on; there have been so many new roads repaired and Northern Uganda has a very good road network. Admittedly, there are some areas where the roads have not been repaired as it is in other parts of the country. So, is the honourable member in order to say that it is only Northern Uganda that does not have tarmac roads?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member said that the road from Gulu to Kitgum, which is 100 kilometres, does not have tarmac and that is factual.

ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we need to organise a caucus of the whole House to travel to Northern Uganda and particularly to my constituency to verify this. But the truth is that the road from Gulu to Kitgum serves almost five districts. It got –(Member timed out.)

12.19
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Recently, with your permission, I went on a trip to Lusaka in Zambia and for those who have been there, you will realise that Zambia is three times larger than Uganda. But the infrastructure in terms of roads there, for example, the road from Lusaka to the Zambian border with Tanzania and DRC – but here, when you look at our roads, you wonder whether the contractors that we use are quite different and they can’t do the work that other contractors do in other countries. I will give the example of the Kampala-Masaka Road, where construction was started in 2010. Construction started from the Masaka area going to Kampala but before they even reach Kampala, they are already patching the very new road that they haven’t even completed. Those of you who have driven along that road will agree with me that there is a place called Lwera that is very dangerous especially at night. They are patching a road that has not even been completed. Mr Speaker, you must have heard of accidents occurring along the Kampala-Masaka road because of this. Can the minister tell us what type of contractors these are?

Secondly, I think we are doing a disservice to this country. I wonder what the Minister of Works and Transport does in this country. We used to have an airline called the Uganda Airlines. Today the air fare from Entebbe to Nairobi which used to be only $320 is now $700 on Kenya Airways.

Mr Speaker, you will recall that when I travelled to Nairobi to visit my party president – by the way, I would like to thank this House for your prayers because the DP President is back and is in good health and ready to do his job. I was saying –(Member timed out.)

12.21
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for presenting this good report. I also want to thank the Minister of Works and Transport for putting the Kapchorwa-Swam Road under camp maintenance and I want to report that this project has improved that road, which means the number of routes we have been making to access our constituency via Kenya have now reduced. During the dry season, we can now access Bukwo via Uganda save for the rainy season, as it is now, when we still have to go via Kenya.

What does it mean if we are to have a breakthrough in Uganda? One is that there is constant breakdown of vehicles. As I talk, Bukwo District has had issues with its vehicles. Even the newly purchased vehicles have been grounded because of the bad road. Our vehicles, as MPs are equally in very sorry state and as you know this House does not pay any allowance to the MPs for vehicles maintenance especially for us people who come from such places. The question now is: yes we are ready to continue suffering, but for how long because if this road is not worked on, we might ask the Parliamentary Commission to begin handling us as “special members of Parliament” so that we can be paid per diem as we go via Kenya and also have a special allowance for servicing our vehicles because each time we go to our constituencies, we have to put aside not less than Shs 3 million for maintenance.

We are aware you are doing something but are we about to come to the end of this suffering? If it is not about, the Minister of Finance is here, the Minister of Works is here; what did the people of Bukwo do to this country to be denied a tarmac road? This is too much and I move that you give answers to those questions today.

12.23
MS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My first concern is about the central government roads. The road from Lira to Pader – and I want to request the honourable minister and I urge colleagues to support me on this recommendation that the honourable Minister of Works travels with me to Pader tomorrow so that he can see what we go through. About two weeks ago, I could not reach my home in Pader. It takes two hours to cover a distance of 5 to 10 kilometres and this is a colonial road.

But now when I read this report and I see the number of roads that have been tarmacked and here I am talking about a colonial road, a road that has been there before this country got independence and before I was born, definitely, and it is in a terrible state. Hon. Minister, I want you to go and see what we go through. They say, “Seeing is believing” because if we keep lamenting here and you don’t go yourself you may not appreciate what we are saying.

Secondly, I want to understand whether we have a set standard where these contractors who do the road construction are expected to work –(Member timed out.)

12.26
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda North County, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity and the committee for the work well done and the minister and the ministry for the little work done. (Laughter)

I have two issues and one is on whether UNRA has the capacity or not. I appreciate the concern of the committee about the low release of the funds but my concern is what they use the little funds for. I want to be specific about my constituency. I have some of the UNRA roads which have taken more than four years without being worked on but even the few roads, which have been worked on have been worked on partially. One time I even engaged the western region UNRA facility engineer, we went there and I was promised that they would put on culverts and the murram but it has never been done and as I talk, one sub county and one town council are cut off from the rest of district. What is the problem? Is it capacity; if it is capacity then I think we have the mandate of relocating these funds to be channelled through districts.

Another issue is about the upgrade of Nyakahita-Ibanda road, on page 7. The expenditure performance is 137 percent but again when you look at this road, there are no access roads to major public institutions, health centres, schools and the like. There is even a main road connecting Ibanda to Kiruhura and then Kyegegwa but when you get there, you cannot even get a way to it. 

And on compensation, if it is 137 expenditure performance and these ones are not yet done, what is this expenditure for –(Member timed out.)

12.28
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. When allocating funds to road works, how much are we allocating for capacity building because although we give them money, they don’t have engineers; that is why at times you find that they even have no capacity to design our roads. So, I think Mr Chairman and the minister should have provided capacity building within the UNRA itself.  

Another issue is about lack of deliberate effort by Government to support our local companies and in the end we find that we are bringing brief case business to take over our roads. The government should have a deliberate programme to build capacity for our local companies so that they can also compete and balance our balance of payments. If you are talking about balance of payments in economics and all the companies are foreign, then they are taking all our money even when you can have your own capacity and we retain the funds here.

Another issue is about water transport; although the ministry talks about inland water transport as priority, we do not see where they have put their expected outputs. In my constituency, we have some lakes or even in Kabale where we have Lake Bunyonyi with a number of islands and there are those islanders and those who want to use the water transport both for domestic and for tourism. The ministry has not provided any means like they have done on other lakes although it is insufficient. So, we call upon the minister to think about putting a ferry on Lake Mutanda and Lake Bunyonyi which are in Kisoro and Kabale respectively.

Mr Speaker, the problem on our roads is that we have also failed to control the axle tonnage on our roads. When you go to some borders entering Rwanda, you will find a lorry load being offloaded because you cannot enter Rwanda without observing those standards. So, although the ministry are working on the roads, they are also facilitating the destruction of those roads because they are not monitoring them. So, the minister should be able to provide for a mechanism at entry point on how much tonnage –(Member timed out.)

12.31
MS ROSE IRIAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Mr Speaker, I thank the committee for the report. I will never get tired of talking about Nakapiripirit Road. The road is horrible and impassable; you cannot access the rest of the country.

The Muyembe-Namaru-Nakapiripirit Road is impassable; the bridges have been washed by the rain. I don’t know whether the minister is aware of what is happening. Another obstacle to our road is the marble lorries ferrying stones from Karamoja to Tororo. The road is impassable. I do not know whether the Government is for Karamoja; I do not know whether the government knows whether there are some people called the Karimojong –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am seeking clarification from the honourable member from Karamoja. She cannot access Kapiripiri and yet the First Lady is in charge of Karamoja. How does the First Lady access Nakapiripirit?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, nobody talked about Kapiripiri here –(Laughter)

MS IRIAMA: Thank you my brother for that information. I discussed and shared with the First Lady on Monday about the state of the road but after Government, I know that this can be done. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

12.33
MS ROSE AKELLO (Independent, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee and the chairperson for the report. I want to interest myself with page 19 of the report of the committee where they have noted that they are lacking funds for demarcating the boarders. I want to inform the ministry that the issue of boarders is very serious. I want to give an example of Kaabong District where I come from. As we speak, the Turkanas have already entered into Kaabong and in Kamiyon Sub-county in a place called Nawontozi, they have put a sign post that reads, “Welcome to Kenya” when in the real sense you are in Uganda. So, I am appealing to the ministry that let the funds be got even so that this issue of the borders can be seriously worked upon. I think it is not only Kaabong which has that problem; countrywide, we have that border problem. So, it is better you look for funds and you work on that. 

Secondly, I want to add on what my colleagues said - the UNRA roads. It is a very big problem and as we talk, coming from Kaabong going to Kidepo which is one of our major national parks, it is completely cut off. The UNRA road is in a sorry state, as my sister said. So what should we say about that? It touches on the social services too; moving from Parenga to Kaabong, the cars cannot move and people now have to walk. So I really urge the Minister for Works to do something very fast.

12.35
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the chairperson for the report. I have issues that I wish to seek clarification on from the Minister for Finance and then the Minister for Works.  

The Minister for Finance has just notified this House that starting this financial year, after every quarter, money that is not spent shall be brought back to the Consolidated Fund. I am aware that we appropriate money for a financial year and not quarters and considering how for instance district road units work, many times you may find the road unit broken down and it takes like two or more months when it is not worked on. Now you are talking about retrieving that money and bringing it back to the Consolidated Fund when it has not been used, and I am wondering under which law you are requesting to withdraw the money that is not spent within a quarter when we are not talking about a financial year.

Secondly, the minister is aware that the Road Fund Act created the district roads committees and the purpose of these committees was to oversee the works going on in the districts. But you are required by the same Act to produce regulations to operationalize the roads committees at districts that you have not done, and this has made the work difficult for the oversight work of the committees. When is this going to happen because our work is so complicated?

Turning to the Minister for Works, every district or most of them received the road unit including Kaliro where I come from but at the time of acquisition of these units, we were informed that they are going to be regional centres where major maintenance of this equipment is going to be done. Now today you find that road equipment –(Member timed out.)  

12.38
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have some issues to raise. One, I do not know what role the ministry is playing in regard to the roads being built or opened by CAIIP. There are many roads that CAIIP is doing but the standards of the roads are very poor. What role are you playing?

Two, Kitgum UNRA office is operating in more than four districts and it is covering a very wide area and yet their performance is very poor. Why don’t you think of opening a sub office in the eastern part of Kitgum so that they can cover that part of the section?

Three, why is it that when doing road maintenance, they decide to reduce the size of the road without even opening the off-shoot, without putting the murram and yet you know that with the rainy season – of course those places have fertile lands and if at that point you do put murram, you will not do any good work and even the work that you are doing will in one or two weeks, if it rains, be washed away. It is very embarrassing when you go to Agago; UNRA has taken over three quarters of the roads and besides all that, they gave our two roads to the consultant. These consultants are not even doing good work. So, what are you doing as the ministry? Don’t you want us also to benefit and travel? Just on Monday, I was coming from home but I got stuck on the road with my car. Normally when the road is slippery, you have to cut tree branches and place them on the road.  Now these tree branches banged my engine and destroyed it. The oil flowed and now the vehicle is down - (Member timed out.)

12.40
PROF. ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I want to thank the committee for the report and also thank the ministry. Some time ago, a bridge between my constituency and that of hon. Kasaija was swept and it is in the process of being reconstructed and I want to thank the ministry for the effort. 

However, from the report of the committee, expenditure performance for Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima to Kyenjojo is seven percent. Expenditure performance for Mubende-Kakomero-Kagadi Road is 33 percent. I would really need an explanation because the Kigumba-Kyenjojo Road has been on-going evaluation, designing and so forth and Mubende-Kakomero which is recent and is on evaluation stage, expenditure is at 33 percent. I would need an explanation for why it has happened so.

I would also want my fears allayed because recent press reports indicate that the monies for Kigumba-Kyenjojo seem to be diverted. Is the money diverted and that is why the expenditure performance is seven percent? The money has gone. Recently Red Pepper said that Mubende-Kakumiro-Kagadi has hit a snag and I need clarification so that we are able to advise –(Member timed out.)

12.42
MS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and the committee for a comprehensive report. 

Through you, Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to clarify on the Nebbi-Goli Road and Alala Bridge in Nebbi District. The Nebbi-Goli Road is a road that has very heavy traffic and connects Uganda to Democratic Republic of Congo and it has been on the budget 2012/2013 and also the Alala Bridge in Erusi has also been on the budget but to date, these projects have never been implemented and they have disappeared from the budget. Can the minister clarify on what happened and when these two projects that were presidential pledges will be implemented?

Two, I would like to know from the minister why he does not reply our letters. We present to him issues of our constituencies as far as roads are concerned. Whereas other ministries do reply our letters, the Ministry of Works does not. I have my letter there but I have not received a reply and would like to use this chance to tell you that the Panyimul-Parombo-Goli Road is currently impassable and there is a deep valley there that collects water and they call it Lake Byandala –(Laughter). Can I request you to clear that lake because – yes, I wrote to your office and I have a copy of the letter. The UNRA does not work until when we go and make noise. So can we have this road worked on - the Panyimul-Parombo-Erusi; it is a very busy road and it carries the fish from Lake Albert. Can we have that worked on?

Lastly, Packwach Town Council lies on the highway and because there are no humps, the death toll there is very high as a result of accidents. So, I am kindly requesting you that town councils need to have speed limits and there should be humps and also –(Member timed out.)

12.44
MS EVERLINE TETE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the report. I know Bukwo Road has been mentioned by my colleague, hon. Sabila. The road is terrible; the bridge that was built in 1962 is collapsing.

Mr Speaker, I am not going to dwell on Bukwo; I am going to talk about the Kirongo-Kapchorwa Road which was completed way back in 2002, if I am not mistaken. I want to thank Government but the road has been destroyed by the Tororo Cement Factory trucks. Accidents are rampant on this road because of reckless driving and we, as Elgon people, have lost many lives. We are burying people almost daily and many are hospitalised with permanent injuries. As I speak, our LC V chairperson is in Mt. Elgon Hospital with other people. 

Honourable minister, is it difficult for this cement factory to be constructed near these quarries? For example why not have a cement factory in Mt. Elgon or Karamoja than transporting heavy trucks for miles and spoiling our good roads?  
Mr Speaker, as the communities of Mt Elgon and Karamoja, we have identified one –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Mr James Mutende): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you for giving way. The member has raised a very serious issue regarding the cement factory and I would like to assure the Member and the House that the Ministry of Trade and Industry is working through UDC to establish a cement factory in Moroto and it will progress. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

MS TETE CHELANGAT: Hon. Minister, were you waiting for me to talk so that you say these things? (Laughter)

12.47
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to make my observation following what hon. Kasirivu has stated. We passed a loan here sometime back for the upgrading of Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kabwoya Road and we want to get an assurance from the Minister of Works, whether the money is still there and when you intend to commence the construction of the Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kabwoya Road.

Secondly, I want to find out from the minister what plans they have especially for the roads connecting to the tourist sites like Murchison Falls Park because these roads are in bad shape all over the country. 

Thirdly, I want to find out the plans that the ministry has especially to connect Masindi to Kiboga and Kyankwanzi. This will help us to ease the movements and especially to take our animals across to Kiboga and the other districts. 

12.48
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice especially to hon. Bakaluba’s submission about what is happening to the Mukono-Katosi Road. Hon. Byandala is my friend and he has raised issues in the media and we have read about those issues. So, Mr Speaker, I request my fellow colleagues that before we pass the Ministry of Works’ budget, hon. Byandala should first make a statement on what is happening on these roads. Mr Speaker, it is an area where there are many Cabinet ministers involved and we have read all those issues and the public is interested. We are now discussing issues but of today, the public is interested to know what is happening on this Mukono-Katosi Road.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I want to add that there is another problem on our roads and this is the Mbarara-Ntungamo Road –(Member timed out.)

12.50
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have three issues. On page 7 in table 4 of the report, they indicate that they provided Shs 55 billion for Musita-Majanji-Lumiino Road and they have said that they have so far spent Shs 27 billion on this road. To my surprise, Mr Speaker, I used that road over the weekend and there is nothing that has happened on the road. The Committee on Physical Infrastructure visited this road in July and they interacted with a number of stakeholders and no indication of any payment has been done. Can we know how this money was used and where the balance - the Shs 28 billion is; otherwise there is suspicion towards this transaction. We badly need the roads; for a considerable number of years we have been pushing for the construction of this road.

Mr Speaker, we also have tourism roads like Kidepo, Bwindi which are fetching a lot of revenue for the country but they have not been attended to. Can we, as Parliament and as Government, demand that this is given priority such that our foreign exchange earnings are enhanced?

On a selfish note, there is a road that starts from Iganga, Luuka up to Kamuli. This road is impassable and during the campaigns there was a pledge and a promise that this road would be included among those to be tarmacked. I will be happy if that kaveera is also taken that side that we also have a tarmac road connected on to three districts. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very important sector and the debate has taken three hours. I notice, hon. Minister, that there are concerns coming from all over the country including Bunyaruguru who have not spoken, Kyadondo East, Kyotera, Bulambuli, Kiryandongo - Kigulu South has spoken already. Jie, Bukora, Masaka, greater Bushenyi, including Mitooma and Obongi. Generally the whole country has issues to do with these issues of roads but we now have to close the debate. So, I will ask the shadow minister to make some responses in five minutes.

12.53
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR LANDS AND PHYSICAL PLANNING (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Mr Speaker, I am going to speak for three sectors: the works and transport sector, the housing sector and the lands sector. I would like to seek your indulgence – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have already spent a minute; I wish you had just started. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, we as the Opposition continue to be concerned about the high cost of road construction in this country. Uganda spends over Shs 2 billion to upgrade the roads from gravel to bitumen. We would like to hear from government how these costs can be brought down.

Secondly, we are concerned about the rampant vandalisation of road signage on our roads. I will give an example of the Matugga-Semuto-Kapeeka Road which does not have a single road sign. These have been stolen and yet Government continues to lament as if they do not control anything in this country. I would reiterate the fact that these road signs and markings are a prerequisite to road safety and unless we have them maintained we can never dream about having safe roads.

Mr Speaker, the Uganda Road Fund continues to suffer under funding. It seems the Ministry of Finance has left but the problem is with the Ministry of Finance. Laws are made by this Parliament for the good governance of this country. What is the difficulty in amending the Uganda Revenue Authority Act? What is the difficulty in amending the Uganda Road Fund Act?

Maintenance is done in order to mitigate failures that occur on roads and failures are a function of the traffic that moves on roads. Traffic moves on roads because there is fuel in the tanks of these vehicles especially the road traffic. In other countries, there is a percentage of the fuel levy that is automatically transferred to the national road fund for road maintenance. We would like to see this happening in this country.

I would like to decry the non-adherence to proper procurement procedures in the Ministry of Works. The Mukono-Katosi-Kisoga-Nyenga road is a classic example where procurement procedures and political interference have caused the near collapse of this project; a project that we have been talking about for many years now. We would like a clear explanation from the Minister of Works.

Delayed implementation of projects has already been mentioned and one thing that needs to be noted is the fact that once an infrastructure project is delayed, there is a likelihood that the cost of the project will rise and this has been happening with our roads. My colleagues talked about the Tororo-Mbale-Soroti road whose cost has increased by more than 20 percent and this is a cost to the taxpayer. Mr Speaker, there are very few roads in this country that have been constructed within the specified contract period. 

I would like the minister to address his mind to the more than 10,000 kilometres that was upgraded from district to national roads. These have remained an eye sore and a big embarrassment to the Uganda National Roads Authority and to the Ministry of Works.

It is mentioned here that the district roads are actually better maintained than these roads that were upgraded from district to central government roads. If there is a difficulty by the ministry maintaining these roads, why don’t you give back these roads to the districts and give them the finances to maintain the roads? Otherwise, you are merely exposing your inefficiency and inability to maintain roads - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, two more minutes. Proceed.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In two minutes, maybe I should talk about the Ministry of Lands. I was proceeding well, if I could just be given four more minutes. There is land grabbing in the Albertine Graben and this is undisputed. The Opposition has been to Bunyoro and we have seen this with our own eyes. Save the people of Bunyoro, save this country.

We have talked about land grabbing and the government has promised to bring here a list of people who purchased land dating back five or ten years in the region but nothing has been done. I want to say that the cost of land compensation is Shs 4.5 million per acre in the Albertine Graben. I think this is almost unmeasured; it cannot be compared to the cost of compensation on some roads like the Mbarara by-pass. Stop cheating the people of the Albertine Graben. Stop cheating the Banyoro.

The resource under the piece of land that you are compensating is a high value resource. I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Lands to re-visit compensation in the Albertine Graben, in the region bordering the Nile in West Nile and the East, in the Nile in Amuru and Nwoya and in Masindi District where there are exploration activities taking place at the moment.

Mr Speaker, this government is one government that does not know what it owns in terms of land. It does not. We have, time and again, asked for an inventory from the Minister of Lands of the land belonging to Government but nothing has come –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, you have four minutes.

1.01
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will take less than four minutes. First of all, I want to appreciate the work done by the committee especially in absorbing all the views that were given by the alternative policy statement. They were all absorbed in the report and I want to thank the committee for being nationalistic.

I would also like to appreciate that this time round, the two ministers; hon. Byandala and hon. Byabagambi did attend the committee and they were able to reply to some of the concerns that were raised by the committee. However, we still insist that the Minister of State for Housing should also attend the committee business because it is very important for us.

Mr Speaker, I have four concerns to raise in the next two minutes. The first one is about land, the second is about land, the third one is about land and the fourth one is about Civil Aviation Authority.

My first concern about land is not so much about land grabbing. As Parliament, we have asked the Ministry of Lands to make available to us details of individuals and companies that have purchased land in the last ten years and also in the last five years so that we understand and know who these people are who have suddenly got so interested in buying land in the Albertine area in Bunyoro. We have been asking the government to make that available to us and we have not got it.

Can I make a last attempt to ask the ministry and probably we give a time period of about two months, to make available to Parliament all those details of the individuals and companies that have bought land in the Albertine area in the last ten years and also in the last five years?

The second concern about land is that Government is the custodian of all the pieces of land that are known to belong to the people of Uganda so they hold those pieces of land in trust for the people of Uganda. 

We are so concerned when we read in the media of how Government has disposed of those pieces of land and we want to know under what authority the government sells the people’s property without consulting us. We have heard about the sale of the Prison land and we have heard about the sale of the Butabika land, which was meant for the future development of that hospital. We have heard about the land neighbouring us here; Shimoni and all that. So, who gives the government authority to sell land, which the government is holding in trust for this country? That is my second concern.

My third concern about land is that we know that the government has some development programmes and I think all Ugandans, including I who comes from the North and from Dokolo, are willing to embrace any form of development and nobody would object to development land but we want whoever is interested in investment anywhere in Uganda; whether in Dokolo, Masindi – wherever - you must negotiate with the owners of the land. We do not want a situation where the owners of the land are left behind and the government negotiates on behalf of the owners and yet we do not know the terms. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, we are also concerned about the state of affairs in the Civil Aviation Authority. But when you look at the government policy statement for this year, it does not include anything to do with building capacity in that institution. So, I want to know how serious the government is to ensure that the Civil Aviation Authority is able to carry out the oversight responsibility that is entrusted upon it. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We come to the ministers; each will take seven minutes.

1.06
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I thank the committee on Physical Infrastructure and my colleague MPs for the interest you have shown in this. I am really excited and this is the spirit in which we should work. 

I will just make a few comments on the report of the chairman. When you go to page 1, he talked about re-allocation bringing problems. There are procedures to follow. We get authority from the Ministry of Finance, so there is no way we can divert this money. 

And on page 7, they show the absorption by UNRA at 39 percent and we rate this very carefully. This was up to quarter three. But when you go to quarter four, our performance is above 85 percent. 

On page 12, which also goes up to page 13, the committee was talking of using testing equipment of contractors – this is not true. We use our own equipment and where they are not present, the next area we go to are the consultants, who are actually part of us. 

On page 15, they also talked about land for the airport. I am happy to report that we have already resolved the differences between my ministry and the Ministry of Agriculture; they have given us 115 hectares and we will give them some 20 hectares in Mpigi. They are cancelling the existing titles and soon, we shall be getting the title for the 115 hectares. 

Then on page 16, they talked about escalating costs on Tororo – Mbale – Soroti – Fort Portal – Bundibugyo – Lamia – Kabale Kisoro Road. These happened due to a division in the design. For the other two in the hilly areas, there were landslides. Due to the landslides, we had to increase eating into the people’s land and this land could not be taken for free. So, due to the land slides, change in the design inevitably brought in extra costs. 

Now, let me go to what my colleagues the MPs have talked about. I will start with what hon. Ssekikubo talked about. He was insinuating on the Mukono – Katosi – Nyenga Road. My boss the Chief Government Whip made a statement here telling you that Government is handling this issue. We are going to come back here with a statement. 

But what is very interesting and which we should take to the public is that the road works are going on. Works will not stop, they will continue and be finalised. (Interjections) Let everybody carry this message; work is going on and the project will be completed. 

There were claims that money has been lost. What was paid was advance payment. And advance payment is money given to a contractor to facilitate him or kick-start him. And this money is recovered – (Interjections) – I am talking about a contractor, please. (Interruption) 

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, I think the minister needs to be calm when handling this matter because information about this road – issues of the ghost contractor; Eutaw, which is implementing this road is known by everybody. We need to understand information of how the magic is going to come out in order to continue to implement the works that are going on. 

So, is he in order to make a sweeping statement about how the works are going to continue yet this Parliament needs information to take to the people whose land and buildings are being demolished without being compensated?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister said: “The work will continue and the project will be completed”. That means whatever is involved, work will be done. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to assure the nation that this advance payment is recovered in the certificates; as long as you do work up to 30 percent, you start recovering this money up to 60 percent. This money will be recovered. I want to assure the nation that this money has not been lost; works will continue and works will be completed. We are going to come back here and give you a statement, Mr Speaker and my colleague MPs. 

The next thing is about the national airline –(Interruption) 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, you gave the minister chance to put his records right. I think it is wrong to create the impression that even if you are dealing with a company that is known to be illegal, or conmen, the work will continue. That shows Uganda is a reckless country; that is not what we expected of you. 

Mr Speaker, I expected the minister to stand up and tell the country that, “Yes, the work is going on and the company that was subcontracted is the one, which is carrying on that work”, and he should also seek the authority of Parliament and this country for endorsement of the subcontracted company. That would put things right. 

But now, who are you continuing with; are you continuing with the conman? How are you going to finish that work when on record we have conmen? So, is the minister in order – we have given you a chance to put records right. Are you in order to make our situation worse by making us believe that we are dealing with conmen? Is this honourable minister in order to continue confusing us?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Parliament did not sanction the first contract; this Parliament cannot sanction even a subcontract. It is not the responsibility of this House to go on approving contracts of this nature. Please, let us know our mandate properly. 

MR HARUNA KYEYUNE: Mr Speaker, the Government Chief Whip had pointed out that they were going to come up with a comprehensive report in respect to Mukono-Katosi Road. So, wouldn’t it be prudent for the minister to answer only questions related to the Mukono-Katosi Road as we await that comprehensive report from the Government Chief Whip?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you had seven minutes but now I do not know how many are left.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was only responding to what my colleagues asked. Okay, the hon. Jacob Oboth asked if we have a master plan. Yes, we have a national transport master plan and in addition to that, we have the greater Kampala Metropolitan area master plan. Those are in place and so, we are not working out of the blue.

On the national airliner, I want to say that the present policy of Government was to divest ourselves from this industry. However, we are now having a second thought. I am due to submit to Cabinet a paper for discussion but also you will recall that in the State of the Nation Address by H.E the President, there was a mention about why we want to make Air Uganda, the national airliner. We are still having discussions and when we are ready, we will report to Parliament on the formation of the national airliner.

There were talks about the roads in the areas of Kigumba, Masindi, Hoima, Kabwoya and Kyenjojo in relation to the money being used. I want to assure colleagues who have brought up this matter and the nation at large that this money has not yet been accessed. Our development partners, the African Development Bank, have not yet given a letter of no objection on the evaluated bidders.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up in two minutes. 

MR BYANDALA: It will be after we have got that letter signed by the contractor that work will start. That is when we will also access that money.

Hon. Muwuma talked about money that was released for Musita Road and that nothing has been done yet. Yes, this money was given to the contractor as a down payment. And after we have done that, we always give the contractor a three-month period for mobilisation. So, while the money is already with him, the contractor is still mobilising and soon we will be on the ground to work on it.

There was something about the Masindi-Apac-Kitgum Road. I am happy to report that I have already met my colleague, the Minister of Transport of South Sudan. So, this is the same as Atiak-Moyo-Afojo Road – those two roads – we are jointly making an application to the African Development Bank for funding under that docket of roads connecting the two countries. So, we are already working on that. We only need to be patient.

As for the Northern Uganda region, we have already signed a contract to upgrade the Olwiyo-Anak-Gulu Road. The other one will be Gulu-Acholi-Bu Road, Acholi-Bu-Kitgum-Omusingo – we have a contract with all these. They also are under mobilisation and any time, those roads are going to be tarmacked.

Mr Speaker, on the Kapchorwa-Swam Road, I want to say that road is in the same category as the one from Madindi-Apac. We are doing this jointly with the Republic of Kenya. They will handle this road from the other side while Uganda will handle this side. Lucky enough, as Uganda, we are already ahead of Kenya. But I am pushing the counterpart Ministry of Works of Kenya to ensure they take their request to the bank as soon as possible so that this money can be approved.

On roads taken over by UNRA, I want to say that we took over only 10,000 kilometres and we were given Shs 50 billion, which means Shs 5 million was allocated for every kilometre on each road. But that money is not enough to regravel a road.

The money given to us is not enough and that is why Government is trying its level best – year in, year out – and I thank you colleagues, for approving more money for us to do maintenance. We started with 280 but now we have reached 400 and more. When we clock 600 and more, we will be having enough money to maintain these roads. We will also be in a position of ensuring people access their places via good roads.

Government is aware, Government is concerned and Government is determined to see these things are done properly. On the Mubende-Kamkumiro-Ndaiga Road, I want to say this is a design-and-build road to be funded by the Government of Uganda. It is on course and before 2016, we shall be on the ground working on it.

Hon. Amuriat said that the cost of doing a road in Uganda is expensive when you compare to other countries but we need to know that when you go to countries like Tanzania and Rwanda, materials such as murram and gravels are free. They are not bought because they belong to Government. In Uganda, we buy all material.

When you go to a country like Tanzania, it is very difficult for us to compare because while we are a landlocked country bearing huge transport costs, Tanzania is not. These are some of the factors that make our units slightly higher. 

However, I am happy to report to you – by the time, I joined that ministry, a kilometre would cost more than $1 million but now, we are between $700,000 and $800,000 per kilometre. So, you can see that we are going down. We have increased on competition and things are getting better.

On road signs being stolen, I appeal to all of you – it is good that hon. Amuriat appreciated that we have installed them but that they are stolen by your people. So, I am appealing to you to educate our people to stop stealing these road signs. They are out there for a purpose to give direction to the moving public. So, assist us in ensuring they are not stolen.

Many issues have been talked about and I have taken note of this. (Interjections)– about his road; I want to say that I have been in contact with the Speaker. I have also written to him and he knows what is going on. (Interjections)

I think on the issues – but there is this issue on Lira-Pader and the Kyakahita-Kazo-Ibanda-Kamwenge Road and it is not having an access road. I want to say that when you do not have money, you cannot do everything. You only can do what fits into your budget. When we do the main road, later we can do the access roads too and so, you should appreciate those roads that have been started on.

My colleague talked about there being no tarmac road in Kitgum District. But I have just told you that we already have a signed contract to do the road from Gulu to Acholi-Bu and Musingo. So, you are covered. It is just a matter of being patient; we will move on very well.

I do not know what happened to the reverend because he said that the Government has failed but that is totally wrong because we know Uganda –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I have been forced to rise on a point of procedure regarding what has been referred to as your road – the road from Karuma to Gulu. Yet, the minister claims he has communicated to you on the ground that work has been given to a contractor and that work is already going on.

My knowledge is that, that is one road from Kawempe to Gulu but the construction differs from Karuma to Gulu. From here to Karuma it is going to be asphalt concrete smooth but from Karuma to Gulu it is just going to be a mere surface dressing and yet, you know there is heavy traffic actually between Kona Kamdini to Gulu because of the heavy traffic from Kenya.

The chairman of Gulu has communicated to you and to the ministry and even copied to the Speaker who is a Member of Parliament who actually uses the most of this road together with hon. Amongi.

Is the honourable minister procedurally right to sweep this matter under the carpet yet construction has actually started? People are concerned and are asking whether the people of northern Uganda are not entitled to a concrete road. When you are moving from Karuma and you say; these people can afford only surface dressing and yet it is one road. 

Mr Speaker you launched that construction work in Gulu and you know, it is – 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the honourable member for Aswa, the point is made. It is true the point you have made. Please, honourable minister, why the variation?
 
MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, what my friend hon. Okumu is saying is true. I looked at the designs and I instructed my technical people to work out with extra money needed to move from surface dressing to premix. We are looking at this one and I think this is how we are going to move. You are definitely right and this is something we had already identified.

I thank you all colleagues for the interest you have shown; the advice you have given has enhanced my knowledge on this.

1.27
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report and recommendations contained in the same, which we are going to pursue in order to ensure effective and enhanced service delivery to our people.

I also want to thank Members for the valuable points that they have raised that will enable us pursue our duties in a manner that is focused.

Members raised the issue of our international boundaries and the need to make sure that we re-survey them, mark them and secure them. We have been having meetings under the chairmanship of Ministry of Foreign Affairs with the countries that neighbour us. We have had meetings to do with Rwanda, DRC, we have been trying to have meetings with South Sudan. We have also been having meetings with Kenya and Tanzania.

I would like to say that meetings to do with resolving boundary issues with South Sudan have been having some complications mainly arising out of the complicated politics in South Sudan and the command that the Government in Juba has over some elements who are living along our borders.

This matter has been taken up at head of state level and I am sure following their instructions, we shall be able to get the necessary cooperation of our counterparts and officials operating along the border with South Sudan. but we are extremely sorry regarding the unfortunate incidents that took place on our border with South Sudan a few days ago when the census was being undertaken and as Government, we are going to do whatever it takes to make sure that this does not happen again.

The issue of the boundary between Kenya and Uganda has been a matter that the two governments have been taking keen interest in, ever since the Migingo days. We have by and large resolved the issues of Migingo but we are also trying to carryout verification work right from the southern point to the northern point.

We had a meeting with Members of Parliament from Karamoja and they raised the issue of incursions of our brothers, the Turkana, from Kenya into Uganda. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs was notified because when we are dealing with international boundaries, as a ministry, we cannot move on our own. This is a bilateral matter, government to government and therefore, we have got to get the involvement of the two governments and the ministries of foreign affairs in the two countries do chair that exercise and this has been brought to their attention.

The issue of internal boundaries and in particular, Mbale- Budaka, has been with us for quite some time but as a Government, we have decided that we pursue this matter between the ministries of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and Water and Environment and funding has been secured under the JICA line of credit. We should be in position to do our work in that area but we would like to appeal to leaders here; many of these disputes involving districts are really Governance issues, which require the input of us the leaders from those areas because we have had very unfortunate incidents where we send our surveyors to do the boundary survey and demarcation and our people are chased away with spears, pangas and jambias and so on. We want to appeal to you and unfortunately, in a few cases, we have seen on TV some MPs not far from the vicinity of some of these wrangles.

My appeal is that if we are going to be in a position to earnestly solve some of these problems, your support and involvement will be required. (Interruption)
MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. The minister has made a very serious statement. First he started by appealing to MPs to help him and then later on he alluded that actually some of the Members of Parliament are part of the problem. 

Is it in order for the minister just to go away without substantiating and naming some of these MPS because just to give a blanket statement, all of us would be suspects as we move, including you, Mr Speaker. So, is the minister in order to leave every Member of Parliament as people who are inciters and against any development by Government?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I heard the minister say sometimes on television, MPs are seen not far away from the vicinity of these incidents. If it is a fact, honourable minister, please, substantiate.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to once again appeal to Members of Parliament as leaders to give us the necessary support. What I meant is that when you are an MP and there is a situation within the vicinity, please, come out and proactively assist Government so that the matter can be resolved.

I need your support and I will continue appealing to you; the only way we shall be able to resolve these problems is when you deliver a positive message to your constituents.

There was the issue of physical planning. We passed the Physical Planning Act in 2010 and this requires us to plan for the whole country. However, we have been faced with the problem of resources and the report of the committee rightly pointed out that if resources can be provided, we should be in a position to fast-track this activity. 

However, I would like to assure Members that it is not true that we are just waiting for resources enough to cover the entire country before we start. We have been moving in phases and so far – as my colleague, the Minister for Works has pointed out, we have been doing some work in Kampala. We are also doing some work in the Albertine Graben. We are doing some work in the Karuma area and there is the Northern Infrastructural Corridor where we are going to ensure we acquire land in advance for purposes of road construction, the development of the railway line and for purposes of ensuring we develop the gas pipelines and internet cables.

This work is on-going and we shall require your support when we get to discuss these plans with your local authorities, urban authorities and you as Members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, my colleagues, the minister on the opposite side, the hon. Amuriat, raised the issue of land grabbing in the Albertine Graben. We had a problem of land grabbing in that area but the President and his government took a decision to carry out a moratorium on issuance of titles to land in this area. I am, however, as we speak faced with the problem of pressure from the people in the Albertine Graben who would like to acquire land titles.

We shall provide you with all the information that you requested for because this is within the public domain. It is our duty to ensure we give you this information. But the critical thing is that we want to make sure that as titles are issued, work that is supposed to progress in that region in regard to the development of the petroleum industry is not affected. I am sure we shall be able to discuss this one and agree on how to move.

On inventory on government land, I want to say that there is an inventory, but which must be updated all the time. As we promised the committee, this will be made available. I have been going through my notes and noticed that a submission was made by the permanent secretary in regard to the available inventory of government land but which is being updated.

There was the issue of land for investors. As Government, we hold the view that when people want to come and invest in the land, they do not have to keep on running up and working to identify areas where they should undertake investment from. Therefore, what we have been doing is to refer these investors to Uganda Investment Authority, the Uganda Land Commission and the various district land boards. We have also gone out of our way to start working on industrial parks in 22 centres in the country.

We believe that once these industrial parks have been established, it will make it easy for Government to direct the investors to the areas where they should go in order to undertake their investment with minimum inconvenience.

It is true we have been trying to encourage some investors to work, with individual land owners and the private sector. But that takes a lot of time, yet we need to do what is being done by other countries to make it easy for them to attract investors. In pursuit of this, Government is pursuing a programme of ensuring that people in the various parts of the country have land titles. Even land that has been communally owned in the past, there is an arrangement where a title can be issued to a clan; to an association formed by clan members and must be able to provide –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I think we will stop there. Minister of Finance, do you want in one minute to say something?

1.41
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the honourable members in appreciating the committee’s report on physical infrastructure. I would like to make one clarification in the context of the question from the honourable member from Bulamogi.

Section  19 (1) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 commands spending agencies to return unspent funds to the Consolidated Fund at the end of the financial year. While under section 13(3) the minister may withhold subsequent quarterly releases pending an entity satisfying accountability requirements. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is time for us to now take a decision on this report. I now put a question for your decision that the report of the sectoral Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for financial year 2014/2015 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had agreed that we would rise at 2 O’clock for a break and come back but we still have 15 minutes. If the chairperson can present that report in those 15 minutes, that will be good. Is that okay?

Honourable members, maybe we will be putting a lot of pressure on the chairperson of the committee. May be, let us rise and resume 15 minutes earlier. Will that be proper?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the House is suspended. We will resume at 2.45 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 1.45 p.m.)

(On resumption, at 2.53 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_) 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chairperson, please, present the summary of the summary.

2.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I would like to move a motion for the House to adopt the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial year 2014/2015.

Before I start, I would like to lay on Table all the documents that we used during the consideration of the ministerial policy statement. I have in the documents, the report of the committee, the minutes, the Private Sector Platform for Action, Uganda Wildlife Authority policy 2014, Uganda Wildlife Education Centre annual report 2013, Uganda Wildlife Authority general management report and a copy of the alternative ministerial policy statements for the Ministry of Trade and the Ministry of Tourism. I beg to lay them on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those documents including the copy of the report.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to proceed and just read a summary of the observations and recommendations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, in the introduction, in accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 177(a) and (d) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, sectoral committees are mandated to examine and comment on policy matters affecting ministries and departments under their jurisdiction and critically examine government recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House.

In the scope of our findings, we were looking at Vote 015 for Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Vote 110, Uganda Industrial Research Institute; Vote 154, Uganda National Bureau of Standards; Vote 022, Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities; Vote 117, Uganda Tourism Board and their respective agencies.

This report covers the following aspects: the sector mandate, the budget performance in financial year 2013/2014, sector achievements in financial year 2013/2014, planned activities and programmes for the financial year 2014/2015, funds requested for to implement the planned activities and the committee’s observations and recommendations.

On vote 015, under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, these are the observations and recommendations.

    1.   Lack of National Export Strategy

The committee observes that Uganda Export Promotion Board, which is the driver of the export sector does not have a national export strategy. This has affected the export sector thus widening the trade deficit. The committee further notes that export promotion, vote function 0611, under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives does not have any budget in the financial year 2014/2015.

It should also be noted that Uganda Export Promotion Board’s inability to decentralise its services has contributed to a lack of knowledge of the producers about the export market for the available products.

The committee recommends that all responsible stakeholders in this sector should expedite the process of developing a national export strategy.

Secondly, that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates Shs 3.8 billion and creates a vote for Uganda Export Promotion Board for it to promote exports and narrow the trade deficits.

    2) Uganda Commodity Exchange

The committee observes that Uganda Commodity Exchange, a private company limited by guarantee that has been playing the delegated role on behalf of Uganda Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority in the management of Uganda Warehouse Receipts System Authority has been demutualised with the stakeholders agreeing on a shareholding of 80 percent by the private sector and 20 percent by Uganda Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority.

The committee was informed that the ministry is in the process of establishing Uganda Warehouse Receipts Systems Authority as provided for in section 3 of the Uganda Warehouse Receipts Systems Act, 2006 and a Cabinet memo has been prepared on the establishment of the board of directors of this authority as provided for in Section 7 of the Warehouse Receipts Systems Act, 2006.

The committee recommends that the process of establishing Warehouse Receipts Systems Authority should be expedited and the budget of Shs 281 million that was planned for activities of the Uganda Commodity Exchange be provided and utilised for setting up Uganda Warehouse Receipts Systems Authority.

    3)    Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill

The committee notes that on 9 April 2013, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives withdrew the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill with a view of making some amendments to it and reporting back in three months’ time. However, the period has elapsed and the Bill has not been re-submitted. The committee was informed that a technical working group was formed to handle the review and this comprised officials from Uganda National Bureau of Standards, Uganda Registration Services Bureau, Ministry of Trade and Industry and Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

The committee also notes that the public is not aware of the importance of the Anti-Counterfeit Bill. The committee observes that the ministry has been misinforming the public that the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill is before Parliament. 

The committee recommends that the ministry presents this Bill to Parliament, the public be sensitised about the effects of counterfeits and information about Anti-Counterfeit Bill be disseminated widely.

    4) Soroti fruit factory

The committee observed that the delay in the construction of Soroti fruit factory was associated with the fear of ownership by the financiers of the project. However, these fears have been contained and the land title has been secured. An annex is attached to the report and the project is starting in November 2014.

The committee recommends that the construction of the Soroti fruit factory be expedited so that we do not lose money and time.

    5)   Uganda Development Corporation (UDC)

The committee was informed that the certificate of financial implications for UDC was issued by the Ministry of Finance and the Bill on UDC is before Cabinet. The committee recommends that the ministry expedites this process and presents this Bill to Parliament.

    6) Revival of Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry and district chambers of commerce and industry.

The committee observes that worldwide, the chambers of commerce play a great role in mobilising traders and have diverse membership. In Uganda, the Chamber of Commerce and Industry has a nationwide membership with ten regional and over eight district branches that are not very vibrant and need to be revived to champion the aspirations of the traders as an engine of development, employment of youth, mobilisation of micro, small and medium enterprises and a forum through which to communicate Government policies about trade in the country.

The committee further observed that due to lack of such a forum, it has led to manipulation and misinformation of traders and government policy. For instance, during the recent strike held by traders in Kampala on the re-introduction of pre-export verification and conformity to standards, there was no clear platform for negotiation especially with the traders that live in the countryside.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation in the medium-term expenditure framework that Government supports the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry through a Public Private Partnership to revive the Chamber of Commerce countrywide. 

    7)   Support to Uganda South Sudan Traders

The committee notes that South Sudan is a very important trade partner of Uganda and therefore, there is need to ensure that a harmonious relationship exists between the people of the two countries to foster good trade relationships by removing the impediments that exist such as insecurity of the Ugandan business community in South Sudan; improving the road infrastructure between Gulu and Nimule and compensation of traders who lost their goods. 

The committee further notes that it made a report on the issue of South Sudan traders and the report was adopted by Parliament. However, the Minister of Trade was given 90 days to give a status and to-date nothing has been done. The committee also notes that the business of some of the said South Sudan traders collapsed when they lost all their property and money.

The committee recommends:
    i. That Government sets aside a revolving fund to help the traders who lost their property to revamp their businesses.  
    ii. That Government supports and protects Ugandan traders in South Sudan.
    iii. That Government commences the construction of the Gulu Nimule Road to improve on the infrastructure in order to facilitate trade. 
    iv. That the responsible minister responds to the issues that were raised in the report of the petition of the Uganda South Sudan Traders.

    8)  Deployment of commercial attachés

The committee observed that four years ago, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives recruited officers to be posted as commercial attachés in their missions aboard. However, to date, these attachés have not been deployed. 

The committee recommends that Government allocates funds to facilitate the deployment of commercial attachés in missions abroad such as China, Sudan and others that have proved of recent to be viable business destinations for Uganda in order to improve the trade relations and narrow the trade deficit. 

    9) Develop medium small enterprises policy on quality and standards

The committee observes and appreciates that in this financial year 2014/2015, Government has allocated Shs 818 million for wage enhancement and establishment of the MSMEs Directorate in the Ministry of Trade. However, the committee is concerned about the policy on standards on MSMEs especially where the committee was informed that standards are voluntary, which leaves room for substandard goods to penetrate the local market. 

The committee recommends that the policy on standards of local goods be reviewed with a view to make the standards compulsory for all enterprises and products on the market. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to propose that this budget allocation for Vote 015 be adopted by this House as follows for the financial year 2014/2015.

Recurrent expenditure - Shs 9,137,990,000: The wage bill is Shs 2,140,773,000; non-wage is Shs 6,922,956,000 and arrears of Shs 74,261,000; Development expenditure - Shs 10,312,791,000: For Government of Uganda, it is Shs 7,166,114,000 and donors are contributing Shs 3,146,677,000; non-VAT taxes is zero and the total for Vote 015 is Shs 19,450,781,000. 

VOTE 110 - UGANDA INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE (UIRI)

Observations 

Support to projects

The committee observed that the Uganda Industrial Research Institute has carried out extensive research on two major projects such as essential oil projects and bamboo processing. Essential oils are plant extras that have aromatic components and are distilled from plants using steam distillation. 

The extracted oils are used in industries that manufacture fragrances, flavours, cosmetics, household products and related high value products. 

The committee observed that support to these projects would provide platform for fostering national industrialisation efforts that can create opportunities for small medium and large scale entrepreneurs. 

The committee observed that UIRI’s selection as a centre of excellence for the East African Community in industrial research has put us on the vanguard of leading the industrialisation process in the region and thus, they have taken the initiative to set up a regional science technology and innovation hub for which we need facilitation. 

We need budget support beyond MTEF in order to build and complement our technological base and to fill the gaps occasioned by past shortfalls and inadequacies in financial provision. Specific additional budgetary needs beyond MTEF include:

    1. Establishment of a regional hub for science, technology and innovation requiring Shs 2.5 billion. 
    2. Staff recruitment and retention especially high calibre scientists and engineers require Shs 1.2 billion. 
    3. Improved emoluments for current and future staff requires Shs 3.6 billion. 
    4. Seed fund for continuing corroborative research between council for Scientific and Industrial Research of South African and UIRI requires Shs 2 billion. 
    5. Foundry technology requires Shs 1.8 billion;
    6. Expanding business incubation portfolio requires Shs 2.6 billion. 
    7. Expansion of agro-processing centres as catalyst for rural industrialisation and commercialisation of value added products requires Shs 8.42 billion.
    8. Industrial skills capacity building requires Shs 850 million
    9. Augmentation and full operationalisation of millennium science initiative project requires Shs 4.8 billion. Development of industrial value chain collaboration network and collaborative research with other organisations like the Danish Technological Institute requires Shs Shs 700,000,000. The total is Shs 28,470,000,000.

The committee recommends that Government provides this Shs 28 billion among others to support the said projects. 

Visibility of UIRI

The committee observes that projects under UIRI are not known to the public, such as the bamboo processing project. 

The committee further observes that Uganda Industrial Institute is not liaising with National Forestry Authority (NFA) to encourage the public in the zoned bamboo growing areas to take up bamboo projects and increase the production for sustainable processing. 

The committee recommends that UIRI liaises with NFA and disseminates information about its projects to the public to enable them participate effectively and sustainably. The proposed budget allocation for Vote 110 for the financial year 2014/2015 is as follows: 
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 6,017,602,000: wage is Shs 4,398,068,000; non-wage is Shs 1,519,534,000, appropriation in aid is Shs 100,000,000 and arrears is zero. 

Development expenditure requires Shs 9,028,951,000: Government of Uganda’s budget under development expenditure is Shs 9,028,951,000; there is nothing on the donor and non-VAT taxes is nil. The total is Shs 15,046,553,000. 

VOTE 154 - UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS

Observations and recommendations 

Recruitment 

The committee notes that a ban on recruitment of employees in government ministries, departments and agencies has affected the process of recruitment in UNBS and lack of staff to oversee its operations in all the 54 border points, with only 18 border points having UNBS presence. 

The committee future notes that in July 2010, Cabinet approved a capacity building memo to enhance UNBS performance through recruitment of additional staff and enhancement of staff salaries to Shs 16.4 billion over three years effective financial year 2012/2013. To date this Cabinet directive has not been implemented.

The committee recommends that the ban on recruitment on UNBS be lifted as an affirmative action to enable it recruit staff and improve manpower to implement its mandate in all the border points and especially the pre-verification on conformity and the single customs territory.

Single Customs Territory (SCT)

The Single Customs Territory (SCT) is an arrangement to clear and pay taxes of imported goods at the point of first entry. It was reached at by the heads of State in a tripartite meeting held in accordance with the East African Common Protocol between the Republic of Rwanda, Kenya and Uganda to help reduce non-tariff barriers. 

The implementation of this programme started 12 September 2013.  However, the committee observed that UNBS has not yet deployed the five officers to Mombasa because the URA has not yet linked UNBS into the Automated System for Customs Data system (ASYCUDA).

The committee recommends that URA links UNBS into the system so that they are able to carry out their duties. It further recommends that UNBS be given affirmative action to recruit staff that will be enough to be deployed at all the points where they need to oversee the matters of standards and quality assurance.

Completion of UNBS home

The committee notes that Government is providing Shs 2 billion annually towards the construction of the UNBS home that started in April 2012. The first phase is almost ready and has so far cost the bureau Shs 4.3 billion but still requires more funding. The picture of the project is attached to the report.


The committee recommends thus: Government should frontloads Shs 12 billion for the completion of the UNBS home and thus the bureau will save Shs 600 million per annum in rent and related costs or Government supports UNBS to borrow these funds at a low interest rate payable over a period of time.


Construction of Laboratories to support Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)

The committee further notes that the bureau seeks to construct initial two laboratories for food and engineering in order to facilitate certification of SMEs and local manufacturers meeting the products standards and quality required to access regional and international markets. This will also enable locally manufactured products to compete favorably with high quality imported products on the domestic market.

The committee reiterates its recommendation in the MTEF that Government supports UNBS to borrow these funds at a low interest rate payable over a period of time for them to construct the laboratory.

Weights and measures

The committee observes that most of the weighing scales used by traders in Uganda are tampered with and do not give the right measurements hence cheating the clients.

The Uganda National Bureau of Standards informed the committee that Hansom scales which are commonly used in Uganda can easily be tampered with and most of them have been confiscated. 

Besides, the existing law on Weights and Measures, 1963, Cap 103 that is being applied is not stringent since the culprits are only charged Shs 3,000 as penalty for non-compliance. The committee was further informed that the amendment of this law has been tabled before Cabinet.

The committee recommends thus: 
a) 	Cabinet expedites the amendment of the existing law on weights and measures in order to deter traders from cheating the public.
b) 	Hansom scales, which are easily tampered with are banned from the Ugandan market. 
c)	UNBS should carry out routine inspections and monitor weighing scales used in trading in Uganda to prevent unscrupulous businessmen from cheating customers.

Pre- Verification on Conformity Procedures

The committee observes that pre-verification on conformity on goods destined for Uganda is a very necessary evil. However, the challenges involved in addressing the issue of counterfeit goods is still enormous especially in countries like China where the approved agents cannot cover all the ports of exports due to inadequate knowledge and lack of capacity. Therefore, goods are being verified after export when they are already in the country. This gives a loophole for manipulation.

The committee recommends that the ministry evaluates and reviews the contracts of the agents to bring on pre-verification and conformity to bring compliance to the agreed procedures.

The proposed budget allocation for Vote 154 for the financial year 2014/2015 is as follows: 
Recurrent expenditure is Shs 14,763,446,000: wage will take Shs 5,764,699,000 and non-wage will take Shs 3,483,747,000, appropriation in aid (AIA) will take Shs 5,515,000,000 and arrears are nil.

The Development expenditure is Shs 4,065,925,000, out of which Government of Uganda will have Shs 3,565,925,000, aid is Shs 500,000,000. There will be no appropriation on donor and non-VAT taxes. The total is Shs 18,829,371,000.

VOTE 022 - MINISTRY OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES

Observations and Recommendations

    1. Compensation of land owners

The committee observes that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has finalised the survey and evaluation of the Katonga Wildlife Reserve and compensation valuation report for land located at Plot No. 1 Block 93 and Plot No.1 Block 94 Kyaka Katonga has been produced.

The valuation report has valued the land in the two villages of Kisororo (647.915 acres) and Byabasiita (640.65 acres) at Shs 2.98 billion. The details are in the annex in the report.

The committee further observes that Uganda Wildlife Authority has budgeted for these funds in their budget for the financial year 2014/2015 and the beneficiaries whose details are herein attached in the valuation report are already being compensated and are required to have vacated the conservation areas within six months effective 18 August 2014.

The committee notes that the process of compensation of the land owners has started and the agreement signing was held transparently on 18 August 2014 involving all the stakeholders such as the local district leadership and government officials. The beneficiaries opened bank accounts with Centenary Bank, which was invited at the agreement signing ceremony held on 18 July 2014 at Kyegegwa District headquarters. The committee recommends that Katonga Wildlife Reserve should be elevated to the level of a national park and that the restocking process be enhanced.

Human- Wildlife animal Conflict

The committee notes that Cabinet in its sitting of 12 March 2014 approved the Uganda Wildlife policy, which details Government’s approach to solve the matter on human wildlife conflicts. 

The policy under objective four outlines policy strategies that Government intends to implement to solve the human wildlife conflicts. This policy includes the following interventions among others; establish and maintain barriers along wildlife protected areas susceptible to stray animals, increase and direct revenue sharing funds to human wildlife conflict mitigation etcetera.

The committee further observes that there is need to review the Uganda Wildlife Act 2000 to incorporate the issue of revenue sharing in the Gorilla national parks such as Bwindi and Mgahinga national parks and the compassionate fund to the victims of wildlife wrath. 

The committee was further informed that the process of reviewing the UWA Act is on-going and soon the amendments of the Act will be before Parliament.

The committee recommends that this policy be widely circulated to all stakeholders to appreciate and understand the interventions that Government has put in place in relation to the human-wildlife animal conflict.

We recommend that the process of reviewing the UWA Act should be expedited to consider the issue of revenue sharing in the gorilla traffic parks and also look at the compassionate fund to victims of wildlife wrath.

Lack of a Land Title for Uganda Wildlife Training Institute

The committee observes that Uganda Wildlife Training Institute (UWTI) that is in Kasese District and sitting on 9.4 hectares of land does not have a land title registered in its name. The committee was informed that the process of acquiring the land title for the institute is ongoing and the blue print of the said land was ready and the file is with Kasese District Land Board.

The committee recommends that the ministry follows up this process so that the land title is secured and land protected from encroachment by unscrupulous people.

Lack of Infrastructure at the Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute

The committee observed that the Hotel Tourism and Training Institute (HTTI) in Jinja lacks the basic infrastructure such as classrooms, laboratories and others for training of their students and thus limiting its enrollment ability. 

The committee was further informed that Government does not remit funds of the government sponsored students admitted in the institute in time and that this stifles the operations and running of the institution.

The committee also observes that the World Bank loan on competiveness and Enterprise Development that had a component for the Hotel Tourism and Training Institute (HTTI) has not yet been implemented.

The committee recommends that:
Government should provide the basic infrastructure for this institute and make regular and timely remittance of funds for the government sponsored students.

That the funds for the World Bank project should be released to the respective organs to kick-start the works for which they were designated.

Competiveness and Enterprise Development Project (CEDP)

The committee observed that the World Bank loan on Competiveness and Enterprise Development Project (CEDP) that was passed by this House has not been released to the implementing agencies. However, the concern of the committee is on the $10 billion meant for Hotel Tourism and Training Institute, which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has taken up as an implementing agency of the ministerial policy statement of Ministry of Finance.

The committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development passes on these funds to the rightful ministry mandated to oversee and carry out this project. 

The proposed budget allocations for Vote 022 for the financial year 2014/2015:
Recurrent Expenditure is Shs 9,063,148,000, wage bill is Shs 1,332,333,000, non-wage is Shs 7,730,815,000, arrears are nil. Development expenditure is Shs 3,127,413,000, Government of Uganda contribution to development will be Shs 3,127,413,000, zero on donors and nil on non-VAT taxes giving a total Shs 12,190,561,000.

VOTE 117 - UGANDA TOURISM BOARD (UTB)

Observations and Recommendations

Disparity in UTB salaries

The committee observes that in financial year 2013/2014, Uganda Tourism Board requested for a supplementary budget of Shs 1.07 billion from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and this supplementary was passed by this august House. 

The committee was informed that part of these funds was used for restructuring. However, an organisation of only 13 staff was restructured partially with only top management positions being filled. The committee further observes that there were a lot of inconsistencies and disparities in the salary structure of UTB that requires attention because even in the same salary scale like T2, employees get different payments with the highest paid Shs 15 million and the lowest Shs 5.4 million in the same salary scale.
 
The committee recommends that the Office of the Auditor-General carries out special audit on human resource and evaluates the restructuring process and finds out why only partial restructuring was done in UTB. The committee also recommends that a value for money audit be done on the process.

Decline in tourists visits – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chair, are you about to finish?

MS KABAHENDA: I am about to finish, Mr Speaker. 

The committee observed that there was a decline in holiday visitors in the country in 2013 from Shs 224,436 in 2012 to 187,806 representing 16 percent decrease in visitor arrivals. This is very low compared to other East African countries like Tanzania at 79 percent and Kenya 78 percent respectively. 
This decline is associated with various issues including Uganda being a very expensive destination both in terms of accommodation and transport due to lack of a national carrier and having poor roads and other infrastructure in the tourism destinations and delays in classifying Ugandan hotels.

 The committee recommends that:
    • Government takes a deliberate effort to enhance the level of marketing Uganda internationally by, among others: reviving Uganda Airlines as the national carrier because in the EAC, it is only Uganda that does not have an identity with an airline; branding missions abroad and having tourism attachés assigned to each of them; securing airtime and space on national and international media; developing sports to compete internationally; upgrading the internal airstrips such as the ones in Kisoro, Gulu, Arua and Kasese among others to international airports to reduce on transport costs, tedious travels and promote tourism.

    • Improve the visibility and promotion of tourism by putting signage on the road sides.

    • Encourage domestic tourism in schools by reviving school clubs such as conservation clubs, wildlife clubs among others and provide for school goers accommodation at the national parks.

    • Members of Parliament should enhance the culture of promoting and supporting domestic tourism in their constituencies.

    • Regional tourism initiatives should be encouraged to harness all the cultural aspects for tourism.

The proposed budget allocations for Vote 117 for the financial year 2014/2015:
Recurrent expenditure is Shs 5,840,155,000, wage is Shs 1,164,252,000, non-wage is Shs 4,685,903,000, appropriation in aid (AIA) is nil and arrears is nil. Development expenditure is Shs 553,303,000 for Government of Uganda. The total is Shs Shs 6,403,458,000.

Mr Speaker, subject to observations and recommendations mentioned in this report, the committee recommends for the approval of the budget for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and its associated institutions and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities with its associated institutions for the financial year 2014/15 as follows:

VOTE 015 - MINISTRY OF TRADE INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES     
    a) Recurrent expenditure 	- 	Shs 9,137,990,000 
    b) Development expenditure 	- 	Shs 10,312,791,000 
    c) Total  			-	Shs 19,450,781,000

VOTE 110 - UGANDA INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE
    a) Recurrent expenditure 	-	Shs 6,017,602,000
    b) Development expenditure 	-	Shs 9,028,951,000
    c) Total  			-	Shs 15,046,553,000

VOTE 154 - UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS
    a) Recurrent expenditure 	- 	Shs 14,763,446,000
    b) Development expenditure 	-	Shs 4,065,925,000
    c) Total   			- 	Shs 18,829,371,000
The grand total for the ministry is Shs 53,326,705,000 (Recurrent – Shs 29,919,038,000 and Development – Shs 23,407,667,000)

VOTE 022 - MINISTRY OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES
Recurrent expenditure is Shs 9,063,148,000, Development expenditure is Shs 3,127,413,000 and the total is Shs 12,190,561,000. 

VOTE 117 - UGANDA TOURISM BOARD
    a) Recurrent expenditure 	-	Shs 5,850,155,000
    b) Development expenditure  	-	Shs 553,303,000 
    c) Total   			-	Shs 6,403,458,000

The other institutions

UGANDA WILDLIFE AUTHORITY
    a) Recurrent expenditure 	-	Shs 49,458,879,592
    b) Development expenditure 	-	Shs 22,050,000,000
    c) Total 			-	Shs 71,508,879,592

UGANDA WILDLIFE EDUCATION CENTRE
    a) Recurrent Expenditure 	-	Shs 3,269,452,983
    b) Development expenditure 	-	Shs 200,000,000 
    c) Total         			-	 Shs 3,469,452,983

HOTEL AND TOURISM TRAINING INSTITUTE
    a) Recurrent expenditure 	-	Shs 2,648,023,993
    b) Development expenditure 	-	Shs 210,000,000
    c) Total         			-	Shs 2,858,023,993

UGANDA WILDLIFE TRAINING INSTITUTE
    a) Recurrent expenditure 	- 	Shs 842,944,000
    b) Development expenditure  	-	Shs 160,000,000
    c) Total        			-	Shs 1,002,944,000

The total for recurrent expenditure under the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is Shs 71,132,603,568, Development expenditure is Shs 26,300,716,000 and the grand total is Shs 97,433,319,568. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much, Madam Chair and the committee members who put in a lot of work to reach this depth of analysis of the ministerial policy statement for all those sectors and also the alternative policy statements that came from the shadow ministers.

Honourable members, I propose the question for your debate and the motion is that the report for the Sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2014/2015 be adopted. That is the motion for your debate.

Honourable members, you will recall that we have had a serious debate on these issues of tourism and those gaps that keep showing up all the time in this sector. I am sure, based on the discussions that we have had before, this debate will not be as lengthy as the one we have had before. So, if it was in my powers, I would just proceed to put the question and we take a decision. (Laughter) I said that if it was in my power. I have just proposed a question for debate but it not within my powers to put the question now. 

So, let us have some discussions now. (Members rose_) Three minutes each for presentation but now going by the numbers, I am going to come down to two minutes so that we can finish because you can see the numbers of people who want to speak. So, let us use two minutes each. We will start with the member for Makindye West.

3.37
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to reemphasise the point of trade attachés abroad. It is very saddening to hear that positions are unfilled at a time when people are looking for employment, at a time when Uganda requires publicity outside this country. I would beg the minister concerned to push these facts so that these attachés are posted to several embassies abroad. 

What is happening right now is that when there is a meeting, the Ugandan Ambassadors normally find themselves playing the entire role; they are the ambassador, trade attachés and military attachés, which does not work well in international arrangements. I would, therefore, request that this matter be put before Cabinet and appropriate numbers of staff be appointed to these positions. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.39
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much. I have just three questions; one is directed to the Minister for Finance. Many of our traders are owed a lot of money. They did business with South Sudan and these people are suffering. Some of them come from my constituency; they are complaining. May I know when you plan to sort out this problem?

Two, Kabale is one of the districts, which do not have airports and yet, it is one of the major centres of tourism. May I know from the relevant minister when you plan to give us an airport?

Number three, I would like to know why the Uganda Industrial Institute is not well-funded. This is also for the Minister of Finance. This is an area that is very important for this country but it is not looked at as if it can rejuvenate industrial development in this country. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

3.41
MR WAIRA MAGYEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Jack Sabiiti has touched a bit on what I want to say and it is to do with the issue of traders in South Sudan. I would have expected the chairperson to guide the House because you just talked about a revolving fund without stating how much we are looking at so that as this House, we can help these traders.

Uganda has managed to help traders in South Sudan, it has protected the borders between Uganda and South Sudan. Why can’t we go ahead to protect our traders who are even our voters? These traders just borrow money from banks, just like most of us and we know the pressure – (Interjections) - no, do not argue. (Laughter)

Government was given 90 days to bring a statement on traders in South Sudan but it is now coming to a year. So, it is now the right time for Parliament to come up and assist these traders. 

Secondly, when we talk about tourism, we intend to attract foreigners to love our country but we shall not attract them to love our country before we love it ourselves. (Mr Amama Mbabazi rose_) Clarification granted. (Interruption) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Not clarification but information. I thank the hon. Majegere for giving way. Yes, it is true that this matter has been pending for a very long period and it had caused, as hon. Jack Sabiiti said, suffering to those affected. I would like to inform this House as I have had occasion to do so previously, that the government takes this matter very seriously. 

I can tell you that H.E President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni has spoken to his counterpart, the President of the Republic of South Sudan, H.E Salva Kiir, on the matter. The Minister of Trade and the Ministry of Trade generally has been vigorously involved; the Minister of Justice has been involved; the Minister of Finance did discuss with her counterpart, the Minister of Finance of South Sudan only a week ago and I have discussed this with the President of South Sudan.

So, Government has done everything possible to push the case for the settlement of this debt. The position is that there was a lot of fraud as is public knowledge in South Sudan and the government there identified the need to carry out verification of these claims. The latest we have now is that the verification is over, the matter is going through a bureaucratic process, it will go through the cabinet of South Sudan and we will be informed when they are ready to pay those that have legitimate claims.

So, I simply want to assure this House and those involved, the business people and the public at large that no stone has been left unturned to try and push for the settlement of this issue. Thank you.

MR MAJEGERE: I thank you for the information, Rt hon. Prime Minister, but how long will this issue last? The committee is saying if we put a revolving fund, as you go along with your discussions, because you can see the chain of discussions, it is too long but these people got loans. So, in the meantime, as discussions go on, because South Sudan is in trouble and you are the ones who are supporting South Sudan. (Laughter) Yes, you are supporting South Sudan and he is telling you, “Wait, we are doing this and that.”

So, in the meantime, about the revolving fund, we identify that money and help these people as we wait for those discussions to mature.

Number two, we are talking tourism - since you used my time, please, give me a bonus minute. (Laughter) We are talking about tourism, and if we are to talk about tourism, we want to attract foreigners to love our country. But before we attract foreigners to love our country, we should also show that we love it. We should show patriotism. I was in Ghana but every vehicle has got that country’s flag, every vehicle has got Ghana’s flag.   (Interjections) Okay, but the information looks to be unfriendly - (Member timed out.)

3.47
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I have two observations. One, as we encourage local industrialisation and setting up of industries in rural areas, I would like to inform the committee that of recent, there are very many small medium industries that are coming up in rural areas in the production of wine. This wine is being taken by very many people but its standard and quality are really put to question. So, I would like the ministry to interest itself in this as this might result into a health problem.

Secondly, the issue of the warehouse system; I would like to encourage the ministry to expedite the establishment of the authority to regulate this sector as it will greatly improve and encourage very many people to invest in agriculture. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.49
MR ROBERT KAFEERO SSEKITOLEKO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Mr Speaker, I commend the committee for a report well prepared and well presented. (Applause) Whereas I agree with the recommendations of the committee, I have two concerns. Uganda needs industries to create jobs for our youth, to generate income and revenue for our Government.

However, I highly doubt and I beg the minister to clarify on whether we have guided methodology of searching and sourcing investors for particular industries suitable and tailored for our situation based on the resources we have. Because, if so, why would we licence an industry for a particular item to be produced and it ends up producing pancakes and nobody is there to follow up on such a thing. Because if we have a mechanism to do so, somebody would be able to follow up right from inception up to the production of that item and if it is not produced, we should be able to query.

My other concern is the law on the importation of counterfeit products which is long overdue. These counterfeits are really a disadvantage to our people. Our people do not get value for their money because of these counterfeits. In fact, now that Government is taking its time on this matter, if next week we do not have the amended Bill back, the subsequent week I will come and request leave of Parliament to table a private members Bill. (Member timed out.) 

3.51
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report but I will pick out a few things and this will basically be emphasised on the side of UNBS. There is one item the committee, I believe, did not pick up very well on the weights and measures. I realise that as much as the committee gives a claim that UNBS is unable to make a proper assessment on the weights and measures and the scales that we have on the market, a claim that there is a type of weights which are on the market which are easy to adjust and cheat the consumers, it is the same UNBS which clears these same scales when they are entering the border in the country.

I would like to know at the time when UNBS is having clearances certified, whether they do not put in concern that this type and particular model of the scale is easy to manipulate and then cheat the consumers. That is something that I will need clarified later.

There is also the issue of fake tyres. I do not know what UNBS is doing on the certification and clearance of tyres in this country. At one time, I involved myself in carrying a tyre, which I bought barely a day before. It burst and one could not believe that it was something bought new. I was told that Uganda does not yet have a laboratory that can undertake an investigation and check tyres within this country. We have very many on the market that are cleared at the borders and yet there are people there handling the process of seeing that these tyres enter the country. What are they planning to do to save the people on Ugandan roads with such goods coming in?

I also would like to know concerning the East African single customs territory –(Member timed out.)

3.54
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the good report they have just presented. I have about three issues to raise and one is under cooperative development. I come from Bukomansimbi and I belong to the greater Masaka. I would like to say that this report has failed to capture the issue of cooperative unions.

This government has always emphasised the issue of revitalising cooperative unions but I want to inform this House that there are very many cooperative unions to which this government owes a lot of money. (Applause) We cannot talk about revitalising cooperative unions until we pay these unions their money. This is not a favour. This money belongs to cooperative unions. This report does not capture the budget for paying cooperative unions.

Two, I also want to take this opportunity to emphasise the issue of traders. We are not doing any favours to our traders, yet, this economy depends on trade. We cannot talk about improving the economy when our traders are suffering. Many people have lost their property –(Member timed out.)

3.56
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. There seems to be a problem with Ugandans. We do the things, which we ought not to do and then we leave out the things, which ought to be doing and there is no truth in us.

Mr Speaker, the issue of the Anti-Counterfeit Bill should have come yesterday but we still see our ministers rotating around and talking about the issue of GMOs as more important, yet, it is not important at this time. So, I am wondering what we have prioritised as a country. 

There is this discussion that I hear about the National Anthem being transformed and improved. Sometimes, I wonder when I hear that the minister is working with the artists and they are trying to improve it but we do not know what they are trying to improve exactly. In my view, the National Anthem is perfect just the way it was designed. Unless there is another proposal maybe to improve the tone, I do not know. Maybe the minister needs to inform us on that proposal.

However, as we talk about that area of transforming our National Flag, Court of Arms and details of that nature, I would like to give this House information that there are students from the Industrial Department of Makerere University who approached me as their youth MP and they were proposing that maybe, as a country, we should also be thinking of transforming our national flag; the impression that has the crested crane. This is because at the time of independence, Uganda was a baby politically and economically but now Uganda at 50 should be moving forward. 

We say that we have taken off in all angles but our impression of the National Flag still implies that we are still crawling. (Member timed out.)

3.58
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the report. However, I have a few comments to make. One, I would like to know from the Minister in Charge of Cooperatives, what has happened to the silos or warehouses that were supposed to be constructed? For example, in Busoga sub-region, we were supposed to have one in Nakalama. What has happened because this would go ahead to help us in this region?

At the moment, this region has got a lot of maize. There has been a bumper harvest of maize in the Busoga sub-region but our farmers are being cheated. They are forced to sell this grain to our neighbours for as low as Shs 150 per kilo. If we had warehouses, this would help us and control sales so that our people would gain. I would like to know from the minister what has happened to the silos that the government was to put up to help improve on our production.

Secondly, this country is losing a lot of money in terms of selling grain. You find that the people who buy the grain eventually process it into feeds and no wonder in Uganda, it has become very expensive to acquire feeds for our poultry, pigs or even fish.

I also want to know about the SACCOs. Our people really embraced the issue of SACCOs and they were developing a culture of savings but they have been disappointed. Many of them have lost their money through these dubious so-called SACCOs. I want to know from the minister, how are we going to help our people to regain confidence in the SACCOs?

Thirdly –(Member timed out.)

4.00
MR JOHN MUBITO (NRM, Budiope County West, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank members of the committee. I have two issues to raise and issue number one is on Ministry of Finance clinging on to funds meant for critical work in ministries. This is not my first time to hear of this. Even in the report of Ministry of Defence and Internal Affairs and Ministry of Tourism, there was a recommendation - there is always a recommendation in these reports that Ministry of Finance should release money meant for work in the ministries instead of staying with it and delaying targets in these other ministries.

I beg to be informed from the Leader of Government Business and the Minister of Finance as to why this is happening. I do not have my iPad here but in the report, it is clearly indicated that they have always asked Ministry of Finance to release money to the Ministry of Tourism for the hotels but I think they have not adhered to this.

Secondly, I would like to talk about regional tourism initiatives. Mr Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to thank the honourable Minister of Tourism and hon. Edward Baliddawa for the job well done in Busoga regarding the Busoga Tourism Expo and Busoga Tourism Initiative –(Member timed out.)

4.03
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee but I will go directly to the Soroti Fruit Factory. I want to be a nationalist. I have been going to a variety of supermarkets in Uganda and Kampala here, but the fruits in Soroti, I am told cannot ever come to Kampala yet those people produce a lot of fruits. Honourable Minister of Finance and Leader of Government Business, why can’t we make this fruit factory functional tomorrow? Where is the money? 

Secondly, on the issue of counterfeits, I want to thank the people of UNBS; they have done a wonderful job, but I think there is a problem of money required for putting up a very good laboratory to check these counterfeit goods. 

On that note, I want to ask the Prime Minister and UNBS, what happened to Kuber, which I told you was killing children including yours and if yours have survived it, your grandchildren will smoke it. I said that the nicotinic acid in Kuber is too much compared to the normal tobacco. Now, there is Mirage and others like Sisha. I said that these things are even causing impotence; that is why very many people are dying from Viagra consumption here –(Interjections)– yes, I am serious. We must be told what happened to the Kuber which I wanted Government to ban from entering this country and to save our children. 

In addition to that, I will talk about UIRI. Without laboratory services in UIRI, I see a variety of our women using cosmetics that will turn their skins due to too much steroids in them. 

People have neglected science but it is the way to go. You may think that you are making business but we are actually consuming goods that are even contaminated with a variety of things. (Member timed out.)

4.05
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have basically two issues and one is a question to the Minister in charge of Trade and the other one is just an observation. I will begin with a question. Honourable minister, you cannot develop us into big scale traders when you do not have a mechanism of nursing and hatching small traders. 

In Kampala, the practice is to evict small scale traders out of the city in favour of the big scale traders. When I hear people lamenting about eviction of Ugandans in Sudan, I want to tell them that there is another Sudanese in Kampala. Many small scale traders in Kampala are being evicted by that “Sudanese”. Honourable minister, does our trade policy favour small scale traders in the city? 

I think it is high time we revisited what we take as tourist attraction in Uganda. When you move to countries across the world, the most common features along streets in small and big cities are portraits – actually, artistic pieces of people they consider as their heroes; people who contributed to the pride and history of those countries. 

In Uganda, heroes including those who contributed to the independence of this country are nowhere to be seen. All you can see is a burial ground in Kololo and elsewhere. The likes of King Mwanga, Mutesa, Kisigiro, Obote and Kabalega would be somewhere visible. 

Mr Speaker, I say so because a tourist can better appreciate the major tourist attractions we have in Uganda after appreciating our history –(Member timed out.)

4.08
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the work and the report they have made. However, when they say there is a lot of effort being put in trenches, I disagree because I come from Bunyaruguru where 50 percent of Queen Elizabeth National Park is and the trenches worldwide have failed. They can only control small animals like hippos and buffalos but not elephants. 

The international practice is to have an electronic fence. An electronic fence per kilometre is Shs 150 million. The trenches which UWA dug cost Shs 3 billion for every year. If we began on the electric fence, little by little, we would solve the conflict between humans and animals. 

H.E. the President told the people of Bunyaruguru that this year, he would give them 41 kilometres of electric fence. So, I want to know from the Minister of Tourism whether we have money in this budget for the electric fence to cover the 41 kilometres.

Secondly, the role of UWA is to protect animals. But now, I see UWA competing with private operators in buying cars and buses to ferry tourists. That will cause unemployment to the masses. I want the minister to tell us clearly; will UWA continue with transportation and building of hotels or leave it to the private sector to generate more employment?

Lastly, you said the number of tourists is dwindling. I think this is because the roads in the tourism areas are very bad. For a tourist to go for a drive in my area, they have to wake up at 3 a.m. so that they – (Member timed out.)

4.10
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee chairperson, hon. Kabahenda and her team for the very good work they have done. I want to start with the human-animal conflict as the previous speaker mentioned. 

Agago borders Kabong District, which has Kidepo National Park. I have always spoken about the problems in my district especially in the three sub-counties that border Kidepo National Park that have always suffered from the destruction of things by elephants. Whenever we get a problem with the animals, I either speak about it in Parliament or I call UWA to ensure that they find a way of chasing away the elephants. 

As I speak, it has become a very big problem in my district. I remember at one time, we threatened to kill an elephant in order for the ministry to act. But still that did not help. We were not able to kill any and yet the elephants are destroying crops; millet, sorghum and Sim Sim in the sub-counties of Lapono, Paimol and Omiya Pachwa.  

As I speak, Mr Speaker, the elephants are still in Omiya Pachwa Sub-county and every time you call UWA – I wonder whether the staff there simply go there to make merry with the elephants - they just keep around together with the elephants. 

I wonder whether the ministry can put on this year’s budget – on this money we are giving you today, because I support the motion –(Member timed out.)

4.12
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to address myself on the indigenous industries in Uganda. One such kind is the Sembule Steel Mills. This industry has been the heart of development. It is a local investment with reputable products. Many interns and workers have gone through this industry but it was taken over under the watchful eye of Government. And despite looking for help from all departments of Government, including the Ministry of Finance, to ensure the debts they had incurred like any other company including that of Mr Basajjabalaba, which was bailed out – but Sembule Steel Mills was left to be devoured by other companies that are now out-competing it and to which it was indebted.

Mr Speaker, I request Government to address us on the self-sustaining economy that was originally in the Ten-Points Programme, which they came with, if at all indigenous companies such as this one could not be bailed out at the point of need, yet others are selectively bailed out like the one of Basajjabalaba. May I get response to that from Government.

4.14
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for doing a good report. Mine is an observation. The committee talked about the Counterfeit Goods Bill. However, I notice that the ministry has shown a lot of laxity because in the report, it was mentioned that this Bill was tabled but that the responsible minister withdrew it. She pledged to bring it back in three months. But it is now more than one year with no Bill being re-tabled in Parliament.

So, I would like to task the minister explain this delay. I also want to inform this House that our farmers down in the villages are facing unexplainable pain. They are facing terrible challenges due to the absence of this Bill especially those involved in agriculture.

So, I would like to inform the House - for example, in my constituency, many farmers had adopted a system of small scale irrigation. But in the recent times, many of them bought seeds and experienced losses because the seeds were bad. So, what many farmers do is to extract seeds from the harvested fruits because now they have lost trust in these so called improved seeds. So, I would like to request the ministry to expedite, as per the recommendation of the committee, this Bill. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.17
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee. In their report, the committee says that 25 district commercial offices were refurbished, equipped and retooled, which is good. However, there are districts like Amudat without commercial offices. We are talking about encouraging our people to diversify the economy. And for the case of the Karamoja sub-region and Amudat in particular, people have now – besides cattle keeping – taken up crop cultivation and some have even entered into business. But because we do not have commercial officers, even the few SACCOs that were there are not doing well just because there is nobody to guide them. I want to say that there is need to ensure all districts get commercial officers.

On the issue of weights and measurements that are tempered with, this is a serious matter. It is as serious as cattle rustling; it is broad day light theft. Children have fallen victim to the wrath of their mothers because sometimes when they are sent to buy sugar, the mother complains that the sugar is little and thinks the child could have licked the sugar on the way. So, we really need to help our children and the society in general so that they do not continue to pay for what they have not got.

Therefore, I support the committee recommendation that we amend the 1963 Act so that more punitive measures can be put in place to punish such people. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.19
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. My first concern is about tourism where the committee said one of the reasons we are having a drop in the number of tourists coming to Uganda is that we do not have our national carrier. The committee is requesting for the revival of Uganda Airlines.

But I want to know from the minister and possibly the Leader of Government Business – Uganda is now the only country without a national airliner in East Africa. Yes, much as other Members are saying that we fly our national flags on vehicles, I want to say that only promotes local tourism. The national airliner would go a long way in selling what we have to tourists outside Uganda. Secondly, we would be able to bring them directly to Uganda because relying on other airlines cannot do much to promote tourism.

So, I want to know from the Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industry, and the leader of Government Business what Government has in plan so that we have our own airliner even if it is working with private people to have that in place. 

The other issue is about us supporting our traders. I want to know from the minister why four years ago, the commercial attaches’ were recruited to missions abroad to help our traders in offering guidance and research other than leaving them on their own to go and sort out what is outside the country. Why has it taken us four years now without recruiting others? When are we going to recruit them, because this is the only way we are going to promote trade and tourism in this country? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.21
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. On page 50 of the report, the committee made an observation that the degradation around Mt Elgon region is an environmental threat. However, it is unfortunate that this goes as an unfunded priority. I would call upon the ministry to really conserve the environment by putting some money in this area. We need this environment and to save the lives of our people.

But also, about the conflicts, the committee noted that there are wildlife-human conflicts in areas like Agago. However, some of the districts that border the park like Manafwa, Sironko and Bududa also have human-wildlife conflicts, which have not been noted in this report. We need to agree that the boundaries should be clearly demarcated because it has caused conflicts - how far it is between the Wild Life Authority officials and then the local citizens of these areas. So, this needs to be rectified.

Finally, in our communities, we have the village saving schemes, which are mostly small schemes composed of women and some men in some of these groups. But these groups operate without a legal framework yet they are helping in transforming the lives of many people in the rural areas. 

I would like to seek clarification from the Government. I know that Government is aware that these groups exist. But much as they have no legal framework and they are not recognised like the SACCOs, they are transforming the lives of our people. What plan has Government got towards boosting these small groups? They help women. I would like Government to come in and finance these groups because these ones are transparent, unlike the SACCOs where we are getting challenges. (Member timed out_)

4.23
MR SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A few months ago, the minister, hon. Amelia Kyambadde, came to this House with so many counterfeit products and the whole table in front there was decorated with these products. That day you would imagine that the situation was going to change the following day but up to today, we still have very many counterfeit products on the market.  I want to find out from the minister what steps have been taken since then in regulating these counterfeits that are coming to our country every day.

On the issue of our tourism dwindling and going down, the committee observed that one of the reasons is the poor roads that lead us to these tourism destinations. However, they only recommended that we should carryout sensitisation and advertisement. I want to find out from the Ministry of Tourism what you are doing together with the Ministry of Works to improve these roads that lead us to these destinations.

The airfields: we have one in Kasese, Soroti and Gulu. If we have to improve on tourism, these airfields need to be improved to airport level. (Member timed out_)

4.25	
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. Honourable members, there are times when we talk politics and there are times when we talk economics. A number of times, these ministers listen to MPs as though they are at campaign rallies. When we come here and make laws and ministers do not want to implement them or facilitate the agencies of Government to do their mandate, it frustrates us. Why do we have the Uganda National Bureau of Standards and yet we still complain about substandard and counterfeit goods? 

The minister should be held accountable because he is undermining the performance of these organisations by not giving them adequate funds. Unless we equip Uganda National Bureau of Standards, we are bound to get poison from outside. Some countries are externalising their costs because they bring things here which are not accepted in their countries and that is okay with us. The Ministry of Finance is very happy to collect revenue from poison like these old fridges and other things which they dump here. Ministry of Finance, we should separate funds from poison and funds from other things; otherwise, you are mixing good things and bad things.

When the President makes a proclamation, I do not why the ministers cannot implement. The President says we want a fruit factory in Soroti, it is now five years or six years and what is that minister doing; why can’t that minister leave the office because he has failed to listen to the President? If you have not listened to the President who appointed you, are you going to listen to an MP? The minister should be able to answer why we do not have the fruit factory that was pledged by the President and the Government. 

I also think that when we talk about high economic roads, these are roads that lead to areas of high economic activity. One of them is like –(Member timed out_) 

4.28  
MS EVELYNE KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. First, I will start with the cooperatives development. The committee says that the societies Act and regulations would be finalised. This Act has been in the making for quite long; can the minister tell us when it is going to be finalised? Most of the things that we are talking about in terms of SMEs and micro enterprise organisations revolve around this Act, so kindly let us know when this is going to come out.

The committee recommends that the Uganda Export Promotions Board be given Shs 3.8 billion, but then this board does not have a marketing strategy according to your own observation. How are they going to use the Shs 3.8 billion without a marketing strategy?

The same also goes for the Uganda Tourism Board. I do not know whether they have a databank of all the tourist attractions that we have in the country. They are talking of boosting tourism but without a strategy or a databank of the tourist centres, how are we going to promote tourism? It looks like we are going ad hoc - look at a sub region and look at the centres that are there, without a wholesome plan or marketing strategy on how we can develop tourism.

As far as the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill is concerned, many people have talked about it but my recommendation is that the minister tells us when it will come. Let us have a timeline. The committee is saying that we should expedite the Bill; they are telling us that it is with Parliament and yet we know it is not here. Let us come up with a timeline so that if we do not respect that timeline, then something else will be done.

My last comment is on commercial attaches. You said you recruited; did we have a human resource plan, because how can you recruit and fail to deploy? It looks like we wasted time recruiting without deploying. Can we know why you recruited and failed to deploy? Commercial attaches are important in as far as promoting our country abroad is concerned. So let us find means to deploy the people we recruited so that we can also be given time.

I just want to comment on the UNBS home. I remember sometime back there was a plan for all government bodies and agencies to have their own homes. (Member timed out_)

4.30 
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to add my voice to that of my colleagues and thank the committee for the work well done.

I have two issues to raise. One, they talked about compensation but only for landowners. I want to hear from the minister why they do not implement, if there is no policy, compensation for those who lost their loved ones that were killed by crocodiles, lions and leopards. You may find that even those who lose their crops are not compensated. Go to Busitema and see what is happening; people are crying and UWA is continuously disturbing them. If they talk, they want to arrest them. In fact, some people in Buliisa were arrested instead of being compensated; why? 

Two, tourism –(Interruption)

MS NAMARA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. I want to give you information about compensation. It is not a deliberate move by UWA to neglect those that lose their dear ones but the fact that we do not have a clear law to guide them on how to compensate these people or to allow them. They cannot just spend the money. What we should be advocating for is for the ministry to bring in the law so that the UWA people can be guided on how to compensate such victims.

MR WANGOLO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. That is why I am asking whether you are not sensitive to Ugandans. That is the question.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, we have so many ways that we can expand tourism. Look at my district, Butaleja; we have the Doho Rice Scheme, why don’t you come there and see what the people of Bunyole are doing? We also want to earn something from tourism. Besides that, look at our culture, which is very interesting, with very unique people. 

Mr Prime Minister, I want to urge the minister to take this up so that we change our country and we collect revenue that will benefit our country. (Member timed out_)

4.34
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report well done. I just have one comment to make on the achievements. 

The committee has talked about the ministry facilitating the jua kali to go for the exhibition in Nairobi. However, I want to say that even though the ministry facilitated the jua kali to go for the exhibition, I think that is not good enough. We met the jua kali in Burundi as the Committee on EAC and they talked to us. They told us that the ministry is not facilitating them; they only help them in reaching there but they do not help them to improve on their products. They even requested us as Parliament to ask the ministry to improve on the policy for jua kali. The jua kali actually have the best quality in terms of fabricated items like gates and furniture, which is the best in East Africa. However, the challenge that they have is that the Ministry of Trade is not helping them to improve on their products.

My second comment is about the training of the jua kali. In each financial year, there is money allocated for training but this is not implemented. If it is effected, then it is the same people who keep getting trained because every financial year, money is allocated but you do not see people being trained. I ask the Ministry of Tourism and Trade to at least come out clearly to indicate which people are trained in each financial year because our jua kali in Katwe are there but most of them are not trained even though they have the skills. They need to be trained so that they can improve on their products. I thank you.

4.36
MRS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for a report well presented and especially for reminding us about the key issues. 

I noted with concern that we do not have a national export strategy. So, we wonder how we can talk of trade promotion and exports when we do not have a national export strategy. I hope that the minister took this very seriously. 

Secondly, we also learnt that there is no vote for export promotion this year. To me, this is a shame because there is no way we can talk about exports when we do not plan for that particular component. 

Mr Speaker, we are concerned about poor quality items and you are talking about imports, but I am interested in our local production. All our emphasis seems to be on items that we import. We talk about pre-verification outside and that items come here without being verified, but then there is a lot we produce here that needs verification. That is why I support the idea of laboratories that are planned for in this budget especially for food. 

If you go to a supermarket, there is so much local food that is packed - soya, millet, milk, water. Many of us have heard stories of the water that we consume, that it is filled from the bottom instead of being filled from the top. We talk about all these things. So, I think we need a laboratory in place, especially to examine the foods our children are consuming like packed fish, maize and all other foods that our people consume. 

This is a very vibrant production area, especially in terms of agriculture. For that matter, Mr Speaker, I really hope that we shall soon have a laboratory that tests what we eat and produce here in Uganda, although our attention is more on what we import. I thank you. 
 
4.38
MRS ROSE IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to go back to what happened in Karamoja. There was disarmament and the guns were removed and my people decided to turn to agriculture. Many of them became agriculturalists but then you know what happened; there is a place between Napak and Nakapiripirit where some of my people went to settle, that is Nabwal, and Government had decided, maybe as part of its plan, to gazette that place. When the UWA people went there, they did not sensitise the people. You know, you need to sensitise the people, guide them and tell them that the Government is gazetting this place. Instead of sensitising these people, they were beaten and their huts were destroyed in June. 

I would like to plead with and request the minister to really talk to the UWA people so that my people are guided on what to do and sensitised. They should not be chased like foreigners on their own land. They should be sensitised, guided and taught on the policy. They should be told what they are supposed to do and they will be resettled somewhere instead of beating, destroying their crops and burning their huts. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

4.41
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The cooperative Act that we currently use was enacted in 1954 and by that time, there was state monopoly of cooperatives. With the introduction of Structural Adjustment Programmes (SAPs) like privatisation and liberalisation, things have never been the same. The hands of the cooperatives have been tied. The law has tied the hands and legs of the cooperatives and you are sending them to the market to go for perfect competition with the private sector. That is why most of them cannot break even and it is the reason most of them collapsed.         

I would like to launch a special appeal to Government and the ministry; the cooperative Act should have been brought here even yesterday for amendment.

A colleague talked about constitution of cooperatives. Honourable minister, you could be aware that apart from representing Budadiri County East, I also serve as a director for Bugisu Cooperative Union. When the Government recently took over the management of the cooperative union, Shs 14 billion was lost in the hands of the commissioner who was at the union. 

When constructing the East African Flying School in Soroti, the then Government of Uganda borrowed money from Bugisu Cooperative Union which has never been paid back. When constructing the high commission in the UK, the Government of Uganda borrowed money from Bugisu Cooperative Union which has never been paid back. When is Government paying this money to Bugisu Cooperative Union? 

Lastly, you are very aware that Wagagai Peak, which is the highest part of Mount Elgon, is in Budadiri County East and –(Member timed out_)

4.43
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

Mr Speaker, the last time, the committee did a survey in all the areas affected by the animals disturbing the border lines in Oyam, Nwoya and many districts like Kasese near Queen Elizabeth. There was the issue of compensation when the animals stray out of the parks and destroy crops and kill people. In my constituency, five people were killed and there has been no compensation to date. Even some agreement which was made informally by the minister to help the families with burial expenses and other issues was not sorted, despite the fact that the technical staff indicated that they had processed them. 

You indicated that you were bringing a law to regulate issues around compensation when animals stray. You also indicated that there will be some intervention in relation to either income generating activities or even electrified fences. May I know what happened, because I have read the committee report and I have not seen these as part of the interventions, especially the one on fencing off the area? 

I really beg that this matter be dealt with and we see where we can handle the matter at a budgetary level. Even if the law does not allow compensation, at least put a provision in the budget for people who have lost crops. In my constituency as I talk now, two days ago 15 animals strayed and people were in dire problems – (Member timed out_)

4.45
MS BETTY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to begin where my namesake has ended. Like in her district, in Rubirizi almost 70 per cent of our people live within the national park. We are surrounded by the national park and the issue of compensation is what we have been talking about longest. 

As the chair has said, there is no law; even when our people go to complain, they tell them that it is the Members of Parliament to decide. I am happy that the committee has recommended that they put in place a compassionate fund so that they can compensate these people who have lost their loved ones. In Ruburizi especially, many people are hunters and as they look for survival, almost every week we bury a person killed by animals –(Interjections)– even when they are just moving around. We pray that the ministry can bring this policy so that those who lose their loved ones can be compensated – (Interjections) – They are not poachers but we live within the national park.

Secondly, there are trenches which have been dug and we appreciate, but these elephants cannot be stopped from crossing. The people of Rubirizi had asked the minister to at least provide the neighbouring people with beehives so that they can control the elephants because elephants do not survive around bees. At least help us with beehives because at the same time –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had a significant debate on the subject. I am now going to ask the shadow ministers to make their presentations and each will have five minutes.   

4.48
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Kevinah Taaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

Uganda’s economy has experienced strong growth in the last few years but the trade and industry sector in this financial year is being allocated about 0.35 per cent of the national budget. Uganda’s trade potential in value-added agricultural products has remained unused, for example in coffee. The trade, productivity and competitive sectors have also reduced. This has been attributed to poor infrastructure in roads, electricity supply and railway development, which hinder industrialization in this country.

The manufacturing sector has dropped to 4.8 per cent this financial year from 6.8 per cent in the previous year. This has brought in a trade deficit of US$ 3,400 million up from the previous period at 1.8 per cent of the total export earnings. That is from April 2013 to April 2014.

With this deficit, we have lost our export earnings to Kenya and DRC in this period and we have also been affected by the war in South Sudan. We should, therefore, focus on things which can bring us foreign exchange and balance of payment to improve our economy.

One of the attributes of doing business in Uganda is that it is very difficult and expensive to start business in Uganda. It takes 32 days, 15 procedures and it costs 78.3 per cent of the gross income per capita to start a business. Uganda is ranked at 132 out of 189 economies in the world, according to the World Bank doing business report of 2014, page 10. We have been declining – last year we were 120th, in 2012 we were 123rd and in 2011 we were 119th. We therefore need to strengthen the URSB in the registration of businesses and starting of business.

The trade sector has been hampered by the delay of the passing of a legal and regulatory framework. You have heard about the Bills which have been delayed for so long: the Sale of Goods and Supply of Services Bill, the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill, the UDC (Amendment) Bill, the Cooperatives (Amendment) Bill, the EAC Accreditation Bill. These have hampered our economy a lot. 

You have heard that we need a national airline to market Uganda both for trade and tourism. We also need to reinstate the Cooperative Bank for goodness sake. If we do not want to refer to it as a cooperative bank, let us call it an agricultural bank. 

We need to build capacity for Ugandans to be able to compete favourably in the EAC so that we can exploit the economic opportunities presented by COMESA, EAC and SADC tripartite free trade area arrangements. We should also avoid the non-tariff barriers. We have an electric tracking system which was launched by URA and Kenya but it is very expensive to have the two different tracking systems; we should have one.

In addition, we have to develop the MSME’s policy for quality standards - I heard members talking about that - and also to improve on our economic growth. Cooperatives or SMEs can boost employment especially for the youth who are unemployed –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The private sector contributes about 90 per cent to employment in the non-agricultural private sector. We need to amend the National Industrial Strategy. Uganda has an industrial strategy but it is not based on agriculture. We should use agriculture as a base so that we improve on the productivity, especially of the local manufacturing sector, to achieve economic growth.

Rt Hon. Speaker, in 2011/2012 financial year, cooperatives were given a miserable Shs 0.39 million of the total budget. This left a funding gap of Shs 5 billion. Up to now, the cooperatives have been ignored but if we are to boost our economy, we need to have the cooperatives revived. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.55
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr John Ken-Lukyamuzi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. By category sketch, there are three important words in my docket as shadow minister and they are tourism, wildlife and antiquities.

Mr Speaker, what should the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife do to make Uganda an attractive area for tourism? This is a very important point. If we want Uganda to sell internationally in terms of tourism, we must endeavour to define the Ugandan nation. Some of you may not know how important it is for people to know what Uganda is. Before a tourist comes to Uganda, it is important for him or her to know what Uganda is. I know Uganda as a nation among many nations with diverse cultures and peoples, spectacular in nature and found nowhere else in Africa.

Mr Speaker, we must take the trouble to know why Sir Winston Churchill 60 years ago termed Uganda the Pearl of Africa. What have we done to make sure that the Pearl of Africa shines from place to place? We must all participate and contribute to making Uganda a joyous state so that others can come and see our country.

I know very well that when you are at the Murchison Falls, when the waters flow, the lions roar, the giraffes yawn and the rains fall. That is one area that could be of attraction to everyone who comes to Uganda.

It is also important for us to know that there are other elements of great importance in tourism in Uganda; for example, UNESCO has been funding, from year to year, the protection of Kasubi Tombs. If it is funding the protection of these tombs, it would also like to know what happened to Kasubi Tombs when fire gutted them. In order to ensure accountability, the Uganda Government owes UNESCO a global report on what caused the fires.

People are struggling to reinstate the tombs. What guarantee do we have that if they are reinstated, the fires will not happen again? So I urge the Government of Uganda - and it is good that we are blessed with the presence of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister - to ensure that the report is produced as it is necessary. It is totally unexplainable for you not to release the report.

There is another very important point, which we must not put aside, although many people have talked about it but not exhaustively enough to catch the fire on the mantle. The beauty of Uganda that I have attempted to articulate requires a cornerstone of touch that is supported by the reinstatement of Uganda Airlines.

The Museveni administration has no explanation for not reinstating the airline because it found that airline in being. So it is totally unexplainable for Uganda not to have a national airline. If poorer countries with poor GDPs can have an airline why not Uganda?

Finally, in terms of importance, I have realised that the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife has not paid any attention to the danger the crested crane species is facing. It has been reported by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature that within 20 years, the life of the grey crowned crested crane will be in danger because its habitat is equally in danger. Wetlands are dilapidating from time to time and this is the habitat for the crested crane. Now that the top people in Government are present, I want to urge the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to ensure that the life of the crested crane is guaranteed - (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Leader of the Opposition, you have three minutes.

5.00
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to give general views on the report of the committee. I have always admired the chairperson of this particular committee as she is very serious with her work. Madam Chairperson, can you listen to what the Leader of the Opposition is saying? The minister is engaging the chairperson. Rt Hon. Speaker, can you call the minister to order! I have always admired the method of work of the chairperson. She is serious and focused and that is the way we expect our committees to perform. (Applause)

Rt Hon. Speaker, I have a few concerns. First of all, the trade industry is one of the driving sectors in productivity in Uganda. In our Government, we have two sectors and I believe that the Minister of Finance should be able to guide the government appropriately so that we know how to allocate our resources. 

Most of our resources should go to the productive sector and yet the reverse is being done. You have heard from the presentation of the committee and from other persons who have contributed that very little is being invested in this sector and yet in the last couple of years, it is very true that the sector has been increasingly earning foreign exchange for this country. This is where we should have consciously invested to ensure that we boost the tourism and trade sectors in this country.


Secondly, Mr Speaker, I am so concerned that in our trade, we have decided to eliminate morality. Last year, we were told how sexual trade is the highest export to China and Malaysia. I do not know whether we need to clap for that because when you talk about sexual trade, you are talking about the misuse of female bodies from Uganda. It has now become an export commodity. I think it is very important that we as a country come up and improve on the image of Uganda outside this country.

Thirdly, the informal sector of the economy earns a lot of money, but the bureau of statistics and other Government agencies have not yet found a way of quantifying how much the informal sector earns. Therefore, I feel that the informal sector is being under-costed and yet they are contributing a lot to the GDP. We must find a way of quantifying that component in terms of our economy. 

Finally, we must improve employment of the youth by expanding the sector – Small scale and medium scale enterprises is the only way for us to absorb the youth into some kind of commercial activities. I get so disappointed when I see leaders in this country carrying sacks of cash to distribute to the youth hoping that that will boost the economy. I think that is a way of destroying our youth. We must find a way of training our youth; we must find a way of building their capacity so that they recognise that the development of this country goes beyond the cash distribution. We must eliminate patronage when developing the economy of our country. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Mr James Mutende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report, much of which we agree with. I also thank members who have made contributions. 

First, I would like to make a few corrections in the report. On page 26 of the report, under key achievements, No. IX says that 25 consignments of imports were verified under PVoC. They were actually 25,000 not 25. In addition to that, there were 27,000 consignments which were inspected under the normal border inspection. That is for correction of the record. 

On the issues that have been raised, I want to say that most of the issues could be classified because many of them were duplicated. So I have bundled them into a few categories. 

The issue of commercial attachés has been raised by many members. I would like to clarify that whereas we made a proposal to have commercial attachés in many of our key destinations abroad, we actually did not recruit any. We have never recruited them because the funds were not available. However, we are still talking to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to see how we can work with them to build capacity of officers who are overseas in our missions or somehow work with them. 

The issue of standards, particularly in regard to SMEs, came out in various forms; a member talked about wine in the small industries and others. I want to say that the wine industry, in particular, is very good for value addition. Indeed, some of our locally manufactured wine is already finding itself in shelves overseas. I do not want to mention particular brands, it is there. 

This industry obviously has a lot of potential in the country. The only thing we are trying to do is to encourage the people in the industry to register with the bureau of standards because we cannot know all of them wherever they are. We have come across many of them in western Uganda, in Bushenyi; in eastern Uganda, Sironko and Mbale. They need technical support and guidance, which UNBS is willing to give. 

On the issue of weight being tampered with, this is certainly a very important issue, particularly with these scales which were mentioned on page 30 of the report. I want to correct something however; it is not “Hansom”, it is “Hanson”. Those are the weighing scales which are easy to tamper with. 

We know that UNBS is not at all the border points, and that is an issue I will also talk about maybe later, if I have the time. However, this is due to lack of sufficient staff, and the report also points that out. Otherwise, there is no way UNBS would clear a substandard weighing scale. Some of them come in through various means. 

A member raised the issue of tyres very passionately. Indeed, this is a serious issue, but I want to say that one of the issues which came out in the report is building the capacity of UNBS. That is why we want to build a laboratory. They do not have the capacity to test tyres right now. 

On cooperative unions, it is true Government owes a number of cooperative unions money and this has been over a period of time. The ministry has prepared a Cabinet memo which is going to be discussed in Cabinet, hopefully before the end of this month because it is ready. We are only waiting for the time it will be discussed. 

The Cooperatives Act is outdated and it is up for amendment. The principles have already been approved by Cabinet. This was done last year and now we have a draft Bill, which is due for discussion in Cabinet also. That will help us. 

On the issue of the Cooperative Bank, the ministry is working on a proposal to re-establish the Cooperative Bank. We have already prepared a Cabinet memorandum and soon it will come to Cabinet, and of course in due time it will come to Parliament. 

Another issue was raised by hon. Ssasaga on BCU. It is not the first time this statement or allegation is being made, that during the time when BCU was under caretaker management by the ministry Shs 14 billion was lost. We have requested BCU, and the director might have come across this also, to carry out a forensic audit and submit it to the ministry. We shall give it to the Auditor-General to look at it and certainly, if anybody is found to have been involved in mismanaging this money, they will be brought to book. That is a promise. 

On the issue of construction of silos, we could not provide funds for that in this budget. However, we are working with the private sector to construct silos and warehouses. Indeed, we have got many who have expressed interest both among our local people and foreigners and we are working with them. Our work will be to regulate them. 

We are also considering doing this under a PPP arrangement, especially since the PPP Bill was passed, so that we move fast. We are encouraging the private sector to engage in this countrywide –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR MUTENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue which was raised by the shadow minister, I agree with you to a large extent. We want to assure you that as a ministry we are in the advanced stages of completing the development of an MSME policy. We know that MSMEs are actually one of the biggest employers of the jua kali – all of them are there. It is just that right now they are a bit uncoordinated. That is why we are developing a policy. 

The ministry has also established a directorate for MSMEs. That answers the issue that was raised by the Leader of the Opposition. Thank you very much, honourable members.

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (Ms Agnes Akiror): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee for presenting this report. I also would like to thank the honourable members who have spoken to this report. I know they have done it in good faith because they are very passionate about the tourism sector. I agree with the committee recommendations and we will take them up.

Mr Speaker, I want to make a small correction on page 17, the second last paragraph, about the loan. The loan amount for the Hotel Tourism and Training Institute is not US$ 10 billion; it is US$ 12 million.

Hon. Franca Akello and other honourable members, you will appreciate the fact that when man meets nature, there is a large scale problem of habitat loss. These are the unfortunate challenges that both mankind and wildlife face. We intend to address these issues with compassionate compensation. However, I think we also need to sensitise our communities on the fact that as the population grows, the land that is available does not expand and so, they need to take up family planning seriously for us to control some of these challenges. (Laughter)

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The hon. Judith Franca Akello is the woman Member of Parliament for Agago District. I heard her so clearly when she talked about the elephants coming to the population in Agago from Kidepo National Game Park, which is about 100 kms away. 

If the minister is saying the issue is about family planning, that people should be sensitised about family planning, then is she in order to say that the people of Agago are not caring about family planning yet Kidepo National Park is very far away from that area? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there is a strict rule of relevance in our debates. How does family planning relate to elephants –(Laughter)– that come from the national park? The animals just exceed the borders of the national park into the communities and you are calling upon people to do family planning to solve this problem!

MS LEMATIA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for giving way. I want to say that people seem not to know that animals can also do family planning. (Laughter) If you have got a cow, which is small, and there is a big bull and you are better off putting that to family planning. (Laughter) That applies to all animals. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is family planning of animals; oh Lord!

MS AKIROR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know that the human beings are competing with the animals for the same space anyway. 

One of the things we are doing is to train wildlife scouts so as to control wildlife incursions. We are also starting up income generating activities that help us to deter animals, especially elephants. We are, for example, setting up businesses like bee keeping, tea growing and the red pepper growing. These can also act as a source of revenue.

Mr Speaker, the committee in their report encouraged members to embrace domestic tourism. I want to inform the hon. Waira Majegere that we are undertaking numerous awareness campaigns. We are also supporting regional tourism clusters in a bid to boost domestic tourism. We have done this in Buganda, Busoga, and during the Eastern Tourism Expo in the Bugisu region we also supported the imbalu; this is one of the tourism products that we developing. All this is in a bid to boost domestic tourism. We are also going to start reviving the tourism and wildlife clubs in schools.

I want to thank the hon. Mubito for appreciating our effort. Hon. Betty Amongi spoke about the humanitarian contribution. I want to say payment has been processed by UWA and will soon be made. I do not think it will take more than three weeks. I want to inform the hon. Betty Mbabazi that we shall undertake to provide beehives for the communities in your constituency. 

There was also a mention about electric fencing. I would like to say that the cost of one kilometre of electric fence is US$ 500,000, and together with maintenance costs this is very high. In countries where it has been undertaken like Botswana, they have to use helicopters to inspect and detect damage that might have been occasioned by the elephants. Those animals are quite bright; they uproot trees and break the fence till they get their way out.

Hon. Naome Kaabule, I want to inform you that UTB has a marketing strategy. This financial year, the focus is on hiring three marketing representatives in USA, UK and Germany. This will be done for three years.

Hon. Jacob Wangolo, be informed that the regional initiatives will take care of the rice scheme. Please be part of us when we start to develop that.

Honourable members, I want to inform you that the establishment of the national carrier is under review by Government. We will come out with a position on that at the right time.

I want to thank the shadow minister for his very passionate contribution about Uganda, the Pearl of Africa, a country gifted by nature. On your concerns about the crested crane, Government is to develop an ad hoc plan and committee this year. This committee will work closely with academic institutions, the Ministry of Water and Environment and Nature Uganda in our effort to protect the crested crane. I want to thank the Speaker for having led the marathon to raise funds for the conservation of the crested crane. I think that is all I had to say. Thank you very much.  

5.23
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I join the honourable members in appreciation of this committee report. I would like now to give some information about two important activities happening in the sector at least from the financing angle.

The funds under the World Bank competitiveness project, also known as CEDP, are meant to finance a number of components including the Uganda Wildlife Authority, Uganda Tourism Bureau and the Ministry of Tourism itself, amongst others.

Under this project, each agency needs to provide its work plan to the Private Sector Foundation, which is the executing agency under my ministry. This work plan will then facilitate project implementation. The World Bank has not yet disbursed any money because they are still waiting for the work plans of the various entities and studies for components before disbursing. All components must therefore expedite their action and submit work plans to the Private Sector Foundation to trigger the disbursements. So the ministry is not sitting on people’s money.

Soroti fruit factory is progressing well. The government under UDC has installed power, water and a road network. We are now waiting for the Korean development agency, KOICA, to install the plant by the end of November this year.

As far as the sector financing is concerned, all funds for this sector last year came up to Shs 13.2 billion. This year, funding has increased to Shs 18.2 billion, an increase of Shs 5 billion. This is mainly to cater for marketing and promotion of tourism in Uganda. 

I would like to inform the august House that the establishment of the single tourist visa between Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda is already bearing fruit. Thank you very much, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The time is right for me to put the question for your decision. 

5.25
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee for the good report. I want to particularly pay tribute to the members of this House for the bipartisan approach they adopted in this debate. I have sat here happily listening to the positive contributions that have been coming from all sides; thank you.

On kuber, I did indeed came back to this House and I reported. The summary of what I reported is that after the matter had been raised, we did convene meetings with the Ministry of Trade, the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, the Ministry of Health, the office of the Prime Minister, and the experts carried out tests. We came to a conclusion that it is not only kuber but there are many other drugs on sale. 

Kuber is in the market legally. It had been authorised to come in and URA collects taxes from the importers. Taking into account the laws of the country and taking into account the fact that they had come in legally, we did agree that a framework should be worked out to stop this completely. 

They should stop the importation of kuber, having given notice to all those concerned that this is going to happen. As soon as this timeframe is ready, I will or the appropriate ministry will inform this House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2014/2015 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go to item No.4 because these other reports will come tomorrow. The education and planning reports will come tomorrow.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SHS 675 BILLION FROM THE DOMESTIC MARKET TO FINANCE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE AND REVENUE SHORTFALLS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware, up to now we still do not have in Parliament the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. It is waiting for this; we cannot conclude this business until this particular matter is resolved. This House cannot proceed to close the financial year without passing the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. 

These matters have been before the House for a while and there are issues involving this particular matter, which the committee is going to report on. We need to possibly take a decision in one way or the other so that the ministry can be free to come with the Supplementary Appropriation Bill for finalisation by this House.

This matter has been in and out; even when I was adjourning plenary, we said that if the Committee on National Economy was ready with this report, we would have recalled plenary to deal with this specific matter and then we go back to committees. I am now advised that they are ready. So, I invite the chair to speak.

5.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. As you have rightly guided, this is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the motion for a resolution of Parliament seeking authority to borrow Shs 675 billion from the domestic market to finance supplementary expenditure and revenue shortfalls for the financial year 2013/2014. I beg to lay on the Table the original report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report.

MR KWIZERA: Rt Hon. Speaker, we know that we are looking at domestic borrowing. This money was borrowed and used by Government; as to whether they are coming here for approval or whether they are seeking retrospective approval, that has to be sorted out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I thought that is coming from the committee; we want to hear what the committee has found out and then we see how to proceed.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. The honourable colleague wanted to hijack our report. We should patiently wait for what is in the report. I beg to lay on the Table minutes related to the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MR KYOOMA: I beg to proceed with the presentation of the report. 

Introduction

The Committee on National Economy is provided for under rule 166 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament with a mandate, among others, to examine and make recommendations to the House on all loan agreements required to be authorized or approved by the House under Article 159 of the Constitution.

On 19 June 2014, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning), hon. Matia Kasaija, laid on the Table a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise domestic borrowing amounting to Shs 675 billion to finance supplementary expenditure and revenue shortfalls for financial year 2013/14. The motion was premised on Article 159 of the 1995 Constitution and section 20 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, which provide for the power of Government to borrow and authority to raise loans respectively. 

Mr Speaker, Article 159(2) of the Constitution states thus: “Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.”

Likewise, section 20(2) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act 2003 states thus: “Loans may be raised upon such terms and conditions as to interest, repayment or otherwise as may be negotiated by the Minister but, only for the purpose of-
(a) 	financing budget deficits;
(b)	treasury and monetary policy management purposes;
(c) 	obtaining foreign currency;
(d) 	on-lending to an approved institution; or
(f) 	otherwise defraying expenditure which may lawfully be defrayed.”

Section 20(3) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act 2003 states thus: “With the exception of any loans raised for the purpose of paragraph (b) of subsection (2), the terms and conditions of any loan shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless they have been approved by a resolution of Parliament.”

As part of the methodology, on scrutinising the motion, the committee -
(a) 	held meetings with the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of Investments;
(b) 	made reference to the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; and
(c) 	made reference to the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.

Findings

In scrutinising the motion, the committee established that: 
(a) 	In the course of executing the budget for financial year 2013/2014, the government was faced with emergencies arising out of the political situation in South Sudan, the decision to implement the national security system and the need to allow the Police to recruit more personnel as part of the roadmap to the national elections in 2016;

(b) 	Whereas the URA revenues for the financial year 2013/2014 were estimated at Shs 8,578 billion, there was a revenue shortfall of Shs 475 billion as a result of taxpayer compliance challenges and instability in the region. This affected the Value Added Tax and Corporate Income Tax; 

(c) 	Following the underperformance of the URA in the financial year 2013/2014, Government borrowed Shs 675 billion from the domestic market without the approval of Parliament as stipulated under Article 159 of the Constitution.

Observations
(a) 	Whereas the URA revenue shortfall for the financial year 2013/14 was Shs 475 billion, the Government borrowed over and above by Shs 200 billion to finance emergencies.

(b) 	Government borrowed Shs 675 billion from the domestic market as a result of the underperformance of the URA in the financial year 2013/14, without getting approval of Parliament.

(c) 	The motion seeks for authorisation of Parliament under Article 159 of the Constitution to allow the Government to borrow Shs 675 billion from the domestic market to finance the supplementary expenditure and revenue shortfalls for the financial year 2013/14, money which has already been borrowed by the Government.

(d) 	The mandate of the Committee on National Economy, among others, is restricted to examining and making recommendations to the House on all loan agreements required to be authorised or approved by the House under Article 159 of the Constitution and as provided for under rule 166 of the Rules of Procedure.

Recommendation

Whereas the committee observed that there was need for the Government to respond to emergency national security concerns, the Government cannot borrow, guarantee or raise on behalf of itself or any other public institution as required under Article 159 of the Constitution without the authorisation of Parliament. The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should in future strictly adhere to the provisions of the law in relation to borrowing. 

As I am almost concluding, I would like to say that while we appreciated the emergencies that occurred, we established as a committee that there was no law, rule or regulation that we would invoke to recommend for the approval.   

Conclusion 

Having analysed the laws applicable to borrowing by Government and having deduced the findings and observations above, the committee, as I have already said, is constrained to recommend to this House the approval of Government’s borrowing of Shs 675 billion from the domestic market to finance supplementary expenditure and revenue shortfalls for the financial year 2013/14, money which has already been borrowed, since the committee’s mandate is restricted to examining and making recommendations to the House on all loan agreements required to be authorised or approved by the House as provided for under rule 166(2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure.   I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Mr Chairperson, can you guide the House; what was the request for and what was actually used, so that we know the difference?

MR KYOOMA: Yes. As it is already stipulated in the report, first of all, the revenue collected by URA was short of what was anticipated. What does it imply? It implies that some of the activities could not be conducted. However, some of these activities were in form of emergencies and therefore, they had to be undertaken. Two, because of the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am talking about amounts. What was the initial figure and what was actually borrowed? 

MR KYOOMA: The initial figure was Shs 475 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this request, it is Shs 675 billion.

MR KYOOMA: But what was eventually borrowed is Shs 675 billion, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a difference between what was requested for and what was actually borrowed?

MR KYOOMA: What was borrowed and what was requested for is the same amount.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shs 675 billion?

MR KYOOMA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR KYOOMA:  I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime minister, do you want to say something at this stage? Maybe you allow me to just recognise the people in the gallery. In the gallery this evening we have elders from Ndoya Village in Bukanga Sub-County, Luuka District and they are represented by hon. Evelyn Kaabule and hon. John Bagoole. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause) Please, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

5.45
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Colleagues, I thought that I should come in at this stage so that the debate is informed.

First, clearly, there was a mistake. When the need to spend money arose and there wasn’t any money already appropriated to meet the expenditure required, the emergencies, as very well stipulated in the report, the Ministry of Finance sought guidance of the Attorney-General. The Attorney-General, through the Solicitor-General, gave an opinion saying that the Ministry of Finance or Government could spend without resort to getting approval of Parliament first. The ministry went ahead and spent the money. 

Subsequently, when the full facts of the expenditure came out, the Attorney-General gave an opinion that actually, the expenditure incurred was the type that required prior approval of Parliament. The problem was that the Solicitor-General was answering the question relating to monetary policy, meaning, can the central bank – Normally, it is the central bank authorised to handle monetary policy, which means intervening in the market either to strengthen our shilling or to contain inflation. That, according to the Solicitor-General, needed not be approved by Parliament first. He was right. 

The problem was that the actual expenditure was due to budgetary deficits and it was not monetary budget. So, it was a mistake to handle it as a monetary policy when it was a budgetary deficit. When the Attorney-General gave this opinion, unfortunately the expenditure had already happened.

I would like, on behalf of the Executive, to apologise to this Parliament for that mess up. I would like to request this House to approve this expenditure as we strengthen our methods of managing funds strictly within the law. 

I would not say exactly – I do not want to lay any blame, but there is some blame and we will find out exactly what went wrong. Why, for instance, did the Solicitor-General addressed monetary policy when actually it was a budgetary deficit?  What I would like to do is to request you, colleagues – (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am really impressed with the humility of the Prime Minister today, apologising on behalf of the Government for the mistake it has made. However, the role of this Parliament is very clear as mandated by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. I want to know whether, procedurally, he is right to plead with this House and the Speaker to allow us to even discuss an illegality for which he has apologised.

I want to know whether we would proceed with the request that this be approved despite the fact that it is illegal. I would want us to get a response from the Attorney-General, the ministry – The Speaker of Parliament guided this House before the report of the budget committee was thrown out. This House was guided on issues of legality and I am very surprised that the Prime Minister would even imagine that this illegality would come back to the Floor of Parliament for approval. 

I appreciate the apology and definitely, this House deserves that apology because this House has been abused year in and year out. The resources of the people of Uganda have been squandered through the supplementary budget and you know it, but this time the truth has come out and I am very happy about it. However, I think we should restrain this institution from adopting and approving an illegality.  

Mr Speaker, I just stood here to ask for guidance on a procedural matter, whether it is right for us to proceed to engage this Parliament in listening and discussing and even attempting to pass an illegality. I beg to be guided. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that a kind of similar situation arose in the Supplementary Appropriation Bill that we handled in 2012. I recall that because I was in the Chair. A similar situation arose, but in circumstances that were different from this. The situation that arose then was that the supplementary expenditure total exceeded the percentage, which was provided for in the law. 

How did we resolve it? We resolved that each time those supplementaries were done, they were handled by Parliament. That means each of the supplementaries was already approved by Parliament. The supplementary appropriation was a total of it, but each time – At the time Parliament was approving, it only related to whether it had exceeded the three per cent requirement of the law. We found out that in each instance, – they were three - each request had not exceeded the three per cent. So we could not look at the cumulative as more than three per cent when the approval was specific on each one of them. So we resolved the matter that way and we passed the Supplementary Appropriations Bill at that time.

Now, this situation is different, in a sense that by a mistake that was occasioned by the chief legal advisor of the government - Ministry of Finance sought an opinion of the legal people of the country, asking if it would be proper to borrow in these circumstances. I do not know why they said to, but they sought advice on whether it would be proper to engage in these activities without parliamentary approval. As the Prime Minister says, it was because they thought it was a monetary policy intervention not a fiscal one. So the first recommendation was that well, because it is not an issue of fiscal expenditure, you can go ahead and borrow. 

Now, how they borrowed is also important. They borrowed through treasury bills. What happens in situations of treasury bills? Treasury bills’ interest rates are not determined at the time they are issuing them; they are determined at the end. That is my understanding of treasury bills. I may not be right and I may be guided on this.

At the time of issuing treasury bills, you cannot determine the interest rates at which they will be redeemed. What is supposed to be laid before Parliament is the whole extent of the required amount of loans and the interest to be paid, and everything that is going to be charged, which is going to be required to be repaid from the Consolidated Fund. So, there was also this gap, which could have created this misunderstanding.

Now, the procedural point that is being raised now is: is this an entirely illegal situation that this Parliament cannot engage in? A question we can also ask is: would Parliament have approved this borrowing at the time it was raised if the issue had been brought before Parliament? Would it have approved? It would have approved. Now, they did not seek prior approval.

Can Parliament ratify a decision that has already been taken if that decision was in the interest of the people of Uganda? Can Parliament ratify it? That is the next question. Can Parliament ratify that decision to have that retrospective implication? That is the question that we might need to think about properly and see how we proceed with it.

Certainly, this Parliament has ratified many decisions and actions that had been taken previously. It has done it a few times, to my recollection. We have ratified many things and acted on them retrospectively. We have even passed some Bills with retrospective application. There are several actions we have done in this House, which have retrospective applications, but the issue that we now need to have a discussion on is whether adopting this and approving this borrowing retrospectively would impinge on the law.

The other question that we also need to deal with is: what is the implication on the entire budget process if we do not approve what was borrowed? This is because we have a hanging Supplementary Appropriation Bill that cannot be drafted or finalised because this particular figure cannot be captured in the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. The implication is that we will not be able to proceed with the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, which conclusion would pave way for the preparation of the Appropriation Bill for this particular financial year.

So, we may want to break this down and understand the real implication of this. If we do not approve this, that means we may as well stop here with the budget process because we cannot finalise the Supplementary Appropriation Bill as there will be a gap that cannot be cured by any other- 

So, I do not know which way this Parliament would want to go. That is how I would guide on this particular matter. Let the Prime Minister conclude; he had not concluded.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I was almost there. I thank the Leader of the Opposition and my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for her presentation. The difference between me and her is not in what she said but in the conclusions reached. Her argument leads to the logical conclusion that we are rightfully here presenting this motion. Why? It is because it is only this Parliament that can do what we are asking for. No one else can do it in this country. Only the Parliament of Uganda has the power to do what we are asking you to do; there is no one else. 

It is also very clear in my mind, as it must be in hers and yours, that the power of Parliament to approve this is not fettered either by the Constitution or by any law. The only restriction we put in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda about retrospective decisions of Parliament was in relation to decisions of a court. That is all; we cannot pass legislation that alters a decision of a court of law as to the interests of parties in a case. 

We can exercise the power that we have to correct what may have gone wrong because if we do not, there is no one else who can do it. Of course, I agree with you, Mr Speaker, that it is crucial that we pass this resolution in order for this process of the budget to continue because if we do not, this will be a major impediment.

I thought I should raise this so that we can put the debate in a proper context. The fact that there was a mistake is not debated; it is a fact and we should concentrate on what we need to do to move forward. Thank you.

5.59
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, Members of Parliament make laws and we can even say they are lawyers by association, so in essence we understand law. 

There are two things here. Are we looking at approval to spend or are we looking at retrospective approval? If the Government is coming for retrospective approval, I will support it because Government already borrowed and spent, although we do not know from where. That is one point.

Secondly, we need to know the terms of the loan. In the morning we were handling a similar matter where Government borrowed Shs 1.7 trillion and Bank of Uganda is actually charging them Shs 137 billion as arrears on Ministry of Defence up to June 30th last year. So even if we passed this retrospective approval, it will still come to the House as a query because the Auditor-General will find it as a query.

You can now debate it knowing that you will still meet it again. Someone can also take you to court because you have abused your mandate. What am I saying? Someone must have committed an error and if an individual commits a crime or an error, errors and crimes are localised and even individualised. Government should have dealt with that person who failed in his duty. We should be seeing the Attorney-General resigning because he misled Government. We should be seeing the Minister of Finance, who endorsed the borrowing without following the procedure, resigning. He must be brought to book.

As much as we agree with the Prime Minister’s apology, we should stop politicising things. We have committed a crime, is it as a government, a Parliament, the Executive, a minister or the Attorney-General? We need to localise that crime. Is it collective responsibility? 

If it does not apply to Parliament- I represent the people of Bufumbira East and if a crime is committed by hon. Mbabazi in his constituency, it cannot be attributed to me. So if Cabinet thinks they have committed that crime as collective responsibility, both of you should resign and go home because you have failed your people.

The issue of coming here and you want to make Parliament to clean the crime is not going to be accepted, unless Parliament forwards this report to the legal committee of Parliament to advise this Parliament that it can take this direction. This is because as you were saying, Rt Hon Prime Minister, the law is silent on retrospective approval of loans. So if the law is silent, what do we do? Should we make the law now?

So we either have the Attorney-General to guide us or we refer this matter to the committee of Parliament in charge of legal affairs. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, in the submission of the Prime Minister, he mentioned that this error was a result of advice by the Solicitor-General and later advice by the Attorney-General. 

First of all, I would like to appreciate the manner in which the Prime Minister moved, particularly in terms of his apology. However, I want this Parliament to move very cautiously especially when apportioning blame. 

In his submission, the Prime Minister mentioned that this error was committed by our government legal advisor. I want to say that this is wrong. I have with me the legal opinion of the Solicitor-General. This legal opinion is in response to a request from Ministry of Finance on capitalisation of Bank of Uganda not a request for supplementary expenditure or financing. Therefore, the Solicitor-General was right in as much as he was responding to a request by the Ministry Finance for purposes of recapitalising Bank of Uganda for conduct of monitory policy.

On that note, therefore, we cannot hold it on our record that the mistake was made by the Solicitor-General. The Solicitor-General did advise in response to the request given by the Ministry of Finance in respect to capitalisation of Bank of Uganda, and the opinion is very clear. 

Mr Speaker, let me just read the conclusion of this opinion:  “Government can recapitalise the central bank by funding securities when capital of the bank is impaired without parliamentary approval pursuant to section 14(4) of Bank of Uganda Act.” Remember, the spirit under which the minister moved the motion here on the Floor was under Article 159 of the Constitution, which was seeking for approval of supplementary expenditure, not this one. 

Opinion two: “Section 19(3) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act requires the minister responsible for finance to get parliamentary approval for any loan raised except the ones for the Treasury and monitory policy. Section 4(1) of the Bank of Uganda Act provides that the functions of the bank shall be to formulate and implement monitory policy. The objective or purpose of capital of any corporate body is to enable the body implement its mandate objectives. The Ministry of Finance can recapitalise the bank under section 19(2)(b) of the Public Finance Act without recourse to Parliament on grounds that it is for the purpose of the Treasury and monitory management, which is the main function of the bank.” 

That is different from the motion, which was laid here. The motion was different. The opinion sought for from the Ministry of Finance was different. I give this information so that this Parliament can move cautiously without placing blame on Government bodies, which have done their due diligence. 

Let me now go to the opinion of the Solicitor-General so that if we are to make a mistake, we do so having exhausted all avenues and without apportioning blame wrongly. The same ministry also wrote to the Ministry of Justice, to the Attorney-General, to give an opinion. This is why I want to commend the Committee on National Economy very highly, particularly for their conclusion; they made it very easy for us. The committee seems to have passed the ball back to Parliament; as if to say, “You can go ahead and do your illegalities, for us we are out of the move”. 

In the opinion of the Solicitor-General – a letter was written to the Solicitor-General and he responded to it in a letter dated 2 June 2014 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was the date of the first letter?

MR MULIMBA: The first one was dated 10 April 2013. The one I am holding now is dated 2 June 2014 and is addressed to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The reference is, “Legal Opinion on domestic borrowing to finance supplementary expenditure”. That is the one related to the motion, and I want to read the conclusion: 

“This particular request of financing supplementary expenditure, which was done through domestic borrowing as stated, is said to have been done with the legal opinion of Bank of Uganda in mind. My opinion is that financing supplementary expenditure is the same as financing budget deficit and the opinion of Bank of Uganda is not applicable. Financing budget deficit is provided for under section 19(2) (a) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act and section 11 of the Budget Act. It is not exempted from being laid before Parliament. 

In conclusion, therefore, borrowing to finance supplementary expenditure requires parliamentary approval since it is beyond the three percent allowed by the Budget Act”.

The procedural point I would like to raise, therefore, is that in the context of the above two scenarios I have stated, are we right to proceed based on the information given to us by the Prime Minister? He said that the mistake was committed by our Attorney-General or Solicitor-General – (Interruption)

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Mulimba for giving way. I was very careful in my words, and I will repeat what I said. 

I said that the opinion given by the Solicitor-General was based on the understanding, which he obviously got from the request from the Ministry of Finance, that this was a question of monitory policy. It is very clear, and he said that if it is monitory policy, then there is no need for prior approval of Parliament. 


I then said that when the Attorney-General came in later, he said that the facts relating to the actual expenditure that occurred clearly show that this was a budget deficit and not monetary policy; therefore it requires prior approval of Parliament. That is what I said. 

I said that we need obviously to go back as a government and look into the details of what happened. If we are to find blame, we will find it. I am not talking about any specific office to blame now. I did say that. 

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, I wanted this to go on record. Having submitted that information, it is now very clear; we know where the mistake was made. If Parliament expects an apology, consequently – (Interjections) – Yes, we need to make the records straight. We need to localise the problem. 

First of all, we need to know who is responsible. Look at the correspondences coming from the advisors; the one from the Solicitor-General is very clear and it is based on capitalising Bank of Uganda. That means that somebody must have lied in his submission to the Solicitor-General. If the one of the Attorney- General came after the expenditure had already occurred and we are saying that it was premised on the advice of the Solicitor-General, that even makes the matters worse. It means that the person who authored the letter requiring legal opinion deliberately lied to the Solicitor-General so that he can now incur the expenditure and come to you to use it as justification.

Nonetheless, we are now cornered as Government. We do not know where to go because we are mandated to approve all loan requests under Article 159 and at the same time Government is required to lay on the Table the terms and conditions, which must be approved by this House before expenditure; all that has been bypassed. 

It is also prerequisite for approval of the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. If we do not approve it, that means we are not going to conclude the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, which is also a basis for appropriation of funds to be expended this financial year. So, we are now caught up in a four-roomed corner or between a hard rock and a stone.



What do we do? I want to agree with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that we have to find a solution in order to proceed. However, my proposal is that before we proceed, we need to find those who are culpable. We cannot hold the country at ransom but also at the same time we cannot simply bypass procedures that were approved by this House.

First, there is need for us to find the culpable people. After that, we can examine their testimonies and consequently life will have to go on. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before another member comes in, let me see if I can reduce on the issues. One, it is clear that the letter that was written to the Solicitor-General in relation to capitalising Bank of Uganda was a separate matter. So, both that letter from the Ministry of Finance and the response from the Solicitor-General have nothing to do with this motion. Is that okay? In fact, we should not waste our time talking about them.

So, what are the events that happened then? The events are that Ministry of Finance spent the money without seeking the opinion of anybody. By the time they spent this money, they had not sought anybody’s opinion. That opinion was sought after the event, through the letter that was now responded to in June 2014, but the money had been already spent.

So, what is the situation? The situation is that emergencies arose and Ministry of Finance responded by spending this money. How did they spend that money? They raised it from their domestic market – treasury bills were issued and money was generated to finance those emergencies. That was done without any legal opinion sought and with no parliamentary approval.

After the money had been spent, then the opinion of the Attorney-General was sought. Which opinion now said that yes, you spent that money but that expenditure should have been done with parliamentary approval. 

The question, therefore, is: can the request be approved retrospectively? Can Parliament approve that request retrospectively? Does the law prohibit Parliament from approving anything retrospectively? The answer is no. The only prohibition is what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister articulated, that Parliament cannot act retrospectively in passing laws that have the effect of dealing with what has been done by the court. That is Article 92, and it says thus: “Parliament shall not pass any law to alter the decision or judgment of any court as between the parties to the decision or judgment.” The title is: “Restriction on retrospective legislation.”

I want to say that there is a history to this. In 1967, there were cases and a particular person went to court, I think it was a case of Shah v. the Attorney-General; the man went to court, secured a judgment but before that judgment was executed, Government ran to Parliament and passed a law that had the effect of removing the rights of that person to lay any claim. So, this person, by operation of the law, could now no longer enforce the judgment because Parliament had resolved that that kind of judgment was not enforceable. So, this particular provision is derived from the need to provide a solution to that kind of situation. 

Is there any other restriction in the Constitution or any other law that prohibits this Parliament from dealing with retrospective approval of any situation? Unless, I am advised on that, in my opinion, I have not found it. 

As I said earlier, even for the laws that we pass, we sometimes say this law is deemed to have come into force in January 2014, for example. That is retrospective application of the law. In other words, we are approving situations which have already passed and we are now legislating in the past. Those situations are not prohibited by the law in my opinion as Speaker –(Interjections)– On issues of guidance I still have to find the rule to apply. 

So, Members, let us try to operate within those confines. We should not say there is an illegality being committed by this Parliament because there is no illegality. This Parliament can decide to approve or not. It is within its prerogative to do so or not to do so. 

You see, there is no point of guidance to be sought from the Speaker; there is procedure, motion and the other issues that I can address. Is that a point of procedure?
 
MR SEKIKUBO: Yes. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have also benefited from the guidance you have given to the House. However, I want to say that whereas there is no constitutional provision in the case of retrospective legislation, when we read the Constitution, we should read the mischief rule, which though not provided for in the Constitution, would tell us what was meant to be cured.

When you go by the mischief rule, it would show you the dangers in retrospective legislation and approval. I think that would lead us to the current situation. So, for us to be expect the framers of the Constitution to even have seen this situation would not be proper at this point in time.

What we need to guard against – There was Parliament and there was no situation of emergency. All the organs of Government were also active. So, for us to say there is lacuna in the law, that it was not provided for, so our hands are free, I do not think would be best way to do this, Mr Speaker.
 
In the circumstances, we have to go by some other definition to see how institutions get abused and the powers conferred to Parliament get abused, and how powers of the Executive are being abused. To put a stop to that, the framers drafted a general provision against retrospective legislation, which can be extended to the current circumstances. In which respect, Mr Speaker, with due respect, I think we do not have clean hands at this point in time to say that if there is anything -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Parliament has clean hands. If you are citing the issue of the law of equity, Parliament has clean hands up to now. So you cannot say that we do not have clean hands. We are not party to all those things that have happened.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not a lawyer and that is why procedurally, I want to inquire. At the beginning, you posed the question, “Would Parliament have approved?” I think our Rules of Procedure stipulate the rules of anticipation. So, first, I need guidance on that.

Secondly, I need guidance on Article 159; what happens when a law is silent on a matter? In my un-legal mind, Article 92 is on legislation and Article 159 is on the issue of borrowing, and 159(2) and (3) say, “(2) Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.

(3) An Act of Parliament made under clause (2) of this Article shall provide – 
(a) that the terms and conditions of the loan shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless they have been approved by a resolution of Parliament”. 

May I now be guided whether the word “shall” is not mandatory, that any loan has to be mandatorily approved with a resolution of Parliament? This would have actually tied our hands on retrospective approval.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me give guidance on this issue. The situation we are faced with is not a loan as we understand it, with terms and conditions laid before Parliament. These are treasury bills; that is what makes it complicated even for me. 

This is domestic borrowing generated through treasury bills, so there is no document that they are coming to lay on the Table. That is where the complication is. There is document, where the terms and conditions are known under Article 159. That is also my problem. I am also trying to think through this with the House so that we find a solution.

There are two things that happened in this case, and incidentally they both require parliamentary approval. The first thing that happened was the borrowing and the second thing that happened was the expenditure. They did not just borrow the money, they also spent it. 

The borrowing is governed by a separate set of rules and the expenditure is governed by another set of rules. If the borrowing was already done, was the expenditure proper? If you want to look at the expenditure, then you need to go to Article 154 that regulates the issue of expenditure. Let us separate expenditure from the borrowing so that we know what we are dealing with; both happened without the necessary approval.

Money was borrowed, but if you are talking about expenditure, look at Article 154, which says, “No monies shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except…” and they provide for that. When you come to clause (3), it says, “No monies shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund unless the withdrawal has been approved by the Auditor-General and in the manner prescribed by Parliament.”

My information is that this particular expenditure was warranted by the Accountant-General. He issued a certificate to spend this money. That is why I am saying that we have to think through this together. On the expenditure side, there was the issuance of the audit warrant from that office of the Accountant-General to spend this money, which was generated through domestic borrowing. So, that leaves us with the question of the borrowing. 

Let us have some advice from the two accountants here, honourable members. You should know that the Speaker is trying to think through this together with you.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I think we need to get down to the gist of this expenditure - how it came about and how it has now come to this financial year. I remember when we were in recess we crossed 30th June before we dealt with this matter. Now that we have crossed 30th June, this is what I would term as excess expenditure, because Government has spent and it did not get the prior approval of Parliament.  

Excess expenditure is dealt with in the Public Finance and Accountability Act, section 17. I want to read it verbatim: “(1) Where at the close of accounts for any financial year, it is found that moneys have been expended-
(a) on any expenditure vote in excess of the amount appropriated for it by an Appropriation Act...” - which is the case for this one -
“... (b) for a purpose for which no moneys have been voted and appropriated; or
(c) in excess of the sum assigned to an estimate forming part of an expenditure vote in the estimates of expenditure approved by Parliament for the financial year, and to which no further sum has been applied under this Act or any regulations issued under it, 

the amount of the excess expended, or not appropriated, as the case may be, shall be included in a statement of expenditure in excess which shall be laid before Parliament and referred to the appropriate committee of Parliament.”

I believe this is the avenue Government should use to now bring this excess expenditure to Parliament. It should be referred to the relevant committee and then we look at the sources of revenue that Government should use to fund this expenditure. That is what I would advise. This is falls under section 17 and I believe that is what Government should use, and it is possible before we do appropriation. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, there is no timeline on this matter of excess expenditure. There is no time as to when Government can bring it, but it only states that it is expenditure which should have occurred after the financial year closed. So we can go ahead with the supplementary appropriation and then Government can even bring this after the supplementary appropriation in accordance with this section of the Public Finance and Accountability Act. I beg to submit.

MR OKUPA: Rt Hon. Speaker, earlier on you did state, and we concur with you, that there are two issues here, borrowing and spending. What has been brought here is the issue of approval for borrowing. 

Before we deal with the expenditure, hon. Akol has brought the issue about excess expenditure. Can we deal with first things first, which is the issue of borrowing, before we get to the issue of excess expenditure. What has been brought here is the issue of borrowing and approval. So, can we start with that? Procedurally, wouldn’t we be right to start with the issue of borrowing that has been brought here and needs Parliament’s role and approval before we get there? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, we can separate the two issues and still proceed. However, the reason that we are engaged at this time is now the question that has been introduced - does this request stop the preparation of the Supplementary Appropriation Bill? If it is true, and I still need to reflect on it, then that would mean that we can have this debate as it does not stop the Minister for Finance from preparing the Supplementary Appropriation Bill for us to close the financial year and deal with the new issues as they have come. 

That is what I am picking from this. However, we still have to get to this issue of borrowing that was done without authority and several other things. So, let me hear from the member for Kabula.   

6.35
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you for giving me this opportunity. The Speaker now and the one I knew in the Seventh Parliament are different as far as experience is concerned, because experience is the best teacher.

I just want to supplement what hon. Akol said and also the words that you have given to this House. The question is ratifying a decision made by an expense that was incurred without approval of Parliament; has it ever happened in this House? The answer is yes. If the answer is yes, then what are we trying to cure? 

I have read the copy of the report and it says that the money that was spent and the decision taken to spend was because of an emergency. What was that emergency? Suppose you are the President of this country or suppose anybody is faced with a challenge and you are invaded by a hostile country, what do you do? – (Interjections) - this is –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable members, let the member make the point first.

MR KAKOOZA: Let me advance my point first. What do you do? The committee said that the emergency that required this money - not all of it but half – was that Government had to send troops to evacuate citizens of this country. Was it wrong? That is the substance of borrowing. 

If the money was not there, what would have happened? In your capacity as the Minister for Finance, what would you have done? You would have looked for sources of money to deal with the emergency. What do you do? The easiest way was to go for the treasury bills. What do you do with the treasury bills? If the treasury bills are determined by the borrower at that time, you just make that decision and do what is needed to be done to benefit the whole country.

I can give another example. By the time they borrowed this money between December and January, all civil servants were not paid. They were financing a deficit in the budgeted activities of that financial year. How would you deal with these civil servants? Should they go on strike and paralyse the country? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please.

MR KAKOOZA: Members, when we are debating decisions taken, you must go on the ground and find out why this person –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please. What we are looking for is a solution. Personally as Speaker, my concern primarily is that this particular issue could bog down the entire budgetary process. That is my concern and that should be our concern. 

Now, if it is true that these particular requests - the borrowing and expenditure - can be grouped under those sections that have been quoted by the member for Bukedea, then it means that we do not have to worry about that for now until we crosscheck. What it means is that we do not have to rush with this decision because if it does not block the budgetary process, then we do not have to rush through this.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I thought that I was still on the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are not. 

6.39
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMEMT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the issues being raised are pertinent and relevant. What hon. Akol said, if it is correct, will give us a way out. In that case, we can go on with the process of completing this budget and then deal with this matter when we have enough time to look at the details.

However, this needs study and an opinion. So, my suggestion is that we sleep over the issue that has been raised by hon. Rose Akol and come back tomorrow and get a report. If we get it out of the way, fine, we can do that and we continue with the process. If we find that we cannot, then we have no choice but to conclude it. I so propose.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. In the meantime, the Minister for Finance should proceed with the preparation of the Supplementary Appropriation Bill excluding these figures so that we can have it as soon as we get this matter clarified. The Bill would then go to the committee so that it paves way for the rest of the decisions of this House.

So, please proceed and prepare the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. If we realise that it is necessary for it to also be in the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, then we take the decision at that time. But for now, prepare the Bill and have it ready and then – Yes, chairperson.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, I need to register my concerns. You are urging the Minister for Finance to prepare the supplementary figures without these figures. I feel that you are giving her a very big burden because if these figures are within the supplementary figures, there is no way – 

You raised a question at the beginning and colleagues were saying that it was very possible. Mr Speaker, technically, it is not possible because these figures must be part and parcel of the supplementary figures.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you see, what the honourable member for Bukedea has said is that if at the close of the financial year, it is  discovered that the expenditure was in excess of the appropriation, then that is treated separately and not as supplementary but excess expenditure. That is what I have understood. That would now be excess expenditure above what was in there. That is what I understood.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and honourable members, let me first explain why this matter of borrowing arose.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are not there. We are not on that issue. We are –

MR KAJARA: Why I am saying this –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, please. What we are dealing with in respect to this particular item is whether it blocks us from handling the supplementary appropriation.

MR KAJARA: What I want to tell this House is that if this borrowing request is not approved, we may not proceed with concluding the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. The Budget Committee declined to approve Supplementary Schedule No. 1 because this source of borrowing was not known. That is why we have to conclude this and then we go to the Appropriation Bill. The Budget Committee said they need to know, before they approve this Supplementary Schedule No. 1, what our source of funding was. It happened that the source was this domestic borrowing, which is the subject of discussion on the Floor of this House. Thank you. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, you had ruled on this matter. The Leader of Government Business had also said, give us time. Who is now the state minister of finance to come and say, no, we cannot stop it? Is he is order to proceed the way he is proceeding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance has not spoken the whole afternoon and I think he was trying to get an opportunity at least to say something. (Laughter) Honourable members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow 10.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.44 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 11 September 2014 at 10.00 a.m.)
