

Thursday, 6 September 2018

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. This is an announcement: You are requested to confirm attendance of the 20th Uganda National Prayer Breakfast, 2018. The Uganda Parliamentary Fellowship announces the 20th Uganda National Prayer Breakfast that will take place on Monday, 8 October 2018 at Hotel Africana, starting at 7.00 a.m.

The key information about this year’s event is as follows:

    i. Chief Guest - H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda.
    ii. Chief Host - the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda.
    iii. Keynote Speaker – Dr Derrick Samuels, President of Derrick Samuels Leadership Institute, United States of America.
    iv. Guest Speaker - Hon. James Clayborne, Majority Senate Leader and Senator of the Illinois State, United States of America.

The theme for this year’s National Prayer Breakfast is, “All hard work brings profit but mere talk leads only to poverty” (Proverbs 14:22).

The venue, as stated, will be Hotel Africana, Nile Hall in Kampala from 7.00 a.m. to 10.30 a.m. 

Please confirm your attendance by 15 September 2018 by filling the Uganda National Prayer Breakfast information forms in the lobby of the Chamber and place them in the respective box, or emailing us on ugandaprayerbreakfast@gmail.com, or calling our administrator, Ms Patricia Akao, on 0775412558. 

Kindly note that only Members who will confirm will be given invitation cards in their pigeonholes. Please take note and let us go and prepare and attend this prayer breakfast.

Honourable members, on the Order Paper, I have been advised by the chairperson of the committee in charge of information technology, which is processing the Data Protection and Privacy Bill, that they would be ready within a week. We will, therefore, not be able to handle this matter today. The second Bill, for which the chairperson came to me and indicated a similar concern, is the Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2017. The committee told me that they need more time before it comes here. However, the rest of the Bills are ready for processing and that is the main business of today. Thank you.

2.09
MS ROSE KABAGYENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

In Kisoro, we have not had electricity for the last two months. Umeme and other agencies have been telling us that they are renovating the power lines and promised that in 15 days, the electricity would have been fixed but it is now two months.

Mr Speaker, we have had mothers dying. Last week, we lost three mothers and three premature babies just because of inadequate electricity in the theatre and in the laboratories. This is affecting the mothers in Kisoro, especially those who cannot afford to be referred to the nearby hospitals.

Mr Speaker, this has also affected the business community because you can imagine, as Government we are emphasising skills development but many of these people cannot engage in their small cottage industries because of lack of electricity.

Mr Speaker, we also do not have water because the water agencies say they cannot afford to pump water using generators for all this time. This is because the water pumps were designed to work with electricity. The water agencies say they cannot afford fuel for all this period. However, in all this, the mothers are critically affected and the people that are suffering.

2.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we received this information this morning and the energy minister is in touch with Umeme to ensure that problem is rectified, probably by the end of today or latest, tomorrow morning. Therefore, after this session we will ensure that the energy minister speaks with the honourable member from Kisoro to update her so that by tomorrow, this problem is resolved.

2.12
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On the night of 4th September at about 9.00 p.m., a woman called Justine Akello in Panyango Subcounty, Lobodegi Parish, Pakwach District, was shot and injured. Right now, she is nursing wounds in Nebbi Hospital. Prior to that, two people were shot dead – an old man in Pakwach Subcounty in May and another woman in Panyango Subcounty again. She was over 60 years.

Mr Speaker, Pakwach has always been peaceful but I would like to say that we are now insecure because of these threats of shootings.  My prayers are: One, I would like to call upon the ministers in charge of security and internal affairs to intervene in this matter to support the local security team so that the people of Pakwach can be provided with information about exactly what is happening. You can see that out three, two are women and an attack on a woman is an attack on the family and an attack on the nation.

We also need protection; if possible, a police post should be put at Panyango Subcounty where two incidents have so far happened.

I pray that Government compensates the families that lost their dear ones and provides specialised treatment for the old women now nursing wounds in Nebbi Hospital. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we are going to invite the Minister of Internal Affairs to respond to this question before this meeting is adjourned. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We expect a response on this matter before the end of this sitting. Thank you. 

Honourable members, before we go to the Order Paper, in the public gallery this afternoon we have a delegation of 15 staff from the Parliament of Kenya. They are attending a programme on parliamentary practice and procedures in parliamentary skills development in the Eastern and Southern African Management Institute (ESAMI), Uganda Branch. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause) 

In the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have close family members of the late Rev. Fr Robert Isingoma Binta Amooti. They include hon. Stephen Basaliza, former Member of Parliament, Juliet Binta, Mary Binta, Catherine Kawenderu. They are relatives of the founder of the Catholic Chaplaincy in Parliament.

We have a motion that is coming up to pay tribute to Fr Binta, who has now passed, for his contribution. In those circumstances, I would like to move this matter forward immediately after the laying of papers. This is so that we can finish with this motion so that the family members can feel free to leave the Chamber and we move on to other more formal business of the House.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE REV. FR ROBERT ISINGOMA AMOOTI BINTA

2.17
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, District Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to move this motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Rev. Fr Robert Isingoma Amooti Binta. It is moved under rule 50 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda received with sorrow the sad news of the death of Rev. Fr Robert lsingoma Amooti Binta, former Chaplain of the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy, which occurred on Sunday, 20 August 20l8;

AND WHEREAS Rev. Fr Robert lsingoma Amooti Binta was ordained on 3l August l99l and served as the Treasury General of Fort Portal Diocese from I996 to 2000 and the Financial Administrator of the Uganda Episcopal Conference in Kampala up to 2007;

RECOGNISING THAT on 6 September 2003, during the Seventh Parliament, the Rev. Fr Robert lsingoma was appointed by His Eminence Emeritus Cardinal Emmanuel Wamala as the first Chaplain of the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy, a position in which he served diligently;

FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT the Rev. Fr Robert lsingoma was a unifying factor among Members of Parliament in spite of their political divide and drew Members of the parliamentary community closer to God through – (i) weekly celebration of Mass; (ii) founding of the Parliamentary Herald, a magazine that educates and mentors members of the parliamentary community on matters of God; (iii) establishment of Christmas carols and prayers at Parliament; (iv) encouragement of Members of Parliament to faithfully participate and contribute to development projects across the countryside;

NOTING THAT at the time of his death, Rev. Fr Robert lsingoma Amooti Binta was the Parish Priest of St Benedict Parish, Phoenix Arizona and had been a priest for 27 years;

APPRECIATING THAT Rev. Fr Robert lsingoma Amooti Binta was a compassionate person who mentored many across the globe and served the parliamentary community and our country with memorable and commendable effort as is evidenced by his performance, and his commitment and unwavering faith touched countless hearts throughout his life;

NOW THERETORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:

1. 	That it takes cognizance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late Rev. Fr Robert lsingoma Amooti Binta to Parliament and the country.
2. 	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of Rev. Fr Robert lsingoma Amooti Binta.
3. 	That we pray to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant the Rev. Fr Robert lsingoma Amooti Binta eternal rest.”

The motion is moved by Beatrice Rwakimari, District Woman Representative, Ntungamo District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion Seconded)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Member for Ndorwa, the Leader of the Opposition, the members for Makindye-Ssabagabo, Apac, Amuru and the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF). The whole House has seconded the motion. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MS RWAKIMARI: Mr Speaker, once again I would like to thank you for this opportunity to move the motion. I also wish to express my deepest condolences to the family of late Rev. Fr lsingoma Binta who passed away in the United States of America. To further comfort them, I refer them to 2 Timothy 4:7-8 in the New International Version which says, “I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith.  Now there is in store for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will award to me on that day — and not only to me, but also to all who have longed for his appearing”. 

As a chaplaincy, we have lost a great mentor and counsellor, but most importantly, the founder of the Catholic Chaplaincy in Parliament. Most of you will recall that this chaplaincy started in the Seventh Parliament after a group of 14 Members of Parliament visited Israel at a very difficult time when there was a lot of commotion and war in that area. I happened to be one of those 14 MPs who visited Israel. At that time, the chaplaincy chairperson was hon. Bernadette Bigirwa and she was the first chairperson of the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy. 

When we returned from Israel, we decided to start the Catholic Chaplaincy in Parliament. Fr Binta was very instrumental in guiding us to start the chaplaincy and he was our first Chaplain, as I have already mentioned. He was a great mobiliser. I must say that he was very skilful in the way he mobilised Members of Parliament to come for mass. You know how difficult it is to mobilise Members of Parliament for any activity, let alone to go to church and pray, but he had that personal touch. He would call you personally and encourage you to come for mass, and he would preach to you about the importance of being near God as a Member of Parliament.

At the end of the day, all of us went to the chaplaincy to pray. As I speak now, because of his departure, the attendance in the chaplaincy has kind of declined. During his time, about 60 Members of Parliament would go to pray but now you find only three or five. Therefore, as a chaplaincy we shall miss his skilful mobilisation in bringing us together to know God and also to keep together as one family without looking at our political differences or tribes.

Most importantly, Fr Binta took the chaplaincy to our homes. He brought services nearer to us; for example, he would baptise our children and he would attend our marriage celebrations. I remember in particular he drove to Kibaale and conducted mass for hon. Juliet Kabonesa who, I think, was the national female MP at that time. At 9.00 a.m., he was already in Kibaale to conduct mass for her introduction. 

He encouraged those who had been cohabiting for a long time to join holy matrimony. He encouraged them and they were able to go to church to celebrate holy matrimony. I remember, in particular, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi who had spent a long time living with his spouse without wedding and Fr Binta encouraged them to wed. We attended the wedding function and to us, that was a great achievement.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, as a country, we have lost a mentor and as a chaplaincy, we have lost a counsellor and motivator. We pray that the Almighty God rests Rev. Fr Binta’s soul in peace. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I propose the question for your debate, I would like the Member for Amuru District to second the motion.

2.27
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving us, the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy, this opportunity to pay tribute to our Reverend Father and mentor who helped all of us, not just the Catholic Church. 

As many may not be aware, when the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy was started by the team of 2012, which included hon. Rwakimari, the other chaplaincies were as well founded. Therefore, he was not just for the Catholics but for the whole Parliament of Uganda. Thank you very much for giving us this opportunity.

Allow me to start by sending my deepest condolences to the family of the late Fr Binta and the people of Fort Portal Diocese as a whole. I did not meet the Reverend Father face to face but I have heard and read about him. 

It was sometime last year that our Chaplain, Fr Philip Balikuddembe, told me about his sickness and I was very hopeful that the fact that he was in the USA, he would get adequate medical attention and would recover and come back to us. Unfortunately, he succumbed to cancer as you were all told.

I would also like to thank in a very special way – as I second this motion – His Eminence Cardinal Emmanuel Wamala because he was also very instrumental in ensuring that the chaplaincy is strong. I must say that Fr Binta laid a very strong foundation for the chaplaincy and this is for me a very strong call to all of us, especially Catholic Members of Parliament who are here. We have a chaplaincy and every Tuesday we have Holy Mass and that is the highest prayer you can have. It is celebrated in the basement within the precincts of Parliament. Unfortunately, many Members of Parliament got to know where the chaplaincy was when we had those unfortunate incidents in December last year. However, everything happens for good. 

For those Members of Parliament who got to know where the chaplaincy is, please be reminded that there is mass every Tuesday at 1.00 p.m. This is the struggle that Fr Binta had for all of us and this was his dream. Even when he went out, he had us in his prayers. 

I must also say that the fact that the Reverend Father went to the USA to continue with the ministry of God reminds me of what Pope Francis told us when we met him on 22 August 2018. He said the hope of evangelism is in Africa. They brought the good news to us but now Africa is evangelising Europe and the rest of the world. For me, the Reverend Father’s presence in the USA as a parish priest was an indication that for Africa, hope is not lost. We are the ones going to hold the torch and evangelise the world. I would like to thank the Reverend Father very much, even if he is not here to hear this.

As the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy, I would like to remind all the Members who are here that after this tribute motion, we will have High Mass at 6.00 p.m. at the Members’ Lounge in honour of Fr Binta. Therefore, I call upon all of you, with the permission of the Speaker, to come and we pay our last respects as the Parliament of Uganda to a man who did a lot for not just Parliament, but for the country at large.

With this, I would like to second the motion and ask the whole House to support it and pay tribute to a man of God and a person who made Parliament strong through spiritual nourishment. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I now purpose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Rev. Fr Robert Isingoma Amooti Binta and specifically that, Parliament – 

    1. Takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late Rev. Fr Robert Isingoma Amooti Binta to Parliament and the country. 

    2. Collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of Rev. Fr Robert Isingoma Amooti Binta.

    3. Collectively prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant the Rev. Fr Robert Isingoma Amooti Binta eternal rest.

That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now with each Member taking two minutes.

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to join the rest of the colleagues in paying tribute to the late Rev. Fr Robert Isingoma. I convey my condolences to the bereaved family and the church as well, first of all as a member of the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy and also as a strong Catholic leader. 

Mr Speaker, last December when the Archbishop visited the church to bless the chapel, as he was ushered into Parliament he made his remarks about the chaplaincy here. He thanked the Government for being one of those few governments in the world that can ensure that there is a chapel in Parliament. That is commendable and we thank the Government of the Republic of Uganda. 

Further to that, the Archbishop, Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, as he passed on his homily, commended and requested Parliament to reserve bigger space in the new complex to ensure that the chapel is bigger than it is. He said the followers cannot all sit next to the altar because it is an anomaly in its own right. Therefore, Mr Speaker, as we commemorate the life and legacy of the Rev. Fr Robert Isingoma, we should reflect on his wishes that we should expand the area of the chapel as we allocate space in the new complex. 

He also reflected on the Members of Parliament being honourable like their title. He asked us to always uphold and keep the candle burning for those who started the chapel –(Member timed out.)

2.36
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to pay tribute to our beloved Rev. Fr Isingoma, who was our first Chaplain. 

Mr Speaker, when we requested for a chaplain from the Archbishop, I am sure it was not easy for anybody to accept to work in Parliament because many people fear to work with Members of Parliament. However, he volunteered and said he was coming to work with Members of Parliament. Indeed, when he came, he did his work. He made our chaplaincy grow and the numbers increased. He was knowledgeable in his work of preaching to us and he converted very many Members of Parliament to God. 

Quite often, we concentrate on worldly things but when we would go to the chapel, he would remind us that we were children of God and we must put God first before we do anything. That was what he did. 

Mr Speaker, because our chaplaincy grew nicely, other religions also emulated us; the Muslims also now have their mosque here and we also have the Protestants. So, it has made all of us religious. Therefore, it is his work that evangelised Members of Parliament.

Rev. Fr Isingoma was a very obedient servant of God to his superiors. When he was called upon to go to America to evangelise there, he went willingly and did his job very well. He also never - (Member timed out.)

2.38
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. On behalf of the people of Kashongi County, I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Rev. Fr Isingoma who died of cancer.

Mr Speaker, the demise of Rev. Fr Isingoma has not only been a big loss to his family, relatives or even friends but a great loss to the entire Catholic Church and the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. Rev. Fr Isingoma was the Chaplain of the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy so many years ago before I joined Parliament. However, his works and deeds have remained in the lives of all the people he touched or interacted with during his priesthood. He remained a good servant who dedicated his entire life to serve humanity.

Rev. Fr Robert Isingoma will always be missed and remembered for his kindness and unwavering faith that touched the countless hearts throughout his life through his daily reminder that God is good all the time. That will always inspire and guide all those who are blessed and choose Christ. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

2.40
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand to pay tribute to the late Rev. Fr Isingoma and send condolences from Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality to the family, the entire Christian and Catholic community of Uganda. 

I would like to propose, through my chairperson of the laity in Parliament and of course through you, Mr Speaker, that for the great work done by the late Father, we should provide space and together erect a monument in the form of a sacred and very magnificent chapel in his memory. I am very sure, as the Catholics in the Parliament, present and past, the Catholics in our constituencies and all the God loving people in the world, we should be able to do that. I pray that through you, Mr Speaker, we get space and actually start on the project. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, in the VIP gallery, we have former Members of Parliament including the hon. Annette Mukabera, hon. Jessica Eriyo, hon. Juliet Kabonesa, hon. Jacqueline Kyatuhaire and hon. John Emily Otekat. They are here to listen to the debate on this motion. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

2.42
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and bring condolences from the mother Kingdom of Bunyoro and the Kingdom of Toro to the family of the late Rev. Fr Isingoma Binta Amooti. 

I first got to know of the late Father from my roommate in Makerere University; he is from Mugusi in Toro - the Banura family popularly known as the Katigondos’ because they also had a brother, Fr. Banura, who was his friend. Later, I came to Parliament and found his footprint and legacy in the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy. 

I would like to appreciate the roles he played. Also, he did not only inspire the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy but all the faiths including the Muslims and the Anglicans. Work in Parliament is not easy; you really need to always have some spiritual guidance. The kind of work he did is commendable and we pray that the Almighty God gives his soul a befitting rest.

2.44
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to pay tribute to Rev. Fr Isingoma. I happened to listen to him only once and that was before I joined Parliament. He talked about the humility of leaders. It is unfortunate that he has gone. 

As we talk about his demise, we should remember to be humble as leaders especially at this time when we are having many political challenges in this country. It will solve the challenges that we are having in Uganda. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I beg to submit.

2.45
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to talk about Fr Robert Binta Amooti as my brother-in-law, constituent and a very good friend. He has been a family member for the last 25 years I have been married. He was a terrific priest who would preach to the young and old. He used to teach my children to recite the rosary and they now know it in Rutooro but not English.

When I became an MP in 2016, he had already started living in the US. I have been reading a thread of messages that we used to share about his village, Kangama, in Karambi. He told me that he needed electricity in the village. He came here in 2016 to celebrate his 25 years in priesthood and found that I had become an MP that year. Imagine he went aboard but was still in touch with what was taking place around his area of origin.

He wrote, “Dear honourable, greetings and best regards from the US. I hope you and your family are doing great. Please, for decades I have been fighting to have electricity in my village. Finally, I have heard that you have worked hard to get this project done. The poles are hanging but there is no transformer yet to light my village.”  Last year when I went to the US –(Member timed out.)

2.47
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to the late Rev. Fr Binta Amooti, the first Priest of the Catholic Chaplaincy here at Parliament.

Indeed, Fr Binta was a mobiliser; when he first came to Parliament, he would mobilise all of us. At one time he met me along the corridors and asked me to go for prayers. I told him, “I am a Muslim. How do you expect me to go and pray because I am expected to remove my shoes, kneel and sit down when I am going to pray?” He told me to go just as I was and I would pray in the way I usually liked to pray, and I attended that first mass.

Fr Binta was full of jokes; he would preach and create a scenario where everyone would want to continuously listen to him. One time he asked me whether I was Bintu or Binta. I told him that I was Bintu but possibly Binta came from the Bintu family.

He was a man who cut across the religious divide so much that he would bring a Muslim on board - (Member timed out).

2.49
MS SILVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much. I would like to pay tribute and above all thank God for his life. For us who believe in God, we know that whoever dies in Christ has not died completely. He has gone to enjoy more with the Father and he has left us a legacy and torch that we should continue following. 

Some of us who came to Parliament recently are having fellowship that had been initiated by the father. We are always there every Thursday morning irrespective of religious affiliation. We nurture our souls and feel different after prayers. 

I would like to thank Parliament for giving chaplaincies to the Catholics and the Anglicans. However, please give the Pentecostals also as our number has increased. We need a chaplaincy so that we can shape our lives more than expected.

The death of the priest has re-echoed the death of one of my key stakeholders in the district, the Chairperson of the Women’s League of Otuke District who died of cancer. Recently, she had spoken to the President about how she suffered at Uganda Cancer Institute. Let the death of Fr Binta help us organise ourselves, especially the Uganda Cancer Institute, so that people who go there with such challenges may not have –(Member timed out.)

2.51
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I rise to thank God for the life of Fr Isingoma and to appreciate him for the contribution he made while still on earth, and especially for the work that he did here in Parliament.

Shepherding people is not easy and shepherding Members of Parliament is even harder. Because of his work, we have seen the spiritual work here in Parliament grow; we now have all the chaplaincies that we need, including a Mosque. 

The Bible teaches that we should learn how to number our days while we are here, like it is said in Genesis 11. We should not think about ourselves alone. Remember that tribe that tried to build a tower; sometimes we spend more time building names, thinking about ourselves, but Fr Isingoma tried all his life to serve humanity and the needs of others. As we continue thinking about ourselves and self-interests, God is watching us and he can scatter us. Thank you.

2.53
MR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion.

I would like to point out that one of the causes to what you see in the country – the strife, the lawlessness and so many other immoral acts taking place – is as a result of some of us who have chosen not to belong to Christ. The intolerance you see between denominations is partly to blame for what we see. I would like to urge Members to live above those differences we have. Rev. Fr Isingoma had succeeded in rising above those differences. 

I would like to appeal to honourable members that those who truly claim to be Christians, in case you are one, must live as Christ wants us to. There is no way one should distinguish between a Catholic, a Protestant, a Pentecostal or a Muslim for that matter, when truly you say you belong to Christ or you believe in God.

Finally, what the passing away of the Reverend Father means to us is that we should check ourselves because cancer is a deadly killer as you know. When you get it and it is too late, indeed it is too late as in the case of our brother. 

I would like to commend him for the standards of civility and unity he stood for. I would like to appeal to Members that we shall be judged by the way we respond to one another. The reason you see this strife today is partly because those who claim to be believers are not really so. I would like to appeal to all of us to be believers and those who belong to the Catholic –(Member timed out.)

2.55
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I joined in the Seventh Parliament –(Interjections)- Some of you are wondering why I have lived here for so long. Since I joined in the Seventh Parliament, this has been my seat.

As we pay tribute to Rev Fr Amooti, I vividly remember that when we joined this Parliament, we had no religious institutions or a room where we could have our prayers. By then, the Speaker was the Rt Hon. Ssekandi. We approached him saying we could not be in this House with our motto, “For God and my Country”, without a prayer room. 

I remember with the late hon. Bernadette Bigirwa - may her soul rest in peace – we moved together and indeed started on the crusade of advocating for prayer rooms for our religious denominations. I am extremely grateful that Fr Amooti –(Member timed out.)

2.57
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to support the motion. However, I wish to note that it is very sad for me to make my maiden speech in the Tenth Parliament having been out in limbo for two years and four months. I got to know about the death of the late Fr Binta through hon. Col (Rtd) Stephen Basaliza, his brother-in-law, who rung me on Thursday. 

While Fr Binta was here as Chaplain, he had much in common with me. We used to remind ourselves of our days in the seminary. He used to tease me and say, “Look, you were called but not chosen”. I would say, “Yes, I was not chosen but I am now chosen as a politician and you are to shepherd me in the faith.” 

I admired his summons at his homilies. He was always very particular in connecting politicians to the patron saint of politicians, and that is St Thomas More. Many of us who are in this field of politics may not know who our patron saint is spiritually and what the late St Thomas More stood for in terms of public life. That emphasises humility. Even if you are a leader of whatever status, you must humble yourself to human beings and humanity. 

There must be the aspect of being disciplined –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I denied the Imam more time. Okay, one minute.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your meek consideration that I have missed on this Floor for over two years, and of course the honourable Imam has been here a little longer. 

Having said that, if you reflect on the summons of Fr Binta when he was still here and more so even after the death of the late hon. Bigirwa, who was later on replaced by hon. Justine Lumumba whom we used to call Nnabakristo (our catechist) - the two as our religious leaders in this Parliament made a lot of progress. All that we have in our chaplaincy is because of that firm foundation that was laid by Fr Binta. We have now got a sacristy, a tabernacle and every other thing that befits the Catholic Church. Those are things that we will not forget Fr Binta for.

Having moved to the United States, I still followed him through the connections of the honourable Col (Rtd) Stephen Basaliza and his dear wife, because these were people who were very close to me that I would feel free to share anything with. His humility, simplicity and commitment to the faith are what we will very dearly miss, and more particularly since we have not been able to see his body so far. However, I am reliably informed that the casket may be here tomorrow or over the weekend. 

Mr Speaker, I also wish to support the suggestion, which was made by my colleague from Makindye-Ssabagabo – (Member timed out.)

3.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol Ocan): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Opposition, the people of Gulu and on my own behalf, I am up here to pay tribute to the late Rev. Fr Binta. 

I joined Parliament in the Eighth Parliament when he was our Chaplain. I got to know him that time that he was very catholic - he loved the rosary and he also loved saying, “The Lord is good all the time.” 

I would like to say that when we are here as Members of Parliament, because of the kind of work that we have, we can easily get lost and forget about our God. However, the presence of the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy here is a light. Fr Binta, as Chaplain, was a light to many of us, helping us not forget our faith. 

He walked as an example - young but always humble and prompt. I remember that sometimes, some of us would also keep time but we would always find him already waiting for Members. I think it was in the Eighth Parliament that we used to pray on Wednesday and then the prayers were changed to – (Member timed out.)

3.04
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I thank you for receiving us in your Chambers when we came to talk to you about our intention to move this motion for a resolution of Parliament. My colleagues and I really thank you for giving us the opportunity to pay tribute to the late Fr Binta.

Mr Speaker, Rev. Fr Binta was born on 14 April 1962. He has a twin sister called Aphra, who is the spouse of the honourable Lt Col Basaliza, as my colleague has just mentioned. This was in Karambi, Burahya in Kabarole District. He was ordained in 1991.

Many honourable members have already given their views on this matter. I will just go straight to one of the most important points, which I think should be made clear. It was on 6 September 2002 - exactly 16 years ago today - that Rev. Fr Binta –(Member timed out.)- Have I been timed out?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, your time is up. You lost your slot because when you were supposed to move the motion, you were not here. So now you are speaking like a non-mover of the motion. I will give you one minute to finish what you were saying.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Can I request – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Thank you. It was on 6 September 2002 that Fr Binta was appointed the Chaplain of the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy by His Eminence Cardinal Wamala. That was in the Seventh Parliament. Since that time, things here in Parliament have changed. One of the very interesting issues and events was the lighting of the Christmas tree. The Christmas tree lighting was inter-denominational, for all of us, and this place was lively during the lighting of the Christmas tree, as well as the Christmas carols.

Fr Binta was a pioneer. He came from a very large family and he was the only one who became a priest from that family. Therefore, he was really a pioneer both in the family and as a Chaplain here, and also as a servant of God in the USA in Phoenix, Arizona. Arizona is a desert and he was a pioneer in that place because of the fact that he came from a place like Fort Portal, which is one of the most fertile parts of Uganda. This, you know very well. We are really proud that such a person could become a missionary – (Member was timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister - 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Finally, Mr Speaker –(Laughter)– apparently, when Fr Binta died on the 20th of August, within that week Senator McCain of Arizona also died. It is as if they had agreed to die. He was his personal friend and I am sure that there will be a message from the State of Arizona when we go to bury in Fort Portal. I thank you a great deal, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence and for allowing me to pay tribute to this gallant son of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I want to put the question to this motion. This is a motion for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Rev. Fr Robert Isingoma Amooti Binta; specifically – 

1. 	That this Parliament takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late Fr Binta to Parliament and the country at large; 

2. 	That we collectively convey condolences to the relatives and friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of Rev. Fr Binta;

3. 	That we collectively pray to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant Rev. Fr Robert Binta eternal rest.

That is the motion that I now put the question to.

(Question put and agreed to.)

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION FROM THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TO THE 138TH INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION ASSEMBLY, HELD FROM THE 21ST – 28TH MARCH, 2018 IN GENEVA, SWITZERLAND

3.11
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to present this report under rule 33 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. This is the executive summary. I will be very brief because the detailed report will be laid on the Table after this brief presentation. 

The 138th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union was held from the 21 to 28 March 2018 in Geneva, Switzerland, under the theme, “Strengthening the Global Regime for Migrants and Refugees: The need for Evidence-Based Policy Solutions.” 

Parliamentarians from over 137 countries sought to identify and agree upon parliamentary inputs to the UN-led reforms on the rights and protection of migrants and refugees. Meeting at the 138th Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) Assembly in Geneva, more than 140 Members of Parliament, including 65 Speakers of Parliament and 216 Women Parliamentarians, ensured that the interests of the 6.5 billion people they represent are part of the global negotiations in the new migration regime.

Key Recommendations of the 138th IPU Assembly and Related Meetings Held in Geneva, Switzerland
Mr Speaker, allow me to present the following recommendations:

During the general debate on the theme “Strengthening the Global Regime for Migrants and Refugees: the Need for Evidence-based Policy Solutions”, parliamentarians were urged to -  

i) 	Ratify the Protocol to eliminate illicit trade in tobacco products as soon as possible

ii) 	Create a group of friends of the World Health Organisation (WHO) in their respective countries, to advocate for global health issues

iii) 	Work towards nuclear-free zones, including through the ratification and implementation of the new Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

iv) 	Promote respect for international humanitarian law. The committee urged Members of Parliament to ensure the translation of the joint International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) publication on humanitarian law - a handbook for Members of Parliament.

Interactive Sessions on Ensuring Accountability and Oversight for Adolescent Health 

All Parliamentarians should be committed to implementing programmes to address adolescent health.

Declaration on Strengthening the Global Regime for Migrants and Refugees

Parliamentarians should hold Governments accountable to their commitments and see to it that laws and budgets are consistent with these commitments. The international community and IPU should continue to work closely with Parliaments, strengthening institutional capacities to design relevant policies for migrants and refugees and to oversee such policies effectively.

Resolution on Sustaining Peace as a Vehicle for Achieving Sustainable Development 

Parliamentarians were called upon to contribute to the implementation of the concept of sustaining peace and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and to identify specific measures of implementation in accordance with their national contexts.

Parliamentarians were called upon to bear in mind the notion of sustaining peace in implementation of SDGs as well as in their daily parliamentary work. In addition, they were called upon to include conflict prevention and implementation of peace building strategies in their parliamentary relations agenda without prejudice to the principle of state sovereignty.

Parliamentarians were also urged to use the preventive potential of the parliamentary process fully, as a way of mitigating and resolving conflict, including through monitoring of human rights protection, inclusive dialogue processes, and mediation to peacefully address the needs of all segments of society.

They invited Parliaments to adopt enabling legislations, including key budget laws, in order to advance both the SDGs and sustaining peace agendas, including measures that promote increased financial support from national stakeholders, notably the private sector.

Parliamentarians were invited to apply all generic parliamentary functions to hold governments accountable for the effective implementation of the sustaining peace framework and SDGs, including the relevant law making, oversight, representative and elective functions and sustainable development agendas.

Members of Parliaments were also called to partner with civil society - as you know, they are partners with civil society - more regularly in order to build trust among the general public including the marginalised sections of society, to ensure inclusiveness and representation of a variety of needs and enable more effective access to decision-making processes, according to national legislations.

Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I will go to the final part of the recommendations. Parliamentarians were called upon to support gender-responsive legislations, policies and budgets aimed at ensuring equal access of youth, women and men to science and technology, education and training; capacity-building programmes for women, especially in rural areas; and equal opportunities to engage in all stages of the renewable energy value chain including entrepreneurship opportunities, jobs and careers, as well as equal participation in local, national and international decision-making processes in the renewable energy sector.

Parliamentarians were called upon to support capacity-building programmes for the poor and vulnerable sections of the population and promote legislations and policies with a view of reducing energy poverty for vulnerable consumer groups.

Parliamentarians were also urged to establish and support the development of a transparent and competitive electricity market that will ensure that the production of electricity for renewable energy sources is self-supporting.

Parliaments were urged to allocate appropriate budgets for investment and stimulate private investment into research and development and renovation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you about to say, “finally”?

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, I will try to wind up. Parliamentarians were urged to continue their efforts to build economic institutions, which foster an enabling business climate for the private sector to engage in SDG implementation and ensure participation of the private sector and other stakeholders in policymaking and assessment.

It was recommended that each Parliament issues suitable incentive policies for the private sector, particularly small investment in small projects, in accordance with respective socioeconomic conditions of the country in its own development period without distorting functioning markets.

There was also a major resolution at the 138th IPU meeting on the consequences of the United States’ declaration on Jerusalem and the rights of Palestinians in Jerusalem in light of the UN Charter and resolutions. They called upon parliaments to urge their governments to recognise the State of Palestine along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital in accordance with UN resolutions.

Report of the Standing Committee on Democracy and Human Rights

Parliaments should develop comprehensive legislations to protect the rights of migrants, to address the root causes of migration, and the imperative to combat discrimination in all forms.

Parliaments should support migrants’ participation in development and political decision-making both in the host countries and countries of origin.

Parliaments should ensure that gender equality and the rights of children are protected in all aspects of migration. 

The above aspects should be supported by all IPU member countries.

Parliament should work particularly closely with young people including by ensuring that SDGs are part of the school curriculum at a very early stage.

Parliaments and parliamentarians, along with governments and other stakeholders, should do a much better job of publicising the SDGs in all languages that everyone can understand. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Allow me to lay on the Table a report of the delegation of Parliament of Uganda at the 138th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) held in Geneva Switzerland. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, as you can see, with the new provision in our rule 33, we might have to put some limitation. Now, he has proceeded to present the whole report and yet we should just have been treated to summaries so that we can have time to have a debate on this matter. 

Honourable members, time will be allocated for debate of this matter. The recommendations are key and so, we will find time and put it on the Order Paper for discussion. Now that the report has been laid on the Table, it will be uploaded on your iPads so that you can look at it and see when we can come for debate. Thank you. 

MR ISMAIL OGAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. Last week, my colleague, hon. Ashraf Olega of Aringa Constituency, raised an issue about the long standing border dispute between Arua and Yumbe concerning Ewanga Subcounty. Accordingly, the Minister of Local Government responded to this issue yesterday.

You might not be aware, but this issue has been going on for some time. On 13 October 2016, while meeting a delegation of leaders from West Nile in State House, members presented a memorandum concerning the security situation of West Nile and the issue of Ewanga cropped up prominently. Accordingly, the President directed that since members had disowned the previous survey carried out by the select ministerial committee under Gen. Moses Ali, a new survey should be conducted under the supervision of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister Ruhakana Rugunda.

Again, as a follow-up, last year in February I raised the same issue in the House during the Prime Minister’s Question Time. I inquired how far he had gone with the proceedings. The Prime Minister vehemently confirmed to this House that a committee would be set up to go and carry out the survey in the disputed area, at the border between Arua and Ewanga, with the knowledge of the affected parties and all the stakeholders would be involved, according to him.

Having witnessed so much delay, I took time, together with the leaders of Arua, particularly the Resident District Commissioner (RDC), the Local Council V (LCV) Chairman, and the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO); we went to the office of the Minister of Local Government to follow up the same issue. We wanted to know how far he had gone with the process. He confirmed to us, and even gave us copies of correspondences between him and the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to constitute a survey committee that would be sent on ground with the knowledge of the affected parties. 

I am rising today because yesterday, during the minister’s statement, he gave completely contradicting information in total disregard of the President’s directive, confirming the earlier report which all the parties from West Nile, including Gen. Moses Ali who chaired the first meeting, had confirmed before the President that members had disputed it and therefore, another survey would be done. He stood in the House here and confirmed to the Members that a survey was done in 2004 and accordingly, Ewanga Subcounty was given to Yumbe. 

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the honourable minister to withdraw his statement of yesterday, until we conclude all the procedures in place, including the roadmap that is supposed to lead to the logical conclusion of this issue? 

Some of this documentary evidence is here with me. We managed to retrieve copies of the minutes of the meeting with His Excellency the President, which took place on 13 October 2016. I beg to lay the same before you. Additionally, the correspondence between the Minister of Local Government and his counterpart, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, is also here with me as it was given to me. I beg to lay the same on the Table. 

The memorandum that was presented to his Excellency the President by the West Nile delegation, which was chaired by Gen. Moses Ali, who actually chaired the first survey committee, is here, duly signed. I would like to lay the same on the Table. 

That is how far I would like the issue to be considered. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this time so that peace can prevail within our community. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a procedural matter. (Laughter)

MR OGAMA: I am sorry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is okay. I cannot guide without listening to the minister because that it the issue that he talked about yesterday and it is the issue being brought up. 

3.30
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In my statement yesterday, I said that in the survey which was done in 2004, Ewanga was “found to be” - not “given” - in Aringa County. “Found to be” is scientific and there is nothing I can do about that. 

There was a meeting, which took place between the leaders of Yumbe District and Arua District and there was a disagreement. That is what I said yesterday. It was said that a meeting was held in the Office of the Prime Minister to resolve the matter and that I am supposed to travel to Yumbe District for further consultation on the matter. I did not finalise my statement by saying that I am therefore informing the House that Ewanga belongs to either district. I did not say that. 

I am therefore under instruction by the Prime Minister to travel to Yumbe and Arua and if necessary, redo the survey. We, therefore, finally –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I have institutional memory concerning what is on the Floor right now. I remember the 2004 survey was conducted with a lot of effects on various places in those two districts. Now that you are considering “if necessary” to go back to those two districts and conduct the survey, will you also take into account the other areas, which were referred to and also covered by the same survey report of 2004? I seek your clarification.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: If necessary, Mr Speaker. We are going into this matter with clean hands. Fortunately, this matter can only be solved scientifically - county per county, district per district, boundary per boundary. Even if you asked me today to state the boundary between Kyenjojo District, where I come from, and Kagadi District, if scientifically it is found that the area being disputed belongs to Kagadi District, I would declare that that part belongs to Kagadi. I would do this by opening the boundaries between Bunyoro and the then Toro districts, before this conflict came. In this particular case, this is at least internal; it is between counties of Aringa and Madi. Therefore, Mr Speaker, this is a very simple matter. 

Fortunately, it is scientific and it will be found out if there is need. Since this debate continues between these sister districts, if there is need and funds are available, we can re-do the survey and finally find a solution to that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think that provides guidance on the matter, so I do not have to rule on it. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on procedural issue. Yesterday, as we were debating, there is one of us who tried to talk to you indirectly without using the official channels. He was claiming that you were biased in as far as conducting the business of yesterday was concerned.

Mr Speaker, today on social media, I have seen a letter from hon. Otto written to you about those concerns. I would like to bring it to your attention, as a procedural issue, and to put it on record that over the last two days, you have tried to ensure that you give an opportunity to the two sides. (Applause) I cannot stand here and fail to defend what is right when I have seen it. 

The reason I have stood up is to really put it on record that when you were giving opportunities to us, – look at our Hansard for Tuesday – many Members from the Opposition spoke as well as Members from the other side. Even yesterday, you gave opportunity to both sides to speak. Therefore, for someone to claim that you gave one side only and that is why he reacted the way he did, I could not stand it. This is because you tried your best to guide this House without being biased. 

I would like this to be on record in as far as your position was concerned yesterday and the other days. You remember last week some of us were not willing to debate and you said you were not willing to preside over a House, which is not willing to sit. Even to reach where you reached yesterday, I did not believe we would reach that far. However, because of your guidance, we reached where we reached without you showing any bias. 

I would like to put it on record as Latif Sebaggala that I did not see any bias because you gave both sides of the House opportunity. I did not know that if one of the Members of the Opposition does not speak, then that is tantamount to being biased. 

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for that Member to continue even sending messages on social media that you were biased, yet you were not?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a tricky one. (Laughter) He is calling upon me to rule on things about me. That is a difficult one. However, if you have read Gulliver’s Travels, there is a particular line that I like very much, which says, “What mighty contests rise from trivial things.” What mighty contest could possibly rise from trivial things? I also remember Shakespeare, in his book Measure for Measure, said, “Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall.”

You know, there are two words that we misuse sometimes; the words “notorious” and “popular”. The word “popular” is always associated with good things and the word “notorious” is always associated with bad things. However, like Shakespeare says, others by sin rise while others by virtue fall. Others by notoriety rise, others by popularity fall. You cannot say that there is a popular thief. (Laughter) However, you can say that there is a notorious thief. If it is your nature to become known by doing that kind of thing, that is what God has given you, so we respect it. (Laughter) 

Therefore, I cannot rule on that matter. I will leave it at that for the people to see and I do not want to go beyond that. You have said what you have said from what you have believed but there is no procedural matter for me to rule on. (Laughter) The letter you have referred to, I think it is the second one I am receiving but I will treat them and handle them in my stride like I have always done. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO IMPLEMENT THE REGIONAL GOVERNMENTS ESTABLISHED IN ARTICLE 178 OF THE CONSTITUTION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe as he comes up, as we left the Chamber here yesterday, I was listening to the radio and I heard the honourable Member for Buhweju also taking his own line against me. When he came here, I asked him, “Really, did you have to say what you were saying and you know that it was not true? For instance, you said on the radio that when I was asked about the Speaker’s letter, I feigned ignorance and I said I did not have a copy, so I went and printed from one the internet.” This was on public radio last night. 

You see, if you have difficulty even understanding what was said, then your problem is really much. This is because the ears we have, we are supposed to use them to listen to other people so that when we are quoting them, we quote them properly. However, if your listening is like your gastric processes where anything that goes in comes out smelling, then it becomes a problem. You should have a system where when you hear things, process them and bring them out the way you heard them. This is because the mouths that we have are the doors to our brains. Therefore, if your mouth is saying what your brain processed and it is incorrect, we cannot blame your mouth that much. Let us proceed. (Laughter)

3.44
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to implement the regional governments established in Article 178 of the Constitution as amended. I move under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS Article 176 of the Constitution of Uganda provides that the local government system shall be based on districts as a unit of administration under which there shall be such local governments and administrative units as Parliament may by law prescribe;

AND WHEREAS Article 178 of the Constitution allows two or more districts to cooperate to form a regional government;

AWARE THAT in Article 178(3) of the Constitution, the regions of Buganda, Bunyoro, Busoga, Acholi and Lango agreed to form regional governments;

FURTHER AWARE THAT under Article 178(4), the headquarters of the regional governments were declared to be Mengo Municipality in Buganda, Hoima Municipality in Bunyoro, Jinja Municipality in Busoga, Gulu Municipality in Acholi, and Lira Municipality in Lango;

NOTING THAT paragraphs 2, 4, 5, 10 and 13 of the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution impose an obligation on Parliament to prescribe by an Act of Parliament the composition of a regional assembly, the grounds and procedure for removable of the chairperson of a regional government, the number of regional ministers, the representation or regional land board on land boards of each district that forms part of the regional government, the gazetting and ownership of the national heritage sites;

FURTHER NOTING THAT on 8 December 2009, Government introduced in Parliament a Bill entitled, “the Regional Governments Bill, 2009” which sought to provide for the establishment of regional governments;

RECALLING THAT the Regional Governments Bill, 2009, although saved by Ninth Parliament, expired at the commencement of the Tenth Parliament;

RECOGNISING THAT the operationalisation of the regional governments was considered during the development of the National Development Plan II and the Vision 2040 wherein, Government proposed to establish five strategic cities of Hoima, Nakasongola, Fort Portal, Moroto and Jinja;

FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT in 2015, Cabinet approved to upgrade four regional administrative centres of Arua, Gulu, Mbale and Mbarara, one in each of the regions of Uganda;

CONCERNED THAT WHEREAS Article 178 (13) of the Constitution commenced regional governments on 1 July 2006, Parliament has not put in place the necessary legal framework for the operationalisation of regional governments…” – (Interruption) 

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, urging Government to implement these regional tiers falls under the docket of the Ministry of Local Government. Actually, we all would have loved to see it implemented yesterday. However, don’t you think it would be procedurally right for the minister, who was ably here and has conspicuously absented himself, to be present so that he captures the salient issues that are being raised by the Member?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am reliably informed that the minister is listening and he is about to come back here.

MR BIRAAHWA MUKITALE: “…FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT in 2015, Cabinet approved to upgrade four regional administrative centres of Arua, Gulu, Mbale and Mbarara, one in each of the regions of Uganda;

CONCERNED THAT WHEREAS Article 178 (13) of the Constitution commenced regional governments on 1 July 2006, Parliament has not put in place the necessary legal framework for the operationalisation of regional governments;
	
COGNIZANT of the 12 years’ delay in operationalisation of the regional governments as well as the need to comply with the constitutional command as contained in Article 178 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament urges Government to do the following:

1. 	Reintroduce before Parliament a Bill to operationalise regional governments as commanded by Article 178 (4) and paragraphs 2 and 4 of the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution of Uganda;

2. 	Commence the process leading to the creation of Mengo Municipality, Hoima Municipality, Jinja Municipality, Gulu Municipality and Lira Municipality as commanded by Article 178(4) of the Constitution…”

Mr Speaker, here, I have already said that these municipalities like Gulu, Arua, Mbale and Mbarara, which should have been the headquarters have naturally and organically grown from the level of a municipality to city status. 

“…3. Commence the process leading to the establishment of the five strategic cities of Hoima, Nakasongola, Fort Portal,  Moroto and Jinja as provided in the National Development Plan II and Vision 2040;

4. 	Consider elevating the municipalities of Jinja, Arua, Mbale, Gulu and Mbarara to city status.”

I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

THE MINISTER OF SATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING): (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Hon. Mukitale is one of my friends and I should not be seen as if I am standing in his way to introduce this important point. However, at the same time, we need clarity regarding our Constitution. 

Article 93 of our Constitution – restrictions on financial matters - dictates that Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of Government - I refer to this because this is a motion - proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment to a Bill, the effect of which would be to make provisions for any of the purposes specified in paragraph (a) of this Article. Creation of a Regional Government is not budget neutral; it needs resources.

Mr Speaker, could we be proceeding rightly without this important motion being moved by Government or without hon. Mukitale consulting with Government? I seek your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is urging Government to reintroduce before Parliament a Bill to operationalise regional Governments as commanded by Article 178 (4), urging Government to commence the process leading to the creation of Mengo Municipality, Hoima Municipality, Jinja Municipality and others.

“Urges Government to commence the process leading to the establishment of five strategic cities of Hoima…” and the rest; “Urges the Government to consider elevating the municipalities of Jinja, Arua, Mbale, Gulu, Mbarara as cities.” Does it impose a charge in the Consolidated Fund? If it does then you need to explain to me.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I can see hon. Oboth Oboth trying to give me information -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like him to give you information?

MR BAHATI: He should; there is no problem.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you read the motion, it distinguishes between a motion creating regional Governments and the motion urging. The difference is that hon. Stephen Mukitale’s motion is a wake-up call. 

The legal effect of it is that Government will have to start the process but if the start of the process is what would have financial implications, then the minister’s fear would be valid;
reconciling the effect of a motion and a resolution carried by Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, you are more capable of guiding this House so that when the motion is carried, it carries weight not only on paper. 
The Government should start the process of creating and the reason Government is probably taking time is maybe they want to include more like Lira, Busia, Bukedi.

Government should be able to tell us why they are delaying before we debate this motion. It looks like a wake-up call; this was passed but what are you doing? What will be the legal effect of this motion and whatever Parliament does has a legal force.

It is advisory that the person being advised can take it or not. What if a person chooses to take it? That is the dilemma, which is coming through my mouth but from my head, it could be as limited. I cannot blame the mouth because it is only channelling what the head is processing. 

I looked at that statement as a wake-up call unless I am advised on the effect of that motion when it is carried. Would the start of it have financial implications?

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, hon. Oboth Oboth. When you read prayer number four, or even number three, “Commence a process of leading the establishment of the five strategic cities” and  “Consider elevating the municipalities of Jinja, Arua, Mbale, Gulu and Mbarara as cities” - you do not just announce that the process should start; you do surveys and invest money. This Parliament is a serious institution whose resolutions are serious and they have financial implications whatsoever. There is no resolution of Parliament, which holds water but does not have financial implications.

Due to the restructuring that we have been undertaking in Government trying to make sure that we live within our means, as the minister for Local Government would probably add on, we have not been able to do what the Constitution commanded us to do not because we do not know that it is there. 

With that limited knowledge and the clarification given to be information by hon. Oboth Oboth, we have been able to demonstrate that this motion is not budget neutral; it has financial implications. It is an important motion and therefore, cannot proceed under Article 93 of our Constitution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a procedural matter on which I am required to rule. If you look at paragraph three; “…Urges Government to commence the processes leading to the establishment of five strategic cities.” Suppose it had said within one year, it would have been a clear charge but it simply says, “Please, consider doing this in the course of doing your business.” 

As you work in your Cabinet and other places, consider elevating the municipalities into cities. If it is not sustainable, leave it but please, consider. 

Even if it was on your own money, hon. Bahati, please, consider supporting these students. Would I have said support these students? I am giving you to exercise your own discretion to see whether it is sustainable or not.

COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was not conveniently and conspicuously absent but I was listening to the debates going on in the precincts of Parliament.

The Ministry of Local Government has been working on the creation of cities improving them from municipalities to cities but we are constrained by resources as the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has said. Resources allowing, the movement will be faster and we shall have these cities. 

Therefore, what hon. Bahati did say is correct because if we had the funds, we would have progressed faster but we cannot move because the resources are not yet sufficient for us to move faster and establish the creation of these cities.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, could you consider leaving your prayer only on number one because when that is handled, all the other things can be handled? Would you consider looking at prayer number one and the debate starts?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, it is good that the minister in charge of National Planning Authority, the National Development Plan (NDP) and the Vision 2040 is the one discouraging Parliament from urging him and Government to support his sector. 
I would request - as you are already guiding - that we are a Parliament; after 12 years of non-compliance by Government, we are becoming unconstitutional by not operationalising what was directed by the Constitution to take effect on 1 July 2007.

Mr Speaker, it is good that we all sit in regional caucuses. This is a pro-regional motion; the people of Karamoja, Teso, Bugisu, West Nile, Bunyoro and Toro. Apart from sitting here as a caucus, using the wisdom of the Members of the Seventh Parliament, I found in my research that this report was brought to the Floor by yourself - the Regional Tier Amendment in the Constitution - the report from the legal committee came from none other than the current Deputy Speaker, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

Therefore, it is a responsibility of the Tenth Parliament to put in effect what the Seventh Parliament did put in place. Government should be apologising and should be remorseful when you are coming on the Floor after 12 years and you have not given the people - you saw that the President in Arua was being asked of the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you going to deal with my question?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, on that note, I would like to request that the Executive should desist from arm-twisting Parliament to do its work. The spirit in which my good friend, hon. David Bahati, is moving is not the spirit of giving Parliament the latitude and leverage to engage the Executive. Twelve years of non-compliance and of slumber; we are at your mercy to make Parliament do its role if we are going to do oversight and check Government where they are not doing well. 

I would like to pray that you allow us such that the motion is moved and we debate. What the ministers are saying should be coming as an answer when we have debated. Allow members of Parliament from caucuses of different parts of this country take home these regional governments they have been waiting for, thanks to the wisdom of the Seventh Parliament. That is my prayer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes you complicate things that are not. In 2009, the Minister of Local Government presented the Regional Government Bill, 2009. What became of that Bill, honourable minister?

MR BUTIME: Mr Speaker, I have to seek proper advice with my Permanent Secretary in the ministry so that I can give a more considered answer to that question. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this particular motion is very involved. I wanted to say it at the end of the debate but let me say it now: This is a motion that needs consultations. I was going to propose that when we look at it properly, we could then refer it to our in-house Committee on Local Government to carry out the wider consultations and then come back to Parliament. We would refer this motion substantially there. That would be a better way of processing it where the ministers will come and engage. When they come back before we adopt the motion, we will have gone through all those things rather that saying, “It is unconstitutional,” because it is not. It is not unconstitutional and does not violate any provisions of the Constitution. It does not have any direct charge on the Consolidated Fund. 

What I was thinking was that because of the nature of this Bill - it is a national issue - there should have been a process of consultation. This motion would ignite that process, where the ministers would participate. 

Therefore, we can receive the motion. If you want to debate, we can, but we think that we can give the chance to our Committee on Local Government and Public Service to look at it and broadly do consultation with the other stakeholders, who we will not be able to consult now. Then they will come back to us with proper recommendations and we proceed with the motion. Therefore, would you present your motion?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the wise ruling as usual. I would like to lay on Table the Government Bill; The Regional Government Tier Bill, 2009. It even had a Certificate of Financial Implication. Can I now lay the Bill on the Table?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot lay the Bill; Bills are laid through First Reading.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, can I now lay on the Table the copy of the then Bill to remind Cabinet as we consult –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that serves no purpose. That Bill was here, it is a public document. You do not have to lay it there. If you want to lay your motion, do so to which is attached the Bill. 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, most obliged. I now lay the copy of the motion at the Table attached with the Bill –(Laughter)– as I wait for justification. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion has just been presented by the mover of the motion. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Members of Parliament from Kumi, Otuke, Maracha, Amoru, Bulambuli and Gulu. All the regions are represented.

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your motion is straightforward; do you want to speak to it again or should we debate?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Seventh Parliament for giving us a very important foundation. How we came to the Order Paper during the last two years budget process – there has been a lot of debate on resources not possibly going to some regions, and one of the proposals was, “Why don’t we implement the regional tier system, so that every government gets equal resources?”

Mr Speaker, decentralisation has been here for 20 years. We have got some reversals in decentralisation, to the effect that the administrative, the legal and the financial devolution, which was anticipated has been reversed, that even the CAOs are now at the centre. There is also demand that even possibly the engineers and doctors go. 

However, if we had a regional government, it would be much easier. If Buliisa can’t attract an expert, at least the Hoima Regional Tier would be a centre for reports. It is also important that areas like land, education, roads – not every district must have a lobby, but at least if the Regional Tier provides, we can share as a region. Remember, honourable colleagues, that when you are entering this Parliament, the gate there clearly shows these sub-regions; there is Bukedi, Bugisu, Tooro, Bunyoro, West Nile, and Karamoja, for example.

This Bill is very organic; it actually gives us the framework. We are all meeting as caucuses, but there is no framework where we can meet back at home. However, with the Regional Tier Government, your caucus will actually be meeting in form of a government.

Mr Speaker, Buganda, for instance has a Land Board which has done a lot of good work. And as a region, we would like to also benefit from that Land Board, including the area I come from. 

Finally, I am requesting – because 12 years ago, the municipalities which were envisaged have since expanded, for instance, Mbarara, Arua, Gulu, Jinja and Mbale. It would now be important to also bring other cities’ law - when we were discussing the Kampala City Law in 2010, there was a demand that other cities’ laws are put in place. You are aware that Tanzania has more than one city, Kenya has more than one city and that is the way to go. Yet in Uganda, we still have only one city.   

When you get these regional governments, we shall have the regional medical centres and regional medical referrals. We also want to get industrial parks in every region, to create economic zones and regional universities, so that there is equal distribution of resources since the Constitution commands regional balance.

Mr Speaker, I want to pray that the Executive allows the Tenth Parliament and its caucuses to take back in its life what the Seventh Parliament started and we take regional governments back to all our regions, through our caucuses. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Seconders of the motion? 

4.18
MR NELSON LUFAFA (NRM, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second a motion for a resolution of Parliament, urging Government to implement the regional governments, established in Article 178 of the Constitution. 

Mr Speaker, regional governments have a strong relation to public and physical accountability to local governments, due to the presence of locally elected officials that serve on the regional governments. Due to their size, structure and the diverse areas of responsibility, regional governments are able to address local government issues in a comprehensive, yet efficient and cost-effective manner.

Mr Speaker, regional governments also recognise that communities are very different from one another; each with its own unique set of challenges and opportunities. Although regional governments may not be able to address every land-use challenge facing member-local governments, the benefits accorded to the region by the existence of the regional government are unmatched by any other government entity.

Furthermore, the mission of a regional government is crucial to the state’s ability to implement its policies successfully and cost-effectively. Regional governments provide a forum and mechanisms by which local governments can avoid or resolve inter-jurisdiction conflicts, and by which local governments and property owners are able to address growth management issues and search out joint solutions.

Mr Speaker, this forum assures collaborative efforts and cooperation among all efforts and all affected parties, a process that has a higher success, greater than a process of set directives. Regional governments also serve as a bridge between levels and units of governments. They serve as a bridge in the sense that the region is at the place where representatives of various entities of governments meet on neutral grounds, to find common values and mutual needs.

It also means that regional governments are often pro-active in facilitating agreements. They provide a staff of professionals, with technical and programmatic expertise. Governments of all sizes and types share the technical expertise of regional staff, providing for a higher degree of cost-effectiveness.

For this, regional governments serve as a link to state agencies and other organisations, as well as facilitating intra-regional communication. They also serve to bring together economic development and natural resource issues into a single forum. 

Mr Speaker, as people migrate out of core urban areas, establishing good planning in rural sub-urban and ex-urban areas is even more important, for the conservation of the natural and agricultural resources of the state.

Therefore, the benefits from regionalism and regional approaches to planning and coordination of services, come from the effectiveness and efficiency of pooling resources, and also from utilising the available structure and capacity within regional development organisation.

The regional entities are the area wide leadership and governance framework, programme diversity and capacity and long-term strategy, focused to serve as the lead entity to better integrity, federal community and economic development, housing and transportation planning, environmental and resource planning and project development. It is upon this background that I second this motion. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion is properly before the House. The question that I now propose for your debate – the motion for the resolution of Parliament, urging Government to implement regional governments, established in Article 178 of the Constitution. That is the motion for your debate.

However, as I said, honourable members, this debate will not be adequate - it will not be properly resourced. So, I will use this opportunity now to refer this motion to our Committee on Local Government and Public Service, to interact with all of you first, in order for you to give your views, and also other people outside this Parliament. They will come and engage.

So, when the committee comes back, it will now report on the motion and then we will have a full debate and take a decision. Motion referred to the committee. Thank you. Let us have the next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $75.82 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT TO SUPPORT THE NATIONAL OIL PALM PROJECT 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we receive this motion, I have just received information - many of you remember hon. Hussein Kyanjo - he lost a wife. You also know Counsel Apollo Makubuya who was an Attorney-General of the Kingdom of Buganda and now a Minister there; he has also lost a wife. These are our friends; we know them, and we have worked with them. I ask that we stand and observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to move a motion to authorise Government to borrow up to $75.82 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development to support the National Oil Palm Project. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by Buvuma Islands, Koboko, and Member for Budadiri - you people already supported your thing in Cabinet; we want others - Member for Buliisa. The motion is properly seconded; would you like to speak to your motion?

(Motion seconded)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the goal of this project is to support the ongoing project. This is going to be the second phase of the project and the National Oil Palm Project is a successor of the Vegetable Oil Development Project II, currently, being implemented by Government through the Ministry of Agriculture.

Government has been able to create, through that first phase, 3,200 jobs directly and indirectly at the palm oil mills, a refinery in Jinja and the oil palm gardens. One thousand and eight hundred farmers in Kalangala have so far earned over Shs 53 billion over the last seven years.

Therefore, the objective is to increase rural income through opportunities generated by the establishment of an effective oil palm industry that conforms to the modern environmental and social standards.

Mr Speaker, this is a familiar project in this House and I beg that the House approves this second facility to support the people of Uganda. The location of this project will be in Buvuma Islands, Mayuge, Masaka and Rakai and we hope that with these successful projects, we shall continue to expand the project in areas that can favour palm oil. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $75.82 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development to support the National Oil Palm Project. That is the motion I propose for your debate.

However, as you know, when this matter was first brought, it was referred to the Committee on National Economy. And to kick off the debate, we would want to hear a summary of the recommendations from the Committee on National Economy and then we see how to proceed.

4.29
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (MR LAWRENCE BATEGEKA): Mr Speaker, I am here to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to $75.82 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development to support the National Oil Palm Project.

Before I proceed with the presentation of the committee, allow me to lay at the Table the minutes of meetings that the committee held while considering this loan and the report of the loan.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, the report is uploaded on our iPads, so I do not think I need to go through the entire report. I will try to summarise. I beg to lay, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes of the meetings of the committee and the text of the report of the committee.

MR BATEGEKA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow up to $75.82 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development to support the National Oil Palm Project in accordance with Rule 175 (2)(b) of our Rules of Procedure. The request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 9 May 2018 and was accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration. Now the committee begs to report.

We held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. We reviewed many documents from the finance ministry and Ministry of Agriculture, the draft loan agreement between the International Fund for Agricultural Development Fund and the Government of Uganda and the final project report for the Vegetable Oil Project Phase II. 

The other documents reviewed included the report of the Auditor-General on financial statement of Vegetable Oil Development Project Phase II, analytical report of the National Oil Palm Project by the Parliamentary Budget Office and Performance Report of the Vegetable Oil Development Project Phase II.

We also did field visits. The committee travelled to Kalangala to assess the development impact that had taken place in Kalangala because of the Vegetable Oil Development Project Phase II. We also travelled to Buvuma Islands to see the difference because that is the desired - the transformation we saw in Kalangala is what is desired to take place in Buvuma, Masaka, Mayuge and Rakai.
In the interest of time, I will read the committee recommendations but before I do, let me start with the conclusion. 

The committee highly recommends that the request by Government to borrow $75.82 million from International Fund for Agricultural Development Fund to support the National Oil Palm Project be approved, of course noting some areas where some improvements could be made. It was a consensus. This report was signed by majority of the members of the committee. There were no dissenting voices. 

Recommendations

I have talked about the observations and recommendations
 
Performance of the Vegetable Oil Development Project

Oil Palm Development in Buvuma 

The committee noted that the process of securing land on Buvuma Islands for the nucleus estate has taken longer than was expected due to poor project implementation readiness at the time of approval of the project. That has caused a delay there because it was part of the Vegetable Oil Development Project.  A lot of land has already been procured and the project is ready to take off.

Private Sector Oil Palm Investment Incentives

The committee recommends that Government considers attracting other private players in operating the mills and palm oil refineries, after the expiry of the incentives given to BIDCO. This was because of the impression we got. We even wonder why we have not done it for all the other islands within Lake Victoria. The change in household incomes in Kalangala and in life styles is very impressive. We are aware that there are conditions of attracting other players into palm oil growing but we are urging Government to quickly ensure that the current investor (BIDCO) is assisted to meet these conditions.

Contribution of Oil Palm Production to Employment

This was highly impressive as well. The committee recommends that Government should increase both the efficiency and amount of domestic public spending going to agricultural research and extension especially with respect to smallholder farmers.

In addition, enhancement of value chains through land titling and enforcement, warehouse receipt programmes, banking reforms, among others, should be undertaken to reduce production risks and increased land tenure systems.

In brief, Mr Speaker, there are constraints when you read our report that should be addressed to increase the pay-off of these interventions to the citizens of Uganda, especially those people that reside in areas where growing of palm oil is being verified. 

I should simply say, among other things, that there were other fears when we were listening to the public. There were fears of environmental damage. We realise that there is a lot of misconception about this project, for example, that once it gets underway, all the trees get destroyed. We did not see that scenario in Kalangala and the healthy environment is maintained yet the incomes of the people have increased significantly. 

There may be other fears that we may hear being put on the Floor. Sometimes, they are really farfetched but when you get on the ground, you find a different picture altogether. It is on that account that we highly recommend the passing of this loan for the benefit of the people of Buvuma, Bugiri, Masaka and Rakai. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair. Honourable members, I have already proposed a question for debate; let us debate. Each Member will take three minutes.

4.39
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson for the report. There is one thing I would like to seek clarification on. Sometime back, money was borrowed for this particular project which was implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and it is supposed to end in December 2018.

What I would like to find out is: Before we add on more money, I read the report and I did not see the failures and the successes of this particular project. You did not tell us the benefits of this project, especially to the people who are carrying out the implementation. We cannot keep on giving money when the real people on the ground are not benefiting. Can you tell us the successes and the failures of this particular project since it is supposed to end this year by December? Thank you.

4.41
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For once, I would like to support this motion, albeit with a heavy heart. As chair of the Committee on Public Accounts, the reports that come from the Auditor-General’s office make me have that heavy heart. 

The way we use the loan funds that we procure in this House is still appalling to the extent, as you will realise soon when we lay our report on this Floor, that there is so much funding that is lying redundant and yet this country is paying interest on those loans - yet they have not been put to use.

Of course we know that our national debt is growing at worrying trends. I am, however, supporting this motion for one reason basing on the Auditor-General’s report. The Government of Uganda has lost lots of money because we failed to fulfill our obligation that we were supposed to have done 10 years ago. For example, Uganda is still paying taxes on behalf of this company because we did not fulfill our part of the bargain. They are not paying the taxes or doing what they were supposed to do according to the memorandum of understanding, until we fulfill this - which I hope we are going to fulfill, having been given this loan. We did not give the amount of land that we were supposed to give to the company, and so apart from giving our people employment, there is not much we are gaining as a country. All that they are making is being repatriated back to their country. 

I am, therefore, hoping that on receipt of this money, we are going to be able to recover even the costs that up to now we have not been able to recover as a country. I would like to pray that this money will be put to good use. 

4.43
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Mr Speaker, for your information, I am now representing Butebo. Thank you. I would like to support the motion but with caution.

Many times, we have approved these monies but they are not achieving what they are intended to do. I would like the minister to pledge to this House that this loan will be put to use and that it will achieve its intended objective. However, I would also like to disagree with the committee chairperson as far as the environmental issue vis-à-vis the palm oil is concerned. When I first came to Kampala as a student, there was rain in this region throughput the year but now there is no rain. 

I visited Kalangala in 2007 as a tourist. Much as I was not a scientist, I was certain that there must have been a direct link between the ecosystem of the virgin forests and the rain formation. Therefore, is it true that we have exhausted other areas where we have comparative advantage other than going all around destroying the forests in the island and exposing our country to more environmental risk? Thank you.

4.45
MS MARGARET BABA-DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the loan for the growing of palm trees in Buvuma Islands. However, my concern is that you claim that the people of Kalangala are now well-off and I do not know how far true that is. This palm oil alone may not make you rich, especially if you have given all your land for palm trees and there is no land for food production. You will end up using the money from the palm oil for buying food, which may not be enough. 

Therefore, my concern is for the people of the islands. You have acquired the land but have you acquired it for free or you have compensated the people? We do not want our people to become squatters and they become workers and the only service they have is their labour, which attracts low payments for our people.

On the issue of the environment, I have read that palm trees have fibrous roots and their roots are not deep. As a result, they do not anchor the soil like the trees with tap roots and so there is also environmental degradation there. Therefore, when you are getting this project we would like to see that, first, our people benefit. We would prefer the production by our people and they sell to the factory rather than taking away the land and they end up only as workers.

Also, we would like to see that the palm oil project benefits our people because you find that those who are investing benefit more than our people. Thank you very much.

4.47
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are some questions to be answered when we are borrowing this money. Firstly, is this money a loan to the farmers or is it a grant? Secondly, the honourable minister raised an issue here that since the project started, Shs 500 billion has been realised. When I computed this, it is around Shs 288 billon. This will answer my first two questions – whether it is a loan or a grant - because I am looking at another question on the recovery strategy. Are we going to recover this money?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would recommend that this money should go to the farmers through the Uganda Development Bank for easy usage, monitoring and recovery. Thank you.

4.49
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to lend my support to this loan. Of course I first note that this country is a loan-dependent country, so, denying it the opportunity to access the loan would mean failure on the side of Government. 

However, I recall that this House – I think the minister in charge of agriculture will respond – had advised that when our committees are processing loan requests, they should report on the performance of loans that have been granted to the sector or ministry so that we are up to speed with how they have effectively utilised the loans that were advanced to them. I think the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries – for which this loan is intended – owes a duty to this Parliament to report on how they have been using loans.

Secondly, my colleague, hon. Gilbert Olanya, raised questions about the performance of the loan that was advanced for the purpose of this project. We still have about three months. I would add that the minister, after processing this loan, briefs this House on the success and benefits of that project so that we are sure that the loan that we process in this House has meaningful effects on the livelihood of the people.

Otherwise, I would like to say that the Government must have a strategy to deal with the rising debt levels and also to avoid paying interest on loans that are borrowed and are kept within Government and we are losing a lot of money in paying interests to sustain the loan. Thank you very much.

4.51
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the loan in order to provide employment opportunities to people in those areas which are going to be the beneficiaries. However, as we supported the first phase for Kalangala Palm Oil Project and now we are moving to Buvuma, may I ask the minister in charge of agriculture or the minister in charge of finance that because we know that we have very many islands in this country and we have identified that these islands are fertile soils for palm growing, why don’t we have a roadmap in order to boost other islands where palm growing can be of value so that as we approve a loan for Buvuma, we also have a strategic plan for other islands?
Given the fact that we have potential markets for the products and we have identified islands as fertile grounds for palm growing, may I ask the Government to come up with a roadmap that these islands are also in waiting so that even Members and the public may know that from Kalangala it is Buvuma and after Buvuma it will go to A, B, C and D islands so that we can move on well. 

Otherwise, I would request the beneficiaries, especially the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, that there is what we call “project monitoring unit” – whenever we have those loans, there is a unit which is monitoring. When you look at the expenses rather being incurred by those who are monitoring, it leaves a lot to be desired. May we really ensure that the big portion is given to the beneficiaries other than –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.54
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have had the privilege of reading this report and I am interested in the facts which informed the decision to borrow this loan. 

Mr Speaker, I have now finally confirmed that, as a country, we lack critical agricultural statistics. I have a feeling that the facts are not well presented in the report. It seems a lot of the evidence is hearsay by the team that has visited the different islands. They seem to believe there is some sort of structural change. While structural change in economics is development, if you cannot pin these facts clearly with an evaluation report of the first project indicating how much change has been made at household level in terms of income, it is very difficult, Mr Speaker, to believe that borrowing more money is really taking this project in the positive direction.

Mr Speaker, we are all aware that one of the main implementers of this project is BIDCO who have had tax exemptions. Up to now, we are still looking forward to their tangible contribution to the GDP of this country.

Mr Speaker, I find it very difficult to ascertain how we are going to ensure value for money when we do not clearly see how the large-scale producers impact on the small-scale producers whom we intend to support with this loan. I am not necessarily saying that I object to borrowing this money but what I am saying is that it is very difficult to prove that this money will achieve the intended objectives in the project document.

Unfortunately, we have not been privileged to look at the project document itself. All that has been put in this report does not give me the opportunity to conclusively say whether this project will help the four - (Member timed out.)

4.57
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also support this initiative to borrow for oil production. I was recently in Buvuma Islands when I visited my colleague, hon. Migadde. I interacted with a lot of people there and there is much excitement from the population. They are waiting to see how this oil production takes shape. 

One issue that I would like to also caution that I saw there is that the forests have been depleted. I think that poses a very serious environmental challenge to us.

However, the issue of oil production is good for the country. It is good for Uganda to also be known for something. It is good for you to go to Burundi or somewhere else and see on the shelves palm oil from Uganda. It will really energise our capacity to benefit from the regional market.

Mr Speaker, of course, the issue of employment should be looked into and emphasised because you know, most of our people are largely agro-based. So, it would be very good for this to be scaled up. 

The other point that I would like to look at is that as we begin implementation, in order for our people to benefit properly, it would be good to think about forming small farmer co-operatives so that they can be able to borrow and have financial benefits out of this initiative. 

Otherwise, I do support this loan. Thank you. 

5.00
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the borrowing of the loan. We are aware of the palm growing in Kalangala but I would like to request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to tell us on the Floor of this Parliament how much impact it has created on the lives of the poor people who are living in Kalangala. It is because most of the times when such projects come, they remain in the hands of the rich. The poor people have got limited access to such projects. Now, what strategies are we going to put in place to ensure that this loan actually reaches the poor people down there so that they improve their income status?
The second issue I would like to raise, Mr Speaker, is that I do not think palm growing can only do well in islands. It is because I personally have palm trees in my field and they are doing very well. Maybe for future purposes, other areas should also be considered. 

However, we would like to know the impact. We would like to know how much it is going to help our people to improve their income status. Employment opportunities - when we talk about employment opportunities, we do not mean these people who ferry things. No, we want Ugandans to get those real jobs. Like right now, we know BIDCO is one of the companies producing palm products; how much real employment opportunities has it given Ugandans? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.02
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion that the loan be provided. I support it for the reason that this is an economic development loan. It is really good for us, as a country, to be able to identify loans which are going to help our communities. 

However, I would also wish to advise the committee and maybe the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that in future, if we are to be motivated as Parliament to accept loans, the loans should be categorised so that we know from the reports that this is a production loan, consumption loan or social loan. We need to know which types of loans are always coming up. Then, in that case again, it would also be advisable that we know, as a country, our current total loans. I hear that we are below the limit but how do we prove that? It is hearsay. When there is a loan request, we would like to be furnished with information on where our debt burden stands and how much we have paid. That gives us a correct picture. At the same time, we would like to know how these loans have performed because this information is lacking. 

Finally, I would like to recommend that in future, we need to provide loans according to the various potential of our country. One time I was in Ntoroko; a vast land with the potential of rearing livestock. The same applies to places like Acholi, Karamoja and Teso. If we have foresight, we should be able to think about getting bigger loans for such areas in order for them to rear a lot of livestock for industrial purposes. Let us judge according to –(Member timed out.)

5.05
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the sake of steady progress, I will support this loan but there are issues. This project is in its second phase and we are talking about moving from Kalangala to Buvuma.

I have seen Mukwano Industries from its inception but they are now competing favourably with BIDCO and they have now extended to various places. If you go to Bunyoro, Toro, they are there. However, we have not given them a loan or borrowed money to give Mukwano Industries.

If you went to any supermarket or grocery shop, you are most likely to find either BIDCO oil or Mukwano oil or both. The issue I am raising is in regard to the performance of this loan we are taking.

In the first phase, what prevented this project from breaking even after its implementation? We are talking of three months remaining. What time frame do we need for this project to break even? How long are we going to borrow money in order for this project to break even? 

We must take stock. Do we still need to go ahead with this project? Must we bring in other players? The problem could be wrong players in the project. Is it wrong project formulation? We are pumping in resources but the outcome is not comparable with what we are putting in; it does not measure up. There is a problem. These are loans not grants.

When I look at page 21 of the report, they are talking about the impact of this loan but they are saying that everybody there now has iron sheet dwellings. If you came to West Budama North, 80 per cent of the people or more have iron sheet dwellings. Do we have palm oil there? Is it as a result of palm oil? (Member timed out.)

5.08
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to air out my views concerning this project. I can precisely say that since the loan has been processed by the committee, I will support it but with a lot of reservations.

We all know our objective 12 that talks about regional development in terms of whatever we do. According to the report, people in Kalangala are now earning billions of shillings. When you look at other parts of this country, people are yawning in poverty. In Teso, poverty has increased by 17 per cent. In Acholi, it has increased by 24 per cent but we are not talking about any of this.

Mr Speaker, I get concerned when we talk about this project. A lot of money is going to be injected in it but the beneficiaries will be the very powerful people in this country who I do not know. I was asking, who are the owners of BIDCO? They have been around for quite a long time but are not paying any tax apart from VAT. Those are the concerns that I have as a representative of Ngora County.

Now that we are supporting this loan, when are we going to borrow a loan that is going to help us fight poverty in Teso, Acholi, Lango and Karamoja? I am very sure that we must all grow and develop as a country. We cannot talk about one side only when the other side is worse. I am not in agreement with that.

In addition, how sure are we that some people will not touch this money and cause confusion and disorder? They are bound to cause some “malaria” in the handling of that money. Corruption is likely to come because money is available. I will be happy if this matter is addressed by the Minister of Agriculture and the minister –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is there a region that has not spoken in this debate? I have covered all the regions except central.

5.12
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My mind speaking through my mouth has nothing to say but that we required this loan yesterday. I am lucky to have been born to Mr Israel Kibirige Sebunya who initiated the Kalangala plantation.

Secondly, I was lucky to have been sent to Buvuma to convince the people there that they need this nucleus farm. Majority of the land is not going to be taken up by this nucleus farm so the rest of the farmers are going to be out growers.

Most of the people were compensated four years ago and that is why the Member who went to Buvuma complained that the forest had already been cleared. The people know that this is going to be a nucleus farm so they have already taken on the assignment to cut trees by themselves.

Otherwise, this loan is multifaceted and even those who will not be shareholders will definitely benefit from it. Income will descend upon these people because everybody will be active in either selling goods to the factory or the factory will be selling them goods.

Lastly, this kind of plantation is an import substitution loan. Mukwano Industries that he is talking about majorly imports raw materials from outside the country. We would like to grow the raw materials in our country so that we save the dollars we would have used to import all this oil that comes into the country. 

Lastly, we shall have many bi-products from this kind of palm oil. If you went to Kalangala, there is nothing that is thrown out of that factory; everything is used right from the shells and everybody benefits. We even get fertilisers from this factory. 

Therefore, I support this loan. I am happy that the honourable Member from Buvuma has recognised that I have supported him and I hope that everybody will support him. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that what he was doing? I thought he wanted to speak. (Laughter) 

5.15
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a few clarifications. We are not borrowing for BIDCO. Part of this loan is to the out growers and it is repaid. 

If we are to go by Kalangala, the out growers were given Shs 45 billion and they have already paid back Shs 16.3 billion. People are not even paying back money for the Youth Livelihood Fund and the same applies to so many other ventures. However, they have already paid back this money when they still have eight years before the term expires. That means that they will have paid back by the end of the term. 

When we go to Buvuma, the forests are cut because our main source of livelihood used to be the lake, which is already depleted. A number of issues have been raised on this Floor by members from the fishing communities reporting issues of brutality by the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and so on. The people depleted the lake and the remaining source of livelihood became the forest; they had to cut the trees. 

That is why when you go to Buvuma now, even before the project starts, trees are already cut. Therefore, we cannot blame the project that when it comes, the trees will be cut because they are already cut. What we should be looking for is another source of livelihood for these people so that they do not only survive on the forest or the lake. There should be an alternative.

Today, Buvuma, for example, collects Shs 80 million as district revenue. The main source of revenue for the district is timber and charcoal. How do you help such a district? That is why, as leaders, we knew that much as land is precious, it will never be so when our people are still entangled in absolute poverty. That is why we convinced our people to give away land, not freely but they are compensated. 

In fact, I would like to inform you that eight years ago, an acre of land in Buvuma was going for Shs 250,000. However, with the coming into force of this, it is between Shs 4 to 8 million.

Therefore, we needed this money yesterday. I have gone with members of Parliament from here to Buvuma and they were afraid of the dilapidated ferry that we have. In fact, I went with hon. Nandala-Mafabi to Kalangala and he said, “When you have such a ferry in Buvuma, I will visit you.” This is because the one in Kalangala is reliable because of the palm oil project. How are we going to attract power –(Member timed out.) 

5.18
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that we keep borrowing without minding the effects on our people. Even when we talk about growth, every year we are saying that the economy is growing but I encourage the researchers to go down to the people and do their research well. 

Last year, when they did the household research conducted by Ministry of Health, poverty in the north was at 27 per cent and yet every time we hear about growth. We are still borrowing. We really need the results of this borrowing; the social benefits to our people. 

I hear that the Kalangala and Buvuma people are now very rich. I have not gone there myself but I hear so. If that is the case, we are very happy for them. However, if they are rich, why should we borrow? 

It is also important for us to do effective environmental impact assessment. People are complaining of climate change, reduced rains and deforestation. The technical people need to help us in as far as environment impact assessment is concerned. 

Regarding issues to do with land, especially that which is for research and so on, personally I link it with the case of Amuru sugar project. I do not like this idea of buying land from the indigenous people. I would prefer that the indigenous people give land as shares in whatever project so that they can benefit from the project instead of selling off their land. 

I went to Amuru recently –(Member timed out.)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, one minute.

MS AOL: Thank you. I was asked, “When are they paying us? They took our land and we have not cultivated.” That is Lakang land where compensation has not been effected. Sometimes, I believe that it is very difficult to compensate these people well. 

When we the leaders try to go to Lakang, they put barricades, tear gas and police on the way. If it is true that this is something that is benefiting our people, why do you block leaders from reaching the people and talking to them? If I volunteer to give my land away, you can take it. How about if my neighbour does not want to give his land away? How do you try to put all this land together? 

Therefore, even as we borrow, we must do our research very well and we must help our people better than we are doing now. When we talk of growth and yet the distribution of resources is not effective - also sometimes, the people who get the loans are very few and they go away with the money. We are doing a lot of disservice to our people. 

I also take this loan with a lot of pain but pray that let the social benefits go to the people that this loan is meant to help. I will not say that because the northern region is not getting anything, why should those other regions get? If the people of Kalangala get and they are better off, they are Ugandans and we are happy. I am happy if they are rich and we look forward to also handling other regions. However, we do not want loans, which we will get and then there is no social benefit to our people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we close this debate? I would like to be able to handle a Bill as well. Can I put the question to this motion? Procedure?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I am addressing my mind to the March 2014 Value for Money Audit Report, especially in the field of Vegetable Oil Development Project. 

Mr Speaker, that audit report brings out the following concerns. One, it says that the circumstances that are causing delay in implementation of projects in the development of Vegetable Oil Project was actually the question of feasibility study not being done in time.

Secondly, that report brings out the question of delays in agreeing on the modalities of the usage of the funds that would affect eventual achievement of the project, therefore delaying implementation.

The third issue was the question of supply of seeds to farmers, which was not being done. That audit report stops us from passing this very loan that is seemingly going to improve vegetable oil production in the same project without the promoters of this loan providing a report on whether these questions were answered in the audit report.

Mr Speaker, are we proceeding right to go ahead and grant these people a loan for a project that has queries in the value for money audit report? Are we proceeding well, Mr Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are proceeding well because it is not the same area. This is a different area; that was Kalangala and this is Buvuma. Honourable member, you may not have visited these places but they are quite far apart. It is almost like Padyere and Tororo. Therefore, they may not be that close.

Honourable members, can I now put the question to this motion? I put the question that Parliament authorises Government to borrow up to $75.82 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development to support the National Oil Palm Project.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we agreed that we will rise at 6 O’clock to enable the High Mass to proceed. We have about 32 minutes and I would like us to go to the next item and see how far we can go.

REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE - CENTRAL GOVERNMENT ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015 (ENERGY SECTOR)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chair, can I receive the report on the Bill for the second reading so that we have time to deal with it next week? Please, let us deal with item 8.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE MENTAL HEALTH BILL, 2014

5.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Mental Health Bill, 2014” be read for the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Sebunya, honourable member for Mitooma, honourable member for Ngora, honourable member for Erute and honourable member for Padyere. 

(Motion seconded)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to speak to your motion? Please give justification for your motion.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, I did so yesterday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You already did? Why then did you move it again?

MS OPENDI: Because you directed me to do so.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You should have just told me that. We were already debating? Okay. I had actually said that if there was no debate, we could move to the next stage but then Members said that there were some issues that they needed to raise, particularly the Member for Padyere.

5.29
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the reasons of the technicality of this Bill, yesterday we asked for your indulgence that we first debate the principles of the Bill.

Mr Speaker, the Mental Health Bill and generally mental health is a very diverse area. From the object of the Bill, as we go to discuss the principle of the Bill, you will realise that we are actually addressing mental health in the context of mental illness. 

In other words, we are looking at the treatment of persons with mental illness. This is seen from the object of the Bill, which says that the object of this Bill is to provide for care, treatment of persons with mental illness at health centres, to provide for admission in, for the treatment and for the discharged from health units and mental health units or persons with mental illness to ensure -

It goes ahead and when you go to the context of the Bill, it is talking about treatment. Mr Speaker, when I was in a seminary, in Philosophy we were taught one thing; that psychological death precedes clinical death and psychological occurrence is in the mind. There is also a saying that a healthy mind is a healthy body.

Therefore, when we are addressing mental health, we should not look at mental illness treatment but look at mental health holistically. When you look at World Health Organisation Action plan on Mental Health, they state that regarding childhood mental health and adolescent mental health, for every 100 people that you see, 10-13 young people are suffering from mental disorders and these disorders can take the form of neo-psychiatry disorders.

It goes ahead to talk about women. The report says that out of every 10 or 20 women, two are suffering from mental distress and out of about 100 men, over 48 are suffering from erection dysfunction because of mental distress.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, mental distress starts with mental disorder of any form. This Bill falls short in its principle in that it does not even capture what we call kleptomania. One of the reasons Americans give for people being so corrupt is that insatiable urge to accumulate more and more even when you have more. That is why people in USA are paid highly; it is kleptomania. You want to accumulate today and then tomorrow –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please summarise.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, regarding the principles, this Bill is not looking at a proactive approach solution to mental health. The issue of counselling is not in this Bill. It goes ahead to treatment.

The other mistake, in the presentation of the chairperson, is that he says that there should be involuntary admission. In other words, you are detained either because Police has recommended or your relatives. That is detention, Mr Speaker. 

In principle, we are not providing here that there should be a form that you should fill as a person who has recommended that someone must be detained for mental illness. Therefore, even my wife can claim mental illness and I get detained. There must be a form attached to this. If that form is missing, in principle, that means that we are going to commit suicide here.

Finally, we have what we call a Mental Health Appeal Tribunal. In principle, from the report that was presented yesterday, they are trying to put that tribunal under a board that is provided for in this law.

However, the procedures and functions of that tribunal are not captured by this law. Mr Speaker, I had the pleasure to read the 2007 Mental Health Act of United Kingdom, which by the way is the international standard for all mental health issues.

An appeal tribunal is captured there so that once you are arrested or detained by the recommendation of a policeman or any other person against your will, you can appeal to them to look at the issue to ascertain whether you are really a mental case. 

In principle, I pray that the chairperson and the House find it permissible that if we are going to the Committee Stage, a proactive approach to mental health should be addressed here. Short of that, we are repealing the Mental Treatment Act with another mental treatment act, which is called the Mental Health Act, which in essence is actually about treatment. We should address mental issues holistically. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you be proposing amendments at Committee Stage? If you intend to do so, you need, at this stage, to prepare those amendments and circulate them so that they are shared and when we go to Committee Stage, we do not have to start proposing amendments from scratch.

MR ANYWARACH: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I had even put my case to the chairperson and I think the chairperson can be on record to say exactly what we agreed because we agreed on a lot of things – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am now talking about a proposal to amend, which will be shared so that we do not complicate the text of what is before us.

MR ANYWARACH: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ordinarily, the committee should have processed all amendments that were coming from the members but it is possible that some members were not privy to what was happening in the committee. This is your opportunity from the time that this matter has been raised. If you have an amendment, propose it early enough so that it is shared and the committee can have a look at it. When we go to Committee Stage, we should not start drafting from scratch therefore making it difficult for us to process and understand some of the proposals because we might end up with implications that were not intended. 

5.36
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their comprehensive report. This Bill has come in time. We have been waiting for the amendment of this Bill since 1996 because the old Act of 1964 has been mistreating mentally ill persons. Once you are mentally ill, you are considered a criminal, you are arrested, beaten and thrown in jail for a while before you are taken for treatment.

I hope that this Bill will address the issue of treating mentally ill persons humanely by people who know how to handle them rather than being given into the hands of police. 

There is stigma placed on mentally ill persons, just like persons with disability. Once you are mentally ill, even after getting cured, nobody can trust you ever again. I think we should have a place that can certify that this person is now cured from mental illness. This is because whatever a former mentally ill person says, they say that this one was mentally ill so they will not trust you again. We need to think of rehabilitation and a way of helping people who have recovered from mental illness to be accepted in society. 

There are many people in Butabika who are mentally ill and their relatives do not go to visit them. Even when they get sick or die, their relatives do not care because they do not want to get them back. There is one example of a boy that was brought to Butabika when he was 15 years. He recovered but could not trace his people. He had to live in Bbina Catholic Church until he died without his relatives. 

It is therefore important to sensitise the community that mental illness is a kind of disability. Medically, they can attempt to get cured but if they are not cured, they are persons with disability and they should be treated well.

Regarding treatment, we have only the referral hospitals where the mentally ill can be treated. I think it is important to have these services at health centres III and health centres IV so that if there is any sign of mental illness, one can be detected and treated early and only referred to the referral hospitals or Butabika when need arises.

Regarding the issue of personnel, there are too few psychiatric doctors and nurses who can handle mental illness. As such, there is need to give more money to training in Butabika so that we have more people trained to handle mentally ill persons.

Let me talk about the women. Women who are mentally sick are only seen as mentally sick during the day. At night, men encroach on them and make them pregnant. There was a lady called Acirwa who said at night she was called “Acic”. These people who impregnate mentally ill persons should be -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What do those words mean? 

MS BABA DIRI: Acic is a nice love name. The lady was called Acirwa but at night she was called Acic, which is a love name. That is what happens. 

Therefore, anybody who impregnates a mentally ill woman must be responsible to take care of her and the baby until she delivers. That stipulation should also be put in the law so that mentally ill women can be protected and the children they produce are taken care of by the people who are responsible. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I think we should draw this to a close. We agreed that we need a High Mass for the Reverend Father who has passed on; Rev. Fr Binta. The mass is about to begin and we agreed that we would not jeopardise the mass. Can we wind up this debate because it looks like most of the issues are issues we can address by amendments? 

We have sufficient time, between now and next week, to prepare our amendments and share them. When I come to process them next week, I am not going to entertain amendments that will be drafted from memory. That will not be acceptable. You need to share the text so that when we have Bills to process, they are sound. They should have been tested by our legal people and found to be sound so that we do not tamper with their integrity. 

Can I put the question to this motion for Second Reading? Honourable members, I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Mental Health Bill, 2014” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE MENTAL HEALTH BILL, 2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will pause at this stage. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock and we will proceed with business as it is. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.43 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 11 September 2018 at 2.00 p.m.)
 
