Thursday, 18 September 2014

Parliament met at 2.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting, and I again want to thank you for the speed at which we have been able to handle business that could have taken us a very long time. I am grateful for what you have been able to do. 

We still have some loan requests that are pending and they are supposed to be part of what should feed into the management of this budget; we have finished one on Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals, but there is one for Programme of Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas (PROFIRA). I think that request was made, they are saying a draft report is being compiled. I wish it could be done quickly so that we conclude with this matter and finish with this, I see the chair of national economy here. 

Then there is one on Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project worth USD 145 million. The report says it is still to be considered; I pray that the committee handles this expeditiously so that it can come and we finish it within this period. 

There is another one on North-East Road Corridor Asset Management, which should also be handled quickly. Then there is another one; second Kampala Infrastructure Development Project. Chairpersons, please, move with the committee to finish this and the final one is a road sector support project V which we should also complete so that the House can pronounce itself on these issues and pave way for what we are handling at the moment. 

When those are ready, we will be able to deal with them immediately; and since the financial Bills are almost getting out of the way, those ones should be there to continue financing those different aspects of what we will be appropriating. Thank you.

2.25
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawampe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. On the 10th of this month, we had an international match with Guinea and we came out victorious, and we are very grateful to Uganda Cranes. However, on that day, as the match was going on, we experienced power fluctuations and the match was temporarily interrupted. 

My concern, through you, Mr Speaker, is that the Minister of Internal Affairs should get interested in the way the Managing Director of Namboole National Stadium was handled because of the power fluctuations. The MD was arrested there and then and he was kept in Police custody for almost six hours on grounds that it was sabotage. Right now the MD and other technical officers are every after two days reporting to Police. 

My concern is that, the Minister of Internal Affairs, knowing our power problems, again wants to shift government failures to an individual, someone who is manning Namboole National Stadium. Yet we know that even the lights they use, even if that power fluctuation was just for a second, they cannot automatically light up; it can take 3 – 4 minutes for those who really know how these lights work. My concern is how the police arrested the MD and other technical officers, and yet to the best of my knowledge power problems or having fluctuations in our power sector is a national problem. How can they shift that problem to the management of the stadium?

The national stadium has a generator, but it is not automatic; when power goes off they have to switch it on, and it takes something like 5-6 minutes. So, my area of concern is, the Minister of Internal Affairs should get interested in this matter otherwise we will demoralise many of our technical officers, many of the people we had given assignments in as far as this sector is concerned. I don’t think that if we had these fluctuations it necessitated arrests and then accusations of sabotage; that the man is sabotaging the country, yet the problems are beyond him; it is a national problem that we have failures in our power sector.

2.26
THE GOVERNEMNT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I think as Members of Parliament, we should desist from doing the administrative work of the ministries because the issue happened, and it was a shame to the country, to all of us. So, if they make the people who are fully responsible to be accountable for what happened, I would really think that if police were investigating, we should make sure Police do their work professionally and thoroughly.
 
We should leave these institutions do their work. There are civil servants in different categories, but they don’t have the opportunity to come and complain to us. So, should we fail police, should we fail the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Internal Affairs from doing their work because a member will raise the administrative issue in Parliament? I would pray that let the member hold on until Police have done their work and then if there is unfair treatment to individuals, he can come here and raise the issue. But police should do their work and we should give space to police to do their work.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Chief Whip on the other side is saying that it was a shame to the country! The truth is, it was a big shame, but I was shocked when an official appeared on the television and said, “Yes, this was a blessing for Uganda. It was good power went off.” Now, to us this was done intentionally and it can bring problems for Uganda. 

“You didn’t even see this was a blessing for Uganda because the other side was putting a lot of pressure. When the power went off, we neutralised the Guinea Bissau team.” That was very unfortunate, and such statements are very embarrassing to the country. I was indeed touched because everybody was embarrassed because of the power going off and an official said, “Yes, this is a blessing for Uganda.” So, we should take all these issues into consideration.

Secondly, we are concerned. If somebody contacted a Member of Parliament and told the member what was happening, is it wrong for the member to come and raise the issue on the Floor of Parliament? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR EKANYA: This is a supplementary. Recently, a judge in one of the proceedings advised the Police that you cannot use suspects to help you investigate; by making their lives very hard. I think the complaint really is for an MD who may not be running into exile to report every 48 hours. I think this matter can be handled in a more decent manner and then you have investigations concluded and then if found guilty, he or she can be prosecuted. So, can we really have Police do the job in a more decent and neat way?

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I would like to request my colleague who has raised the issue of where an official made reckless statements. I think that I am still blaming such people and would really pray that the member cooperates with the Ministry of Internal Affairs so that this person is also disciplined if he made reckless statements because that is not good for us as a country.

Secondly, we as Parliament made laws and I would, therefore, really suggest that let somebody clearly state that when Police are doing their work, they are not doing this in relation to this law. But you cannot come here and say that they are doing this and that. Please, let us leave the Police to do their work for the good of all of us.

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Speaker, I am not stopping the Police anywhere from carrying out their work. But I am just raising a concern that the Ministry of Internal Affairs should get interested because we know that when the power went off, it was a shame for the country, but who was responsible? If we are trying to say that it was the MD or the technical team, then the Minister for Internal Affairs should come here and tell us because for us as Members of Parliament, if somebody approaches us that they have a problem and the way things are being handled is not the way they should be handled, we are duty bound to come and explain here so that we get a statement from Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. But, honourable members, it is not always very good to pick one set of facts and run with it because sometimes it creates confusion. Now, it turns out that somebody actually came and made a statement to the effect that it was a blessing. It had the implication of even suggesting that it was switched off deliberately. That now complicates the whole thing. 

So, I think that it important to allow different agencies do their work and if they make mistakes, then we come in, but if they are doing their work, we give them the space and time to complete what they are doing so that we can all be happy about the results and if we are dissatisfied, then we have avenues for raising those concerns at the appropriate time. But of course, the information is what you have heard and some steps can be taken to find out what is going on.  Yes, the member for Igara West.

2.33
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance which I would like to believe is not just for Igara West but perhaps for even the other places.

On a sad note, on Tuesday 16 September (last Tuesday) in a place called Bitooma Sub-County at Bitooma Trading Centre in Igara West Constituency, a thief stole a motorcycle from a boda boda rider at about 10.00 a.m. and disappeared. The boda boda rider worked with his colleagues and they traced the person through the areas he was buying fuel from up to a place in Bihanga in Buhweju. They reported at a police post called Malinde in Bihanga and the Police arrested an accomplice who was believed to have been part of the group of thieves. 

The riders wanted the accomplice help them get the real thief and because of this, there was a scuffle at the police post and in the process, the policeman shot into the group and killed one of the boda boda men. The person who was killed was called Arthur Ndyamuzara. So as we speak today, the Police have impounded 40 motorcycles of these boys and arrested a number of them and some of these boys have not been seen by their families. The situation is ‘boiling’ and I would not have raised this if it was an isolated case.

In the last six months, I have had three similar cases of boda boda riders losing their motorcycles. They follow up the case and end up being traumatized by the Police. It happened in a place called Kizinda and another one called Kigoma in Nyavayo Sub-County.

Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister for Internal Affairs to help in this particular case and ensure that the Police carry out speedy investigations into the matter to ensure that these motorcycles are released to their owners, and to also explain to us the security in place for these boda boda riders so that they do not feel neglected and they start doing the investigations on their own.

I would also like to ask the minister to prevail over the Police such that their reaction in such incidents is not the use of live ammunition into this kind of group. Surely, at least they should have shot in the air or used tear gas. But using bullets and killing people, I find this unacceptable and I think it should be really stopped. It is not a sign of professionalism on behalf of our force.

Mr Speaker, I would like to submit this and request for an explanation from the Minister for Internal Affairs.

2.37
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Thank you so much honourable for raising this issue. I will inform the Minister for Internal Affairs to come and give us a report in this matter. However, I still want to urge colleagues that the issue of mob justice – if you watch the news like ‘Agataliiko Nfuufu’ on Bukedde TV, I think that as leaders, we need to come up and sensitise our communities to stop taking the law into their hands.

I will inform the Minister for Internal Affairs to come and give us details about this matter and even what could have happened in another area other than that place. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils of Awidiri Primary School in Arua District. They are represented by hon. Bernard Atiku and hon. Christine Bako. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause). We also have prefects and teachers from Life College Mukono represented by hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Peace Kusasira. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause). We also have pupils of St Mary’s Primary School, Kishayi in Isingiro District represented by hon. Bright Rwamirama and hon. Grace Byarugaba. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. Thank you very much. (Applause) The next item.  

BILLS
 FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2014
    
2.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill,” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which year is this? 

MR OMACH: 2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to read it again?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the first reading of “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2014”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The motion is seconded by the Chief Whip, Minister of State for Works and honourable Minister of State for Industry. So that Bill is properly received by this House and it is committed to the Budget Committee for expeditious handling. In fact, if the Appropriation Bill was already with us, we would have gone through the procedure of dispensing with some provisions to allow us handle this Bill within the House here, complete it to close the financial year and pave way but now there is no Appropriation Bill as yet. As soon as it comes, we will handle that.

So, I am asking the Budget Committee to prepare, look through this quickly and report on Tuesday afternoon so that we can close this matter. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, yesterday we had a long debate on this issue of the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014 and we had a discussion on salt, which took us about three hours. I think there is a structural problem that this House faces, which we need time to correct so that we can move with these issues smoothly. You could see that the Speaker exercised a lot of restraint but also got overwhelmed by the kind of discussions that were taking place and it is not necessary for us to do this.

Structurally, why do I say there is a problem? This Parliament spends all its time under the Budget Act discussing expenditure. All the documents that come to this House speak about expenditure. Whether you are talking about the mid-term expenditure framework paper, it is expenditure. Whether you are talking about ministerial policy statements, it is about expenditure. So, we put this House in the moods of expenditure. We are not involved in the process of analysing suggestions from the Ministry of Finance about how we raise the money, we do not participate. It is the NGOs and civil society organisations that participate, Parliament does not. So we come here for nine or 11 months discussing expenditure. Then for a few weeks, we start talking about revenue. We are not prepared, we are not consulted. 

So, some of these things would not have been necessary whether we are talking about salt or paraffin. All these things should have been resolved at a certain level before they come out in Bills because financial Bills are about things that have already been decided and agreed upon, in which case we would pass the ministerial policy statements and immediately pass the Bills to finance the budget. But that is the missing gap and I need a commitment, even if the legal framework is not there. 

I do not know whether it is in the Bill that is proposed, which is before this House; the Public Finance Bill but if it is not there, an opportunity should be sought to introduce an amendment that compels the Ministry of Finance to bring these matters of taxation well before so that we do our consultations on them. It would help so that when we come at this time, we are already agreed and just proceed with the formalities and matters kick in. We cannot debate salt and goitre for three hours, honourable members. Really!

I think something has got to be done. So, Madam Clerk, with those few remarks -

Clause 3

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, in clause 3 yesterday we passed the amendment on 3(a). We came to 3(b) and we had a long discussion on C(c) on gas and F(f) which is on salt. There was an agreement by the time we left that gas should be left the way it is in the Bill and we rejected a proposal from the committee about removing H(h) so we left that there. So the issue that we left unresolved completely was the question of salt and so we are here to add on the three hours we spent yesterday on this matter to see how we can progress with this matter.

Honourable members, as I said when I was in the chair, we should find opportunity to handle these issues before so that by the time they come into Bills as revenue proposals for how we raise money, the House and the committees are fully briefed so that we agree on how we are going to move with these matters and so that these lengthy debates on these issues are negotiated at that stage and at this stage we only move and the country knows.

I am sure those who were watching us yesterday debating salt for three hours were also concerned. I am sure they were wondering what was going on but this could be solved by the kind of suggestions I was trying to make for how we move forward. So that is where we are.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, you have invoked a serious global parliamentary practice of the US Congress and the House of Senate. I have spoken in the House of Congress of the State of Pennsylvania and I have visited most of these countries and that is what you have invoked today. However, your proposal can only go a long way to relieve this Parliament of the precious time if the government side is willing to move in that direction. So before my colleagues and I say anything, it is important to hear from Government.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, most of this will be cured by the Public Finance Bill that is already here in the House for Second Reading so that both the revenue and the expenditure are dealt with in advance to ensure that the revenues that are going to match the expenditure are handled appropriately and within time so that there is coherence of the two sides.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I get a confirmation from the chair? Is it correct that the issue of the revenue side is in the Bill?

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, the Public Finance Bill, 2012 is trying to reverse the budgeting cycle backwards such that by the time the Budget is read by the Minister of Finance, we would have already considered the revenue and expenditure side. That will help put to hold when Ministry of Finance passes the budget and then four months into the process, Parliament reverses.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are the processes, the consultation for the revenue side of the budget in the Bill?

MR SSEBUNYA: No, they are not in the Bill, but what really happens is that we do engage stakeholders. Maybe what should be proposed that we should always have budget framework is for expenditure but we should also have a revenue side also produce a book or a conference to involve all stakeholders such that we begin debating those revenue measures together as Parliament and not as a committee because we find it very difficult to get the critical mass within Parliament to understand why tax measures are being brought the way they are being brought.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, it is only right and fitting that the expenditure is looked at by Parliament ab initio. [Honourable members: “What is that?”] That is English.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is not English.

MR OMACH:  Ab initio; from the very beginning.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is Latin.

MR OMACH: Yes, but it is taken as English.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is not English, honourable minister.

MR OMACH: I stand corrected. So, we accept your guidance on the issue of looking at revenue in good time so that we know how much revenue has been passed by Parliament so that it is able to match the expenditure that will be appropriated by Parliament.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, you know this issue I am not alone, I was looking behind at the chairperson of UWOPA so that tomorrow when we come up with the matter they do not call me a traitor and I wanted to hear her views on this so that I can concede and we move forward but before that I wanted to hear her view.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I think yesterday we debated at length on the question of gas and salt and we did not take a decision we had thought the minister after we conceded on gas would still give us salt, but the minister is still very firm and if the minister is willing to concede on the crucial issue of agricultural machinery and tools and implements, fertilisers and seeds, and cereals grown and produced in Uganda we can be willing to concede. So, it will be good for the minister to give us a firm commitment because those amendments are in the committee report ahead.

MS BAKO: Mr Chairman, if we were able to know the revenue deficit that would arise as a failure of taxing either salt or gas, we would then –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Gas is out of the picture now.

MS BAKO: Okay, in case we did not tax salt and we knew exactly what shortage would arise out of the budget and cause that imbalance, then we would be in position to concede on salt, but that is for now. We cannot accept that salt be taxed because we are not aware of what deficit it will cost.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But I thought the minister made that statement yesterday. Would you like to repeat?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, the revenue expected out of this tax measure is over Shs 8 billion. 

MS BAKO: Mr Chairman, Shs 8 billion reflecting on what happened yesterday that we want to be as pro-poor as possible and the minister acknowledge that this is a people’s government, I think it would be prudent for government to realise that they can actually find this within their budget by taking austerity measures.

One of the ways is scaling down expenditure in ministries that are not productive. If you look at defence, if you look at state house, the presidency, when you take austerity measures, Mr Chairman, you are able to get the Shs 8 billion that you are talking about and therefore it will be very unfair to levy a tax on salt. (Applause)

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I was convinced by the commitment of honourable minister of finance that our participation in looking at the budget process is going to include taxes from the beginning. Instead, our focus has been on the revenue and it was on the basis of –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It was on expenditure-

MR EKANYA: It was on expenditure and it was on the basis of that that I was requesting my colleagues that we may need to change our position. The reason is that if we find that some of these taxes that government has introduced this year are not favourable, we can make adjustments next financial year. (Applause) But I do not know whether within our rules of procedure on government assurance, it is acceptable in the government assurance procedure or we need a commitment of the Prime Minister and then we concede and move forward.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If the Bill is before us, we put it in the Bill.

MR EKANYA: Based on that, Mr Chairman, I beg to withdraw my alternative. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can we proceed on this now? I put the question. Now, there is no amendment.

Clause 3 as amended

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 3 as amended stands part of the Bill. 

Question put and agreed to.

Clause 4

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think we have made a technical error on (d) because if you are saying clause 3, you are saying insert immediately after paragraph 1, the following new paragraph, “The supply of seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and hoes”. The justification the chairman gave is, this is not under exempt. It is under zero rated. So, this is a technical mistake we are making.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On which one?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On the third schedule –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is where we are now.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But if you have passed clause 3 as the committee has recommended, then you have brought the supply of seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and hoes under exempt and yet, this is under schedule three. 

MR SSEBUNYA: We are still on second schedule.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we are still on second schedule, we have just – no, we haven’t – 
MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we have only dealt with Clause 3 (b). We are yet to complete (c) and we have not taken a vote on the whole of Clause 3.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we did. That is why you are there as chairman; you should be guiding us. So, can we come back to this after we get done with Clause 4? And chairperson of the committee please be keen.

MR SSEBUNYA: I am sorry, Mr Chairman. It is not yet a long but we are already getting – anyway, in Clause 4, we propose to amend the third schedule to the principal Act in paragraph (b) to delete (f) and (g). The justification is that proposed measure will hinder mechanisation of agriculture which is associated with high levels of production and increase in value addition. Two, seed security precedes food security and therefore more attention needs to be paid to the seeds to make them accessible and affordable by the majority of the farmers. There is that the application of VAT on the supply of fertilisers will escalate the price of inorganic fertilizers even higher. So, we also propose the insertion of a new paragraph (c) to substitute it with paragraph 1 (f) to read as follows: “(f) Supply of cereals where the cereals are grown or milled in Uganda.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is the amendment clear, honourable members? I think there are also agreements from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister on this. But you need to guide us properly on what you are proposing in specifically (b) – honourable members, let us follow this. In (b), (e) is for seeds, fertilisers and pesticides, (g) is on machinery and tools – where does the issue of hoes and the like come in from? In which paragraph are hoes? Is it (d)?

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, if I can read (e), it is about supply of seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and hoes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I now get it. What are you talking about, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya? You are talking about paragraph (s) in the third schedule? But there is no paragraph (s) in this schedule. Where are you finding it? Okay, can we get done with this third schedule?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in third schedule we can delete (e) so that it can only remain in the parent law. Then in (f), which deals with the supply of cereals that are grown, milled or produced in Uganda. In the committee’s amendment, it is indicated that this should be about the supply of seeds where the cereals are grown and milled in Uganda.

Their justification is that they are removing those that are imported and that is why they are proposing to amend that paragraph (f). And that is why I said that placing hoes in that paragraph was a mistake. It should have been left here. So, I want to propose that we only delete (e), amend (f) and also delete (g).

MR KAKOOZA: I want to supplement to what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said. If you leave this in the third schedule, it will be considered zero-rated. But what the Prime Minister was saying is that we move it to the second schedule then somebody will be able to claim the VAT. And in case of any importation, somebody will pay and they will in the same case protect those people who grow these seeds in Uganda. That is why I am suggesting that we move this (f) to the second schedule. I don’t know whether I am clear on that –(Interjections)– what I am trying to say is that the placement of paragraphs (f) and (g) to be considered zero rated in the third – no, that should be moved to the second schedule so that anybody who supplies those seeds is able to claim VAT. When we leave it in the third schedule, these people will not be able to claim.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But the second schedule exempts supply, not so?

MR KAKOOZA: You can decide to either claim or not.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: When you are exempted?

MR KAKOOZA: Yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Kakooza, let me help you. Mr Chairman, the moment we put these in schedule two, it means input tax is not claimable because it becomes part of the cost. That is what it means. But when it in schedule three, it means the input tax is claimable. That is why it is better to remove it – it means the cereals that are grown and made in Uganda – it means that anything one deals in and that something has input tax is claimable. But when you take it to schedule two, it means the input tax in production or milling is not claimable.

Let me give an example. If you have a milling plant, you pay Umeme but they will charge you VAT. If you are under three, you will claim the VAT on Umeme. But if you are under schedule two, you cannot claim VAT on Umeme.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is exactly what I also thought.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I would like to agree with the position that the hon. Nandala-Mafabi has explained that we remove (e) and the rest – I appeal that they remain as they are under schedule three. So, paragraph (e), which was articulated about by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, will be on the supply of seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and hoes which we had intended to remove taxes on, now they will be taxing them. The rest, we appeal that the House accepts that they remain as provided by the minister of finance.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am rising on a procedural matter to do with schedule 3 (b) (ff). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is no (b)(ff) in 3rd schedule. We are on clause 4.

MR NZOGHU: No, Mr Chairman, it is to do with the accusation which honourable shadow minister made on which am rising.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we are on clause 4; are you raising it on clause 4?

MR NZOGHU: no.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If you are not raising it on clause 4 then wait for the time to raise it properly when they come to that matter.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I want to disagree with the minister and support the position of the committee especially on (g), the minister seems to only be conceding on (e) which is seeds, hoes, and so on. But (g) under the 3rd schedule is the supply of machinery tools, and implements suitable for use only in agriculture. (g) as you know are things that affect our common agricultural people. 

We have in villages where these days you have even a local woman grinding with agricultural machinery. You have everywhere these maize milling machines which are agricultural tools and implements but the minister wants that not to be zero rated, but I am happy that the committee had agreed that these be zero rated and these will reject the proposal by the minister. I sit on committee on agriculture - even the permanent secretary of the ministry of finance wrote a letter to URA to defer collection of VAT on this particular agricultural implements and tools. So I don’t know why the minister comes here to not agree with this particular aspect which his own technical people and his own PS has written accepting that this should be zero rated.

So, I want to agree with the committee and appeal to the minister that please accept that (e) and (g) and the issue of silos be considered but most importantly on the issue of (g) that you should agree with the committee’s position.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Chair. I think the minister should be clear because I have the budget speech here with me. He said, “Termination of the zero rated supplies under 3rd schedule of VAT Act, I propose that the following VAT zero rated supplies be terminated with effect from 1st July 2014: supply of printing supply of printing services for education materials” which the committee agreed and said yes it should be terminated. “Supply of cereals grown, milled or produced in Uganda”, we agreed that it should be terminated because if you grow produce in Mbale or anywhere we have to protect you that anybody importing that same cereal like rice, you are promoting the local industry and the committee agreed that that should be. 

But then we said that we should not terminate zero rated supplies of processed milk and milk products, supply of machinery and tools for agriculture and supply of seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and hoes. This is the budget speech and I thought if you go in the 3rd schedule which is zero rated, these two to be terminated and to get revenues it should be taken to the second schedule whereby we are protecting the local industry. This is the budget speech we have of the minister and you will generate revenue mainly any way because if you exempt then you will not get revenue and he said that it will need Shs 30.4 billion so we are saying yes, the cereals production people in Uganda - I am growing rice, I must be protected, because if somebody imports rice and is not exempted we cannot compete favourably and the industry will not grow. That is why we said put VAT on those people who are just bringing those cereals inside Uganda so that we cannot be at the same footing. That is what it means and this is what the Prime Minister was yesterday explaining that we have to protect these people and put VAT on those. And if he can agree, we can go item by item as has been explained by the minister.

MS ABIA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. These proposals actually defeat government policy in the sense that this country realised that the plan for modernisation of agriculture was the arching policy frame work. How do you modernise agriculture if you cannot mechanise it? And now we want to tap machinery. There was a letter written by the Uganda Seed Traders Association to the adviser of the president on agriculture and in here they have an in depth analysis of the impact of all this particularly tracks higher services and factor zoned look at the disturbing statistics, the lost production for small scale holders will be 56,000 metric tonnes and for medium will be 231,900 metric tonnes and for the commercial farmer will be 1,250 metric tonnes. 

Now, in a country that is first of all grappling with food insecurity - in the papers today you see the people in Karamoja are eating wild food, and we are talking about mechanising agriculture to modernise it. So, I find it disturbing that the minister would introduce a levy or even not allow that this be zero rated consumable in the production sector unless they deviate from the government policy. Then that is the only way as an institution, as Parliament, we should go by their proposals otherwise it is self-defeating.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, my voter hon. Bako is still continuing with the other big debate we had yesterday but according to your guidance, you gave that even the committee does not have enough time to interrogate these measures that government has brought. So the government had conceded because we cannot quantify all those measures here. The government had conceded on (e) in paragraph (e) so once we bring back another debate on machinery and (h) on cereals, we will go back to the bigger debate that we had yesterday. So, Mr Chairman, you had proposed that we only confine ourselves to seed which government has ceded on and then we pass the rest of the paragraph, because hon. Amongi has just brought up this new measure on machinery. If we have ceded on 9 billion on salt, what about machinery? Machinery according to the ministry is in the range of 30 billion plus so what are we doing to the side of revenue that shall again fund the whole budget? So, I think we are moving properly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that let us go one by one because it may be easier. So in the proposal which is coming and has been agreed already is that (e) should be deleted from the Bill. Is that correct and agreed to? And (e) is on fertilisers, pesticides and hoes. Okay, that one is settled. 

Now on (f), is there anything? The committee amendments is proposing to remove what is in the law and replace it with the supply of cereals where the cereals are grown or milled in Uganda. That is what the committee is proposing to change.

MR SSEBUNYA: What the committee is proposing to change is to remove the word, “produced” but otherwise, the whole – okay, the committee is proposing that we substitute (f) with the following, “The supply of cereals where the cereals are grown or milled in Uganda.” And remove the word, “produced”. But what hon. Kakooza was saying is that we remove it and put it in the third schedule.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, please.

MR SSEBUNYA: Okay, it is to stay but have the word “produced” removed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, all that the committee is proposing and I will help the House to understand, is to delete the word “produced” from the Act. That is what they are proposing.

MR EKANYA: But that is now (f).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is (f) and I thought that is where we are.

MR EKANYA: Do I have a wrong Act because (f) says, “The supply of cereals where the cereals are grown and milled....” Oh, “produced” is very faint in my book – “in Uganda.” It is very faint, Mr Chairperson and you can see. 

But the challenge that we asked Government, and I wish that the Prime Minister was here, is that we just asked the COMESA Free Trade Area and the EAC. But the challenge that we are going to have is that cereals imported from Malawi, Egypt, South Africa – this COMESA area, are going to flood the market and yet the cost of production in this country is very high and it will even create unemployment and even the revenue that Government expects will go down. 

I do not know why the Prime Minister and Government in particular is taking action counter to the decisions that you agreed to in COMESA and the EAC.

MR KAKOOZA: Information. This matter was debated in the committee and we agreed that we be honest to each other and Ugandans. If you are growing millet and some people are importing – you want to manufacture it here and he does not have tax, will you be at the same level? The cost will be high and that is why the minister is saying that let us reinstate VAT on these people who are importing so that you encourage me who is growing and I think that is why the committee took that stand. We said that if one is growing rice in Uganda, then that person cannot be on the same level with somebody who is importing free in the free market and there is no tax and yet we cover the same footing in trading – that person will be cheaper than me who is growing and I will not produce. 

So, we are saying that let this be the starting point by putting VAT to encourage and protect me who is employing people. I am encouraged because I am investing money there and this is what it means and this is what the minister submitted during the budget speech.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I have a technical problem. I do not know what the text of what is in the Value Added Tax Act is – the actual text.

MR SSEBUNYA: The new information that I have been given here is –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, I am talking about the text of the Value Added Tax Act, CAP 349. What does it say?

MR SSEBUNYA: Let me read the current one. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is only one Act.

MR SSEBUNYA: The Act reads, “The supply of cereals where the cereals are grown and milled in Uganda.” The information is that it was already removed and by last year, this word “produced” had already been removed. In the previous measures that we did last year, we removed the word “produced”. So the Act now reads, “The supply of cereals where the cereals are grown and milled in Uganda.” If that is what we want to change, it is already changed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that is what you were proposing. That is the entire purpose of your amendment.

MR SSEBUNYA: So, we leave it as it is.

MR NIWAGABA: As a matter of fact, when you look at their proposed amendment, it tends to allow milling of imported cereals. As long as we import the cereals and you mill them from here - because the words are “grown or milled” So, I may mill the cereals that have been imported and that will defeat the purpose. I believe the Act, as it has been read, should be retained.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let me have the member for Rubanda and then I come to you.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Actually to the best of my recollection, this matter was discussed extensively in the committee last financial year and our debate was always surrounding on how we protect people who are growing their cereals here from competition. 

The original proposal was that those who are growing their cereals from here should not pay VAT. But when we were considering the proposals for this year, the only tool that we used was this reprint on the Income Tax Act, CAP 340 and the Value Added Tax Act, CAP 394. What is provided in this Act is that (f) reads, “The supply of cereals where the cereals are grown, milled or produced in Uganda.” 

As a committee we said, “No.” Our original proposal of protecting our local producers from foreign competition must be reinstated and that is how we came up with the idea of removing “produced”. But now from my brother’s insight, being a lawyer, he also says that when we retain “milled”, it means that our objective shall be defeated and, therefore, I would like to propose that we amend it to read as, “Supply of cereals where the cereals are grown in Uganda.” 

MR EKANYA: What does that mean? That it will attract VAT.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also want to concur with my brother from Rubanda, hon. Musasizi. We were given the law we are using by the Ministry of Finance. If what you read is true that the text of last year says “Grown and milled in Uganda” that is good enough. This is because if you say “Or milled” somebody will bring wheat from out and mill it and will not pay. So if the law we have is saying “And” then we have no problem but if it is not, as my brother said, we would only amend “Grown and milled” in Uganda.

MR EKANYA: I thought the view of hon. Nandala-Mafabi and some of us was to protect the cereals grown here from VAT. Now the Bill is proposing to repeal it and when you repeal then it will attract VAT because once you repeal (f), you delete it from the Act and you are moving it to the Second Schedule and so it will attract taxes, which will have to be paid. I thought the idea of Government and all of us was to protect the cereals grown here.

Last year, we deleted the word “Produced” but the word “Grown” remained. If you want to protect local farmers here, we need to delete the word ‘grown’. When you delete the word “Grown” only and leave it at zero rated, by repealing it from here -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSONs: Honourable members, let us have the chairman.

MR SSEBUNYA: The information I want to give the House is that we have uploaded the Act on the iPad so that is the current Act, which is on your iPad. I think I would go with hon. Musasizi’s amendment for the intention we wanted to achieve, which is to say that the supply of cereals, where the cereals are grown in Uganda and we stop there. We do not add the word “Milled” because somebody will take advantage and bring in seeds and then mill them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the worry here is if you use the word “or” you separate. If you use the word “And”, you make them together. Then nobody can bring cereals from outside. The law is saying “Grown and milled”. You cannot bring it from outside and that is what the law actually says now.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman, I was trying to catch up, I am not sure I have caught up yet but the law as it is now in the Act actually handles cereals grown and milled in Uganda because it does not have produce produced as has been pointed out. That is the current law.

Now the Bill is proposing to repeal that so that it actually attracts VAT. That is the idea. The reasons of course are as we said yesterday, to raise revenue. Secondly, to stop subsidising large millers through not charging them VAT but refunding the VAT they pay through the inputs. Yesterday we talked of inputs; you know the electricity and water because there is VAT there. If you do not do this, they will not have the opportunity to claim it –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and my brother Prime Minister for giving way. If it is zero rated, it means you claim your input tax so this is good for our local millers. What happens is the electricity and water they will pay will be claimed because output would be zero but inputs would be (x) amount of money so they will claim to get their VAT. If you take it to exempt then they will never claim it. That is why we are –

Now what this law is trying to say - I want the Prime Minister to listen to me. What we are trying to put in the law is that those who import wheat and come and mill it or those who bring rice from Pakistan should pay VAT at 18 percent. We are removing it from zero rated to standard -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Right honourable, are you still holding the floor?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I do not know if this was distributed but the amendment seeks to reintroduce VAT - I think seeks to reintroduce zero rating, isn’t it? Now if that happens - you know this is for wheat grown from outside. This would mean that we would lose revenue of up to Shs 36 billion. So that - (Interruption)

Mr Chairman, I am happy to take more information so that I am speaking on -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to thank my brother again. The true story is if you put it un-milled, that is when you will donate the Shs 36 billion you are talking about because the people from out will bring it and mill and because it is zero rated, they will not pay so you will donate that.

What we are trying to say is that for those you are importing, if you maintain what you are saying; grown and milled in Uganda, it means you are now saying the one, which will attract zero percent is the one locally grown. That means the one imported is at 18 percent.

I know maybe somebody has advised you because the word ‘or’ was the one bringing a problem but since we have deleted it and put ‘and’, the Shs 36 billion will go nowhere but will come to the coffers.

MR KAKOOZA: Regarding what the Minister of Finance read to us in the Budget speech, she said termination -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have gone past that stage, we are here.

MR KAKOOZA: I move that you put the question because it is supporting Government.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That was three or four months back. We are here.

MR KAKOOZA: But this is a tax measure, which was spoken and we are supporting it. I do not see why the government is objecting to it. This is what we are saying; that the tax measure, which was put to generate revenue on cereals and supplies is okay. That is why the committee supported it.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, we need to understand.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, this is where we are. (Members rose_) Let me first explain where we are. The law, as it is now, says the supply of cereals, where the cereals are grown and milled in Uganda will be zero rated and will not attract VAT; that is what the law says. Government is saying now, that should be repealed so that the supply of cereals where the cereals are grown and milled in Uganda attracts VAT.

That is the issue. That is what the government is proposing. The explanation from the honourable member for Budadiri West is that when you leave it like this, you are protecting – honourable members, when you leave it in the Bill the way it is, then the local growers and millers who mill what they have grown are protected. When you leave it in the Bill as it is, the local growers who mill what they have grown will be protected from VAT.

But the people who bring it from outside will not be protected, they will pay. What the proposal from the government is now saying is that no, let those who bring it from outside and those growing locally and milling their own products pay VAT. (Interjections) That is what is being proposed.

Honourable minister, is that the position?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I think what the chairman is saying is actually what I had said earlier, that the current law zero rates and therefore no VAT. The current proposal is to introduce VAT, simply put and I gave the reasons.

This question which my young brother hon. Nandala- Mafabi is saying – my response to this would be, this is what I am advised, I want to be sure that we will understand it, and that I even understand it well myself.

When you refund tax paid on inputs, the inputs, the electricity, the water, all these things, that they pay where there is VAT already, when you refund that tax in effect you are subsidising, that is receiving VAT back but actually not paying on the final product. For example, a miller will pay VAT on packaging materials, on electricity, on warehouses, transport, advertising, phone calls but the maize produced will not be charged VAT. Instead the VAT on inputs will be refunded by URA. You get the point?

So, in effect, you are subsidising, that is the logical conclusion of what I am saying. Do you have any reason to disagree?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think the minister will understand. The prime minister is my big brother, who ran away, he knows why he ran away. 

We want to take two scenarios so that we understand what we are putting in perspective. Nandala produces wheat and mills it in Uganda. In the current law, it means the cost of my mill which I will sell out will not include VAT, because the moment it is unallowable, it means it will not be part of my cost of production. The VAT on electricity, water and other things.

Now, you have Imam Ssebagala who imports. For him, when he imports, when he enters with rice, they will charge VAT and when he is going to sell, it will charge VAT. So, it will be slightly more expensive under normal circumstances than mine who has done it locally and this means you will promote people to grow more rice or wheat in Uganda.

But if you take what my brother is saying that we all have 18 percent, this is what will happen. It means I will charge 18 percent on all my inputs they will be charged as my input and when I sell, I will also put 18 percent. Now, there is no difference that now all of us are being taxed if the production costs were constant, nobody would go and import because we would be at par. But where there is massive production like in Pakistan, China or America, then I will be outcompeted because we are being treated in the same bracket. Now, zero-rated means that I am tasked but at zero rate, it means I claim my input tax.

Now, we are saying the one who imports and mills here, he will be taxed at 18 percent - [Honourable members: “He claims”] he claims it? Yes, that he will claim his input and he will be put at 18 percent. The only advantage you have over him is the 18 percent which is put on his output. But for me, I will be at zero.

So, the advantage is that you will promote local production instead of importation. That is what it means. So, if you say you want to put them at equal level, then you are in a big problem. What will happen; you are going to have more rice from out, more wheat from out and these people who grow it locally will immediately go out of the business.

MR EKANYA: I would like to supplement that information, Mr Chairman, and I also want to find out under the East Africa common external tariff. What stopped, because here we are talking about grown and milled which we want to repeal - suppose, like what hon. Nandala has said, somebody brings rice which has already been milled, I put my mill just in Malaba or Busia Kenya and I bring it here already packed because in Kenya, just like we know, the cost of power is low, or I grow it in Bugisu like you know, Mr Chairman, wheat is grown in Sebei but it is grown in Kenya and then it is brought here, and then you have another farmer who mills his in Sebei.

The point, if we are taking Government position, is that the person who mills his wheat in Sebei is more expensive and will be severely punished. So, people will move their milling machines across and if they move it across it will mean the feeds that we badly need here will have to be imported. And if we introduce VAT on feeds, we will have to import but also pay VAT, which will be double taxation and which might kill the animal industry including job opportunities. So, Government needs to come up with a good proposal.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, first I would like to state that really our interest is to see how to improve agricultural production in Uganda. So, we should not legislate to discourage production. But the way I see things moving – very vivid explanations have been given. Simple explanations aimed at promoting production have been given; they are aimed at saving the local farmer.

I have listened for quite a while – a number of times you even called on the Minister of Finance to make a comment on what is obtaining on the Floor. I have no doubt that technical Prime Minister – I don’t want to doubt his competences – but somehow, I think it would be proper for us to hear from the Minister of Finance who owns this Budget so the Prime Minister can only come in to back it up. But I can see that all the ministers from the Ministry of Finance leaving the battle to the Prime Minister yet I thought they would be more active in this regard to appreciate what the Members are saying. So, I am wondering why ministers from the Ministry of Finance leave it to the Prime Minister –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, what is the procedural point?

DR EPETAIT: The procedural point is why does Ministry of Finance just leave the matter to the Prime Minister yet the ministers are present in the House?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The honourable member for Ngora County, I am sure at this point you are dying to hear the voice of the hon. Maria Kiwanuka, but there is way they function as Government. So, we cannot compel anybody to speak just like I cannot compel you to speak. I cannot compel the Minister of Finance to speak. But when speeches are required on behalf of Government, they know how to do it and they are doing it and the Prime Minister still had the Floor.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to also thank my brother for the commendation. As I said yesterday, Mr Chairman – first of all, I actually think that we are all aiming at the same objective; I have no doubt about that. The question is: how do we do it and we are saying one way may actually ultimately not lead to the objective we so desire.

So, as I said yesterday and as you all know of course, VAT is a consumptive tax; it is never used to protect production. It is for revenue generation. And someone who is registered for VAT claims VAT incurred on inputs and so he incurs no tax burden but passes it on to the final consumer. That is what we have been talking about since yesterday. But a person not registered for VAT, but buys inputs that VAT rated at 18 percent, actually absorbs that 18 percent. Don’t we agree on that?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So, it becomes a cost of production. Doesn’t it? So, the cardinal principle is that tax is paid at the place of consumption and this applies to all goods and services whether imported or produced locally. The idea that imports will be cheaper by imposing VAT therefore is not logical – (Interjections) yes, I am just using logic now.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Mr Chairman. Most of the rice consumed in Uganda is grown in my district, Iganga and Butaleja districts –(Interjections)– Kanungu grows very little; we grow most of it. May be 70 percent of the rice grown in Uganda is grown in those three districts and Kibimba Rice Scheme is in my constituency. A lot of people in Bugiri District depend on rice for income generation not for consumption and they have been complaining about the cheap rice from Pakistan and Vietnam because their cost of production is higher. I mean the cost of production for local rice in Uganda is higher. Yet most of the farmers are not registered for VAT because they are small operators.

Therefore, if we levy VAT on their rice and whatever they use, they will have to absorb it, meaning we are going to have the rice grown in Uganda more expensive. For that reason, it is logical that if we are to protect them and we want to stimulate production of such a crop, we should only levy this tax on imported rice. This will help us to protect the small-scale producers in Bugiri, Iganga and Butaleja districts. 

Mr Chairman, some time last year, this Parliament approved a loan, under food security and part of that loan was to assist those peasants I have talked about to grow rice in a more advanced way. But up to now, that scheme hasn’t started and yesterday, when I met a person from the Ministry of Agriculture, I was told that one of the private investors from Kibimba had given up and that the scheme could be collapsing. I am giving all this information because I would like the Prime Minister and his Government to appreciate that we don’t need to levy tax on our local small-scale producers; we only need to levy it on imported cereals. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: But that is the point. You see I am saying that VAT can never be used for purposes of protection; it can’t. You know protection is granted through, as honourable Nandala Mafabi knows very well, import duty; isn’t it? And at the moment, maize flour from outside Uganda actually attracts 60 percent import duty that is to protect our local production. So the way you protect local production is not by VAT.

MS BAKO: Mr Prime Minster, a letter that was addressed to an adviser of the government, gave this example; that a commercial farmer claiming VAT will have to charge this VAT on his sales to fill and therefore can he compete with the small holder? And if the small holder for informal sector sells let’s say the cereals at Shs 700, the commercial farmer needs to sell at the same price. But with VAT, you will have to sell at a low rate meanwhile claiming the input cost at 30 to 40 percent in effect. This farmer or business man will be selling at Shs 635 something that you grow in the production chain for nine months. We don’t have records to justify your government’s claim because if, for example, the ministry of finance together with the URA told us as Parliament that for the last five years, the input refund amounted to this and we have seen progress in production and therefore this becomes a viable tax area, then we would agree. But when we do this, the transfer of the VAT on the final products in essence is introducing into the economy food inflation because you are bringing in cereals from out, the cost of production here is high, you are actually by essence reducing the acreage under production and you are pushing in food inflation. Is that what you want? Are you better off with your food inflation at play or you depart with this tax?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have asked my brother - he had agreed. Mr Chairman, I want to do my second last demonstration, but before I do that, on consumption, Mr Prime Minister, you are right. VAT is a consumption tax; it is the last consumer who pays it. If he pays and the commodity is very expensive; of course the price determines the demand and supply. So the moment the price is high, the demand will go down and the moment the demand goes down the production goes down. 

Secondly, if you import goods, you will need foreign exchange. You will need it to be able to import, and it is very bad for a country to rely on importing food because food is a must. The moment the import bill of food is high, that means your forex is in danger. Having said those, how do you determine production? 

In Uganda, production is by hoe/hands, so our method of production we can say still rudimentary. And because it is rudimentary, you will produce little because when you use rudimentary methods you produce little. And when you produce little, when you are putting more energy, you cost it very expensively. But for America, Pakistan and others, they use machinery and the moment you are using machinery, you will do mass production, which means you will satisfy your local demand and the excess must be exported. When you are exporting, you put in two considerations. If the demand is low, you would rather export it at a lower price than leaving it to rot and that is what is happening. That is why in Senegal, they have refused to import products because they fear that it is making cost of production high and they are eating medicine, drugs and whatever. 

The one I wanted to demonstrate now is this; I want to say; assuming I am a local and honourable Ssebagala is an importer, assuming our costs of production margin is Shs 10,000, the VAT at 18 percent will be 1,180 then I have no comparative advantage over the person who is importing maize grown with machinery. But if you give me at zero percent, hon. Ssebagala will be at 1,180 and I will be at 1,000. So if am at 1,000 it means the demand for my locally produced maize will be higher. And when it is higher, there is no reason why my brothers who grow maize could not grow because the demand is higher and they are no longer interested in imported maize. 

The reason we are raising this, Mr Prime Minister, is to help you produce jobs because imported rice will be cheaper than locally produced rice due to rudimentary methods and mechanisation and you are even making it worse in Uganda by saying that you even want to tax a tractor - you are going to make it even more expensive.

MR SSEBUNYA: Hon. Mafabi, for us to put this matter in perspective, much as you are using examples of the small millers, we should also use the example of big millers like Maganjo and Kibimba. That means that Kibimba is also claiming to be local and at the end of the day does claim input VAT and once he claims input VAT that means he is eroding our treasury at the same time the government is not collecting revenue. So we have to put the two in perspective. He is also claiming to be local, so we must have a balancing act that once you are being protectionist to our local farmers, we must also know that there are bigger entities that are not favoured.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to thank my chairman but I will explain.

MR KAKOOZA: Chair, if we people have iPads, let’s take a destination principle, as the prime minister has said. A destination principle is a concept of international taxation which allows for VAT to be retained by the country where the tax product is being sold and they are collected on imports and rebated on exports. That is what it means; that if I collect VAT on imports, me who is producing locally not until I export but by then not getting VAT on me who is producing in Uganda, I am making my product cheaper providing employment and I will not be at the same competitive advantage as somebody who is importing and the tax is collected there. This is what it means and this is what we are saying, this is what hon. Mafabi is saying; that please, let us collect money from these people because even in the budget it was a tax measure. So, I do not see why you waste a lot of time.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My Chairperson raised a very important point. He is saying what about these – we are talking about Kibimba. Incidentally, for VAT registration, you must be having an income of Shs 50 million and above. So the small millers we are talking about are not the ones we are telling here like the ones of Busage and Busamaga. No, they are not the ones. But we are talking about Kibimba that has out growers. Are you getting it? What it means is that Kibimba does not produce all of it and must get from the out growers and for these out growers, the moment you make the rice very expensive, you will discourage them from growing. So my chairperson, I wanted you to understand that. Even for Maganjo, the maize is from –(Interjections)– yes, if you have understood that, then I want to conclude like this. 

Mr Prime Minister, the moment we agreed to say that cereals grown and milled in Uganda, you are not going to refund Shs 36 billion which would have been on imported wheat. What has been happening is that the imported wheat, you have been refunding Shs 36 billion. Now what is going to happen is that you are not going to refund Shs 36 billion and you are even going to increase because whoever will have to eat that rice, will add another 18 percent and you are going to increase this by another Shs 10 billion and you will make Shs 46 billion from the imported cereals. But for the local ones, you are going to promote production and the remaining, you are going to export and when you export, you are going to get forex and you are also going to save forex for import because everybody would prefer to consume fresh maize, rice and everything else fresh than the other one that has drugs and that is the reason we are saying that this proposal is very good and good for the people of Uganda.

MR OMACH: Thank you. The proposal of the committee was to the effect that the supply of cereals where the cereals have been grown and milled in Uganda be removed from zero rating and taxed 18 percent - (Interjections)- [HON. MEMBER: “It is the other way round.”]

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is the Bill saying?

MR OMACH: We are saying that this was being zero-rated and now we are moving it away from there so that they pay the tax. The only thing that the committee was saying was that instead of putting the word “or”, we could remove the word “or”. Now this was already amended the last financial year under Schedule 3. So, all  that is being done is to remove it from being zero-rated and therefore, whoever is going to import or produce and mill here, will be paying a VAT of 18 percent. 

As the Prime Minister has said, VAT is a consumption tax and through this measure, we expect to generate revenue of up to Shs 36 billion. So the chairperson of the committee said that this was a typing error that they were trying to correct and we have agreed with that position –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, from the time we discovered that the committee was proposing what is in the Bill, we have already dispensed with the report of the committee. What we are debating now is – because what the committee is proposing is what is in the Bill and in fact what is in the Act is better than what the committee was proposing. This happened because the committee did not have the final text of the Act that is in force and so we have finished with that. So what we are debating now is your own proposal and that is what is in the Act and what we are clear about is the one that should be repealed. The implication is exactly what you have said. 

So, we leave the committee report out because it is not an issue anymore and what is an issue is the proposal in the Bill and so deal with it, just the Bill. 

MS AMONGI: Hon. Minister, just one minute. I can see that the old committee report amending clause 4 also proposes the deletion of (f) and (g) and yet (f) is also on cereals. So, I think that if you look at the committee report, they still deal with the deletion of (f) and (g) and I had spoken on (g) which is agricultural implements and if they are also proposing (f), it is cereals as it is in the Third Schedule and the minister had conceded on (e) which was on pesticides and so on. Which means that even if we dispense with it, in starting a new paragraph (c), we still have to deal with the amendment of the committee in (b).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, that is exactly what we are doing. We finished with (e) because we agreed and we are now on (f).

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. First of all, for the information of the august House, Uganda has a 60 percent import duty on imported cereals and this is to protect our local producers. Even in our last meeting of the EAC Finance Ministers, I strongly defended and retained our position against an onslaught by some of the other countries that wanted us to reduce our import duty from 60 to 35 percent.

Secondly, as has been said, several times already, at least while I have been here, zero rating refers to a situation in which the rate of tax applied to the sales is zero but credit is still given to the taxes paid on the imports and so right now, as the Prime Minister said, you are subsidising the grain producers of Uganda on their VAT paid on utilities, for instance. The Government account reduces to zero every year and it is not Government income but transfers from one area to another.

Thirdly, VAT is designed to tax domestic consumption exactly as we have been talking in the last two weeks to raise domestic revenues for our domestic purposes. When we look at the millers, we mentioned the big millers but there is also the small miller. Any person that gets an income of Shs 50 million and more per year must register for VAT. Even when you look at your small millers, any miller producing at least 1,000 kilogrammes of flour for instance in a month, should be liable for VAT as it encourages them to keep books and become part of the formal economy. What they pay in VAT, they can collect back from the Government. The millers are small and medium sized business people and not peasant farmers.

Mr Chairperson and hon. Members, again I remind you of the various producer surveys that we have done. What do the producers of Uganda want most from the Government? The first four items are identical across the years and across the countries of Africa. They want all weather roads, reliable power supply, piped water to their premises and the workforce to work in their factories and enterprises. That is similar to what the Government has been trying to do since this administration started; infrastructure and human skills development. Let the producers of Uganda contribute to what they want from the government.

Lastly, Mr Chairman and honourable members, we have also been looking at prices of processed cereals; imported and domestic. If I was a domestic producer, I would not charge one shilling less than what the imported cereals are charging. I do not do cost plus, no. I do sales price comparative. They are pricing at the rate of the imported cereals, not because that is what they have to do but because that is the profit margin and in that margin, there is ample room for them to charge VAT, remit it to the government and do their paper work for the refunds. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is the -

MS KIWANUKA: So Mr Chairman and honourable members, I request that you support the government position on this issue.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us first get this clear. There is 60 percent import duty on imported cereals that is rice, flour, whatever is brought. There is already wheat, all those. There is 60 percent import duty. That I am sure is correct coming from the Minister of Finance. So the purpose of the tax –(Interjections) - no, I am just trying to bring these things together so that we see how to proceed with this because this point has been made before.

The issue is VAT therefore on these issues would not be to protect the local producers because there is another 60 percent import duty, which is specifically to protect the local producers and millers in this country. The minister says VAT, and this has been said by the Prime Minister also, is meant to get this category of producers and millers of a certain rank who meet the VAT threshold so that they can contribute to raising the money that will produce the things they deserve or want for their factories to run. 

That is where we are now. So it is no longer just for protecting our local market because that is already done. Our local producers are protected by the import duty imposed on imported things. So how do we proceed from here, honourable members?

MR ODONGA OTTO: My economics is getting rusty after leaving university ten years ago. I would like to find out. If import duty is to protect - yes, I studied Economics and Political Science. I just want to understand, if the import duty of 60 percent is to protect the local market, can the Minister of Finance help us to know why as of now the rice from Pakistan is still entering the market cheaper than that produced in Bugiri? If we could only understand that aspect, we could easily buy your argument. Could you, honourable Minister of Finance just help me on that?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please handle that one.

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As I mentioned earlier, when people are setting their prices, they do not just go cost plus. They go to what will the market bear. Secondly, when you get some very inefficient local producers, they can also pass their costs on to you. So a high cost does not necessarily mean that, that is where that person has to operate at. They can improve and if someone charges a domestic product at the same level or higher than an import, it means that they are gauging that that is what the market can take.

Thirdly and unfortunately, we do have that spectre of smuggling. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman and colleagues, I would like to give information to my brothers, hon. Wafula Oguttu and hon. Nandala-Mafabi, on the question of prices, which in a way ties in with the question that has been raised.

You see the effect of VAT on the price of say rice, which is produced locally - the VAT then will be on cost of production in Kibimba, Butaleja or Bugiri. So if it is let us say Shs 1,000 per kilogramme and you put an 18 percent VAT as hon. Nandala-Mafabi was saying, then this will raise the price by Shs 180 so it becomes Shs 1,180. If imported and say the cost of production in Pakistan is Shs 800, here it is Shs 1,000 but in Pakistan it is lower; Shs 800. This will then attract that 60 percent import duty, which is to protect our producer locally. That means that this imported rice will come at a cost of Shs 800 plus the Shs 480, which is 60 percent of Shs 800 thus becoming Shs 1,240. So even then it will be more expensive than the Ugandan rice.

This is before you have applied the 18 percent. If you put the 18 percent on Shs 1,240, which will be the new price of the imported rice from Pakistan, the cost will rise to Shs 2,281; almost twice. So when you do the calculation - I think we will have to go to the market and find out because there may be other factors but when we are addressing the question of VAT and the impact it will have on prices here - that is what we are addressing and of course as we all know, since the reading of the budget, the market has acted as if the measures that were read are the new tax measures so they have been applying them and that is why I was saying yesterday that for instance on kerosene, we will have to refund more than Shs 2 billion because that has been collected.

The information we have from UBOS, which has been analysing the market prices both just before the budget and since the budget clearly shows the following: rice per five kilogrammes has risen from Shs 8,472 to Shs 8,586, which is an increase of only 1.3 percent. Maize flour per five kilogrammes has risen from Shs 3,278 to Shs 3,297, which is an increase of only 0.6 percent.

MS BAKO: Mr Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance clearly- Can I get your attention? The Minister of Finance said that one of the concerns is actually smuggling, which directly implies tax evasion. 

Two, from hon. Odonga-Otto, you realise that the import levy has not helped the domestic market and therefore the domestic consumer.

From hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you gather that the big players that we are talking about that are VAT compliant are actually pulling their supplies to be milled. From the recent statistics and information from the Mukwano production point down here in industrial area; they are producing vegetable oil only at 42 per cent because of lack of productive capacity of the country. Now you are quoting the situation of 5 kilograms declining or only increasing by 1.3 per cent.

Mr Prime Minister, this decline statistically is a very significant one for a population of about 37 million people. When you look at the 0.6 per cent that you are taking about, it is equally significant in actual terms because you are looking at it in percentage terms. It means that if you have Shs 500 and there is an extra increment of Shs 50, you have a big margin of people who are actually leaving consumption and coming down, either moving from maize or rice to lower foods. That is when your gift in economics comes in on giffen goods. You are taking people from a more healthy diet to a lesser healthy diet. That is what it means.

Mr Prime Minister, if you look critically at this proposal vis-à-vis the consequences, you realise that in essence you are scaling down production and you are pushing up food inflation. You are not looking at the small player through the lens of the other guy who has increased the scale because of an aggregation of the small supplier.

Therefore would you think that you still need to retain this position given the fact that the foods that you are talking about are actually being consumed mainly by our institution? And look at our production this year, for example. The entire North and East lost production because of a long spell of drought during the last season. This season we are losing out because of floods. So what do you think is going to be the most immediate impact of this imposition, and do you think it must still stand?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, for the last few days we have been here, hon. Maria Kiwanuka has said we now have common external tariff. This is very good. (Interjection)-Yes, I am seeking clarification from you, Rt hon. Prime Minister as a Leader of Government Business-(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My brother, thank you very much. I want to give information. I think the figures you have given of UBOS might be for some years back. The reason I am stating this- I am coming. I am worried about UBOS statistics. In Mbale, rice from Bunyole and part of Teso swamps is Shs 2500, which means times five is Shs 12,500. When you say Shs 8500, it means a kilo is Shs 1700. You know when you mention five kilos, you need to divide. It means a kilo of rice in the Kampala market is Shs 1700.


I want to tell you, Prime Minister that you need to go to the market now or make a phone call. The price of rice in Kampala is Shs 3000. I have seen somebody doubting. I am telling you I am from Mbale and it is Shs 2500. Here in Kampala, the lowest should be Shs 2500. For you to say it is Shs 1700 means the UBOS statistics are wrong.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay, I am not going to dispute that. That is now a question of fact but really as- First of all, our small holders are not able to meet the demand of the market. You know that very well. They do not.

Secondly as the honourable Minister of Finance said a moment ago, there is a tax threshold. If your production is less than Shs 50 million a year, you do not have to register for VAT, not so?Because our producers are small, they cannot meet the demand of the market and they cannot compete with the big ones. That is the problem. It is not VAT; it has nothing to do with VAT. You see – (Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much. I will go back to rice. Kibimba is the biggest player producing rice in Uganda; Kibimba rice scheme. It collects about 60 per cent of its rice from out growers; from those small producers around Bugiri. If you go to buy Kibimba rice - Before the taxes were in the category of rice, it was more expensive than imported rice. I will give an example that this Parliament approved a loan from the Arab Development Bank to improve rice growing in those areas and Kibimba is supposed to be a partner. 

Yesterday I was speaking with a gentleman from Ministry of Agriculture and I was telling him that money was approved six months ago so why hasn’t the rice scheme started? He told me that Kibimba has pulled out of the project because of taxes. So it means the tax is affecting domestic production.So my people will have nowhere to sell the rice if Tilda or Kibimba scales down its production. That is where the connection is, honourable Prime Minister.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Getting deeper into details will need more than just the exchange here. The only point I was making was that most of these small holders are actually not in the bracket of production that requires registration for VAT. We know that they cannot meet the domestic market demand, and as you know, they cannot compete with the big ones.

If what you are saying was the case, if we take trade as an example, this simple trading in consumer goods, why do we have supermarkets that pay tax; they pay VAT and they are big and thriving yet we have all these small shops, which don’t pay VAT? Why? You see, this is a business; it has nothing to do with status.

So, I really I thought –(Interjections)– I will give the Floor in a short while. So, my appeal to you, colleagues is this: we have already taken a decision on the activities we will carry out this year. We know how much money is required for us to conduct those activities. We are now looking at revenue. So, we will be causing an incredible imbalance if we keep reducing by saying for example, this Shs 36 billion off, Shs 8billion off – the budget will not balance and that will be a problem.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. For me, mathematics has never been my area and so I don’t even understand those things. But I have been jolted to try to respond because the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is trying to compare the issue of supermarkets and general business. I thought that it should be elementary for us all of us to know that the grain sector in agriculture, particularly rice is the most highly subsidised sector when it comes great economies; for example, you are looking at the USA, Pakistan, Canada and so on – the greatest subsidies in agriculture go into the grain sector and specifically rice. So, I thought that it would be improper for the Prime Minister to bring a comparison which is as specific as the proposal in the Bill.

By the time rice from those other economies gets to our markets here, the subsidies will have lowered the pricing to a factor of almost 5 per cent. That is what explains their ability even with the computation you previously did. It is because they bear the direct branch – up to 5 per cent the cost of production is taken own by their governments. So, the lea we are making here, Rt Hon. Prime Minister – I really would like you to have all the money we can give you to run this economy and support our people – but the plea we are making here is for the very survival of our local producers. 

The moment you expose them to those vagaries – because the other subsidies go beyond just the tariff – I understand the tariff is the import duty you talked about. But they go beyond that. The subsidies go right into the cost of production. So, the moment you expose them to that level, I can promise you, Rt. Prime Minister, many of those rice millers in Pallisa, Katakwi and wherever they are, will close shop and that will mean having more and more unemployed people. I hope that we need to proceed well aware that that is where we are heading.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, if I can –

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mt Chairman, allow make two quick comments. The issue of why supermarkets are picking up and people are abandoning shops is about something called demonstration effect. From Gulu, I have observed carefully that people feel that it is prestigious for one to move swinging a polythene bag showing that they have just been shopping from Ucumi Supermarket –(Laughter)– that it shows the person’s status to the extent that even when they go to the local market, they will still put what they have bought from those Ucumi polythene bag. (Laughter) Yes, because it shows that that person belongs to that class that shop from Ucumi. So, the argument of the Prime Minister cannot hold water here.

But what I am seeing is that the statement that the Prime Minister made is very serious. He has said that all these issues had been factored in the budget. So, any adjustments will adversely affect that budget. But then ask a rhetoric question: why did you come here? What is our role now? I need to know this because it looks like our hands are tied. If we make any slight changes, we will mess up the entire financial year and we are very sympathetic but we also have to represent the interests of our people. 

If I may provide an answer to that question, Mr Chairman, as you advised earlier next year, the procedure of Government consulting with Parliament even before the speech is made. That means we have to amend our rules to provide for that. Otherwise, it looks like today, we may have to swallow the bitter pill but someone should still answer me – if you already had provided for them from there, why did you come here to make us waste this time debating things that are already decided by some other people?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you know that we are not only making changes on the revenue side. We already made changes on the expenditure side too; we made them and they were big. But even before we made changes on the expenditure side, these provisions were supposed to do that. But now we are losing some of the provisions that were supposed finance the original expenditure framework that was proposed.

Now that we have increased the expenditure but at the same time reducing the revenue side, what will eventually happen? Both roles are played by us because while we have to approve the expenditure, we also have to approve the revenue side so that the two sides can balance.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, just one clarification to the Prime Minister. It is based on the information we got from the Minister of Finance. Under the EAC, we have the Common External Tariff on duty of imports. I hope that exempts imports from Kenya, Rwanda, Burundi and Tanzania. 

So, I don’t know whether the Government of Uganda has the capacity and ability – because you said that one of the problems we are facing is smuggling – that the Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi has a firm in Kenya and grows 20 tonnes of rice or mills or 100 tonnes of maize and adds it to the one of Pakistan but label them as grown in Kenya. What capacity do you have – because you know that common external tariffs are for good imported for outside the East African Region? But you have not answered one question relating to what will happen when we join the COMESA. In the Parliament of Malawi – like the honourable Alice Alaso said, MPs are discussing what tonnage of fertilizers have been given to their constituency? How about pesticides and seeds? 

But kindly answer me on what capacity you have to know that the rice, wheat, maize and other cereals that you will have declared to have come from Kenya, Tanzania is from Pakistan?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, it looks like you don’t have the Floor because –

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you for giving way, honourable member. Mr Chairman and honourable members, just a point of information for honourable shadow minister. What capacity do we have? We do have the capacity in Uganda National Bureau of Standards; they now test the DNA of the rice. What we need more of is the machinery and the equipment, and those are part of the principles that were in the budget. Rice has DNA and sugar has DNA, go to UBOS and they can taste it for you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it what is called geographic indication? On what matter do you rise?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am raising on a procedural issue which I want for your guidance. You were talking about balancing the act; the income and the expenditure.  You are right we must balance the income and the expenditure but what we are talking about is that if you are going to increase production, you must support the local producers. If you don’t, because you have a demand for food, we are going to import, and when you import, it is only those who can manage who will buy. Those who don’t manage won’t buy. And for society to be able to produce more, you need to be fed very well that is why food in America is cheap; food in Europe is cheap; food in China is cheap; it is because they want you to spend less money on food so that you can be healthy, then when you are healthy you go to work and produce more. When you produce more, you are taxed better. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you putting that in the context of short term medium term and long term.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes Mr Chair all of them are in context.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: All of these can happen in the short term?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman they do because if you don’t feed me well and I get stunted even for one day, tomorrow if you try to bring a lot of food I will fall sicker.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members let me see if we can make progress on these issues. I need to understand so that we can see if any concessions can be made. In sub clause 4 b) we have agreed on paragraph 1 (e); we are debating 1 (f); we still have (g). Can we hear what the government has to say on (g)? So that we see what the actual situation is. (g) Is supply in machinery tools and implements suitable for use only in agriculture? What is the situation from the government on this one? Are we going to have a lengthy debate on this one also so that I can prepare myself for a long hold?

MR OMACH: Chair, this came from honourable Betty and we have been having problems with machinery coming, some of which are not really related to agriculture so we are proposing to have what we would call a VAT deferment when the machinery arrive, they are looked at and agreed that these are agricultural machinery and therefore they should not pay the VAT. But as of now there has been a difficulty in administration where machinery are brought in and are cleared as being agricultural machinery when they are not. So the deferred VAT would cure this.

MAFABI: Mr Chairman, This clause provides that the supply of machinery tools and implements usable only in agriculture. It means when I bring my tractor-if I go to Ingsor, the VAT there is Zero. But what the minister is saying is that if I go now, I will be charged 18 percent; if you delete that and the tractor was USD 50,000 at 18 percent, you add on 9000; it will be USD 59,000 more expensive by about Shs 24 million.

For deferment, it means that you only delay payment but you will pay; so that cannot apply here. The best solution is that if they are zero rated, you need more tractors. And by the way Government is the biggest consumers of tractors because I remember they said every Gombolola must have a tractor; if you don’t then you make it more expensive. But also you are trying to promote more production. For somebody to produce using a tractor it must be slightly cheaper. If you make it expensive he will not do it; so deferment is not the right statement. We should maintain supply of agricultural machinery at zero rate so that the farmers can produce and we can leave the hoe. 

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I want to plead with the minister to accept this to remain at zero rate. The argument you are making can be dealt with administratively. You have just said that UNBS has capacity. I am very convinced that URA at Malaba and everywhere they are also having the same capacity to determine which machinery are specifically for agriculture. You are telling us the implementation has been difficult but you have not been able to determine whether or not this is an agricultural implement. But you are telling us that the capacity of the implementers is questionable even if you put it under deferment, what mechanism and criteria are you going to use to determine it under the scheme of deferment. 

If your policy is that we should zero rate and you are genuinely agreeing that the agricultural implements should be saved from paying tax let us delete it and you build a capacity and have a list of what constitutes agricultural supply. Honourable Kakooza had said earlier that in your statement you made it very clear during the budget speech that you will ensure that you protect agricultural implement but to leave it here also will be at the mercy of the person at the border whether they will defer or not. So I really beg that you concede on this so that we don’t have so much wastage of time on this matter. 

MR KATOTO: Mr Chairman, distinguishing between the agricultural inputs and non-agricultural inputs. The minister is telling us a lie. When you reach Malaba, they make sure that they verify each and every single item and sometimes these agricultural inputs are written on like tractors, hoes, and ox-plough. So there is no way you can tell this House that there is no capacity of distinguishing between agricultural inputs, and if you can even verify a small box like this and you even open what is inside, what about the big equipment? Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I think honourable minister, let me just plead with you. Look at our exports- colleagues you have the iPad-In the minister’s finance report, our export to the region mainly to Sudan and DRC. What are we exporting? Food. Now, you want to deny people the opportunity to bring tractors to produce food for export. I know that the minister will stand up to say, “We have manufactured goods from Mukwano and so forth.” But the leading export to South Sudan and DRC is food. We shall support you but we know that you shall not raise the expected revenue.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairperson, when you have deferred VAT on purchase or importation, you do not pay the tax. If you take the example of a tractor to be agricultural machinery you will not be surprised to find a tractor being used for transportation of people –(Interjection)– [MR EKANYA: “Where?”] Yes, the put a trailer or they use it for construction –(Laughter)– and so at the end of the tax period, the person who has imported this equipment reports himself or herself –

MS BAKO: Order.

MR OMACH: Which one? The left or the right? (Laughter)

MS BAKO: Mr Chairperson, the three Ministers for Finance seated here are totally aware of what is going on in the agriculture sector. They crafted what they called the Agriculture Credit Facility in Bank of Uganda and their target was the commercial and medium scale farmer but this facility has been abused and they know it very well. 

Now here they come to say that it is proper and in order to tax agricultural equipment aware of our basics in production and he is justifying this. Aware that he has also gone ahead to propose taxes on cereals, aware that 10.2 million Ugandans are food insecure. Is he therefore in order to insist on this levy without justification and the only justification being that there are loopholes in tax collection? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Members, to ask a tax collector whether their instance on collecting taxes is a rather difficult question to rule on because the tax person will use any opportunity to get more taxes and he will not be out of order. It is what the House finally decides that will rule. Please, hon. Members, we do not seem to have a common position on both (f) and (g) but we have common position on (e) and (h) and so we can retain those. We had agreed on clause 3 but there were issues that remained unfinished. From what the committee had proposed, we had already thought that we had finished. So at this time, I am going to suggest that we close for now so that we can finish clause 3 completely and the only thing that will be pending will be clause 4. Will that be proper?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On Clause 4? No please, we are coming back to clause 4 later. So can we go through the process of coming back to clause 3 and I hope that members know the procedure. Chair, you know the procedure of what I would like to do at the moment.  

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014” and has adopted clause 3 with amendments and passed sub-clause (4). I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Stop at clause 3, honourable minister.

MR OMACH: Stop. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the Report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, Clause 3 had some issues –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the motion you want to move is for recommittal and so how do we go about it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, recommittal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Move it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to move a motion that we recommit clause 3 to deal with some items as proposed as (d) in the report of the committee. This is where it says that we insert a paragraph immediately after paragraph (i) and (kk), the following new paragraph, “The supply of seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and hoes...” and also for repealing paragraph 1 (jj) of the VAT Act. The justification is that seeds and fertilisers are under Schedule II and (jj) was an issue to deal with VAT on bio-gradable packages so that the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by members for Aruu, Oyam South, the chairperson of the committee and member for Arua. Honourablemembers, I think that this issue was fairly clear that at the committee stage, we put the question at a general issue when we had not finished with two amendments that have been proposed by the committee. So, it was agreed that I now put the question to the motion of the recommittal. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker –(Interjections)– no, this is another one.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I raised the issue of (s). That (s) in the Bill was misplaced. Look at –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are recommitting Clause 3.

MR EKANYA: Yes, that is where I am. In the Bill, there is (s) and by repealing paragraph (s)but in Schedule II of the Act, which we are working on, there is no (s) unless I am advised otherwise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are recommitting then you can deal with it at committee stage. Is that okay? Have I put the question already? So please, Bills Committee Stage.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

Clause 3

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we passed -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please deal with the one we are recommitting. The one we did not handle is the one you are proposing.

MR SEBUNYA: Insert new paragraph (d) as follows: (d) by inserting immediately after paragraph (1)(k)(k) the following new paragraph: The supply of seeds, fertilisers and pesticides and hoes should be exempt from VAT.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to plead with my chairman that on supply of seeds, fertilizers, pesticides and hoes we delete it for the reason that it is already under Schedule III as zero rated. When you bring it here, you are treating it both as exempt and at the same time zero rated. So I wanted to plead with you that we delete it here to avoid the confusion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay so there is no proposal on that? Are you withdrawing that?

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I withdraw my proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, but there are still more amendments.

MR SSEBUNYA: Insert a new paragraph (d) as follows: (d) by inserting immediately after paragraph 3 the following new paragraph (4), the repeal of paragraph 1(J)(j) shall be deemed to have come into force on 1 July 2010. 

The justification is to rectify the error made by Parliament exempting these supplies from VAT in 2001 so that the supply of these materials then can be treated as taxable supplies to avoid disallowing input VAT and claiming refunds on the supply from URA. The proposal has no financial implications for Government.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, is that clear? Honourable minister-

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, we do not agree with the proposal that this amendment has no financial implications. The repeal of paragraph 1(J)(j) that shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1 July 2010 has financial implications.

Mr Chairman, this item of supply of bio-degradable packaging materials was exempted from VAT in 2010 and this was repealed in 2012 and it made such supplies VAT-able. The proposal by the committee to supply the VAT on the materials effective 2010 when in actual fact the law between 2010 and 2012 designated this item as exempt would create liabilities to both URA and the tax payers when they undertook their transactions well knowing that the law was in existence.

Retrospective application may also result into refunds from Government to the manufacturers of these materials, which has not been quantified nor budgeted for.

There is also evidence that the manufacturers of the bio-degradable materials charged VAT to their customers. So this could also set a bad precedence where people do not comply with the law as it is because they do not agree with theapplication and if such a law is subject to repeal then they do not fulfil their obligation when the law was still in place. So I appeal that the committee withdraws this proposed amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Again this needs to be put in context. Initially the bio-degradable packaging materials manufacturers were a taxable supply, it meant that they pay input tax and when they sell, they charge output tax. When they sell to someone who is going to issue packaging, he would also claim input tax on materials bought.

Now if you do not do that, it means when they came- I am raising this because a petition came to a committee and I was a member of the finance committee in 2010/2011 and I think an error was made, which everybody acknowledges and we need to resolve it.

What happened is if you bought your materials at Shs 1 million and we charge VAT at 18 per cent, it means we will charge Shs 180 as input tax. Now this manufacturer sells his materials to a company, which packs like Britannia for example, to pack sodas and biscuits. He will sell to him at Shs 1,200,000. He will again charge 18 per cent on that. That means you will have Shs 216,000 as output tax. What manufacturer A will do is to pass Shs 36,000 to URA because URA has already got Shs 180,000. When Britannia packs its biscuits and sells, the Shs 200,000 it paid as output tax becomes its input tax. Now it will also claim to have decreased the pain.

Now if you say it was exempt, it means the money, which Britannia paid; Shs 216,000 as input tax will be disallowed. Now it has to go to manufacturer A and say, I need my Shs 216,000. Manufacturer A will have to go to URA and say, I need Shs 216,000. In effect, everybody will demand. URA collected Shs 216,000 in error and it must repay it to the other person.

The other angle that will occur if you take it to exempt is that the Shs 180 this manufacturer paid in output tax will be part of cost of production. It will no longer be Shs 1 million but Shs 1,180,000. It means his cost of production was under claimed and he must now claim another Shs 180,000 meaning reducing profits, and youknow profits are subjected to corporation tax. Now, it means URA must reimburse corporation tax on the extra allowance a manufacturer will claim. If you do what you are saying now, as a committee, you are saying URA refunding corporation tax, the gymnastics of Britania going to manufacture the A to demand and manufacturer A going to URA to demand.

It is simple mathematics and I can tell you all of you can understand or we will help you to understand and know that the committee –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But honourable member, we have a technical problem with that proposal and this is- that clause was repealed already, it is not there. So, the only thing you can do to it is to reintroduce it and then repeal it, because there is nothing to repeal something which is repealed. You cannot act on something which is not there. You cannot give a non-existing anything status to exist by making it look as if it is still there, so, its repeal will take effect a few years back, because it is not there by an operation of an Act of Parliament, it is repealed already. There is no way you can bring it to life without re-enacting it.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we are saying that if we repealed it in 2012, the effective thing is that it should not have been there in 2010.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the thing is, it is not there, we repealed it already. It is not there, we treat it as if the place it occupied was empty, so, what are we backdating? Today, there is nothing there, so what are you backdating?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what I am saying to update is that we repealed this in 2012; it is not there, but it should have been, not in the first place even put there in 2010. (Interjections)– Mr Chairman –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have repealed it, it is not there. You cannot activate it and then repeal it again, because it is not there. The space that it occupied is empty, even when you look at these revised editions here, the cap 349, it says (jj) repealed. So, how do we give life to something that is dead, to make it live a little and then – let it die before that date? No. please, withdraw.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, given the advice, I think we withdraw the proposal because this man had already died I don’t know, in trying to resurrect him, it is almost impossible. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think then there was no amendment and there was no need for recommitting clause 3; so, is there another amendment on clause 3?

MR SSEBUNYA: Not on clause 3 but  -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: if it is not on clause 3, we came here on recomittal of clause 3 only.

MR SSEBUNYA: So, Mr Chairman, also, after we have finished clause 3, I want to us to go back a little on a new clause that we had wanted to insert- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In clause 3?

MR SSEBUNYA: We wanted to insert a new clause after clause2.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: A new clause?

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: but would we be properly constituted at a recomittal stage? No, it would not – we would have to come back properly at committee stage and then handle it at that level.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

5.25
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach); Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014” and looked at the recomittal of clause 3 and the recommittal amendment was withdrawn. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion that this House does consider recommitting clause 4 because there is an emerging consensus which we have been consulting extensively on and we thought we could use this emerging consensus to make changes especially on the issues of tax on agricultural equipment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that we will go back to committee stage for consideration of this Bill. That is the motion. It is seconded by member for Ayivu, member for Kole and the chairperson. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, in clause 4 we were looking at paragraph b, that is where we were and we agreed on (e) and (h) and the contention on (f) and (g). Honourable member who moved this motion, can you guide the House?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am making submissions only on agricultural equipment. I don’t know- that is number (g) at least the emerging consensus is that we were not yet agreed on the issue of cereal. I think some of these sensitive issues if we ponder them over, it can lead to huge speculation in the economy.

Now, the emerging consensus which others would agree with me, because we consulted here, is that by Government imposing taxes on tractors and other agricultural implements, it can give more opportunities to raise revenue to buy ox ploughs that our people need. Those who can buy tractors are the ones that can afford them and would want to do commercial agriculture. So, it would not be harmful for Government to get money from these commercial farmers.

In the circumstances, the consensus that emerged here is that we consider endorsing that particular provision in relation to agricultural equipment but we can continue engaging the minister on the issue of taxes on cereals. Mr Chairman, I beg to submit.

MR ATIKU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I seconded and supported the motion for the Committee of the whole House to resume and reconsider this matter for a reason.

On many occasions, along Kampala-Arua Road, particularly in Nwoya, Bweyale, Kigumba I have seen a lot of mechanised agriculture taking place. I have also seen companies hiring out tractors to people to open up their land. If you travelled through the park, you would see a lot of land opened and people are now doing large scale farming. 

All this has been happening within a short time. The tractor hire business has become a norm. Even where individuals would think of hiring human labour, they are opting to hire tractors. This means that the country is moving in the direction of mechanising the agricultural sector. So, levying taxes on agricultural machinery would, in one way or the other, help the country in embracing the current trends. So, for us to say that we should remove VAT on machineries that are going to be imported into the country is self defeating.

Secondly, for small-scale farmers, like in my area where land is subdivided, we would have opted for oxen and ox ploughs. Recently, the MPs from Karamoja and the Minister for Karamoja opted for ox ploughs rather than tractors. So, Mr Chairman, the basis for supporting this – (Interruptions)

MR SIMON ALEPER: Mr Chairman, it is not true that the MPs and the Minister for Karamoja rejected tractors. We specifically rejected the walking tractors. If you generalise, somebody may think that the Karimojong are against the idea of using tractors. We were specific on walking tractors. They had been given to women groups yet they require a muscular person to operate them. I thought that I should make that clear. 

Let me put it on record that Karamoja supports mechanised agriculture. We only rejected the procurement that was done without the consultation of the leadership and the local people. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman and honourable colleagues, this issue had been discussed, I thought exhaustively, and my sense is that we are in agreement. If I get it wrong, please tell me, but my sense is that we are in agreement that there should be no taxes on this equipment.

The Government, from the minister’s statement, is saying that in the past, there has been abuse. People bring in equipment under this label but they use it for something else. The proposal, therefore, is that to cure this practice, we should have deferred payment. This means that when you bring in your equipment, you actually do not pay tax until the next tax period, at which time you are required to prove that you actually used it for agriculture purposes and in which case, you will not pay taxes. Am I right? 

What is the problem then? Why should we continue debating? Is there any problem with the deferred payment? Procedurally, shouldn’t we focus on that particular point where we did not seem to have either consensus or even understanding, so that we can finish this?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has raised a procedural point. Honourable members, the amendment which has been proposed in clause 4 is an amendment to the third schedule of the principal Act, which is about zero-rated supplies. Under the zero-rated supplies, (g) still reads thus: “the supply of machinery, tools and implements suitable for use only in agriculture.” That is what is in the Act, which they are seeking to repeal for the reasons stated. 

The honourable member sought to recommit this back to committee stage to see if we could reach an agreement, because some consensus had been generated. He said that this (g) should remain repealed so that it should be subjected to tax. The additional information we are getting, however, is that this would be deferred tax. You could have equipment coming in, say a tractor, and you are subject to pay VAT on it and after a year, you file and say that this equipment was used for purposes of agriculture; in that case, you will not now pay the tax on it. However, if fail to prove that you used it for agricultural purposes, you pay taxes. That is what I have so far gathered on this matter.

Therefore, the procedural matter that was raised by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is: should we continue debating this matter when in his view it is clear that these taxes will not be imposed immediately? This would be a deferred tax measure, just to confirm that the purpose for which this instrument was imported is actually the purpose for which it is being used. So, he is asking whether we should continue debating this matter. 

If we are to come to an agreement on this matter, we might need to be clear about these things. We might need to be advised how deferred taxation operates so that the House can be persuaded that okay this is what will happen for this particular item falling under (g) then we will take a decision on this.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, technical clarification from the minister; what has happened is that you have the VAT Act, in the second schedule when we handle we have already repealed (h), it was also supply of machinery used for processing of agricultural or dairy products that was in second schedule. We have already repealed we did not take care of what the Prime Minister is saying, deferment of tax. Now we are in third schedule, the same is in (g). You get me; if you want us to go that way of deferment and put the right word, we have already left (f) we repealed it completely in second schedule. Now we are in third schedule, you want to introduce a word to have deferment. So we are going to have contradiction.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, that is why I said we have a clause we have to go to and it is about plant and machinery if you can read 34(8), VAT.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Section or what?

MR SSEBUNYA: The new proposal in the amendments we have in the report. The proposal will be on that section 34(8) which shall be “Notwithstanding sub section (1) the minister may by regulation prescribe the terms and conditions of payment of tax on plant and machinery.” That is the matter which the minister has been trying to explain about deferment. That will save us.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where is that amendment on the report? Honourable members, if you look on page 7 of the committee report on the top, proposed amendments, there is a new clause proposed. Amendment of section 7 of the Act; that is VAT, it is something else. Section 8 is registration.

The comment is proposing an amendment to section 7 and they are proposing two amendments; the first amendment in sub section (1) of section 7 - sorry section 8. It is on registration, is that what you want to amend?
 
MR SSEBUNYA: The amendment will be amendment of section 7 of cap 349 and in A, subsection (1) by inserting immediately after paragraph (b) the following new paragraph (c) which will read: “At the beginning of any tax period of more than three calendar months where there are reasonable grounds to expect that the total value exclusive of any tax of taxable supplies to be made by a person with the annual threshold set out in sub section(2)” and once we read the Act in sub section (2) it will be the annual registration  threshold of Shs 50 million and that is sub section (2). Then we shall go to (b) by inserting immediately after sub section(5) which will read, “The registration under section (c) of sub section (1) of section 7 shall be valid only for purposes of assessing terms and conditions of payment of tax on plant and machinery as provided in 34(8)” and that is plant and machinery; 34(8) is where they say that “Notwithstanding sub section (1) the minister may by regulation prescribe the terms and conditions of payment of tax on plant and machinery.” The minister can now explain the new measure that Government has put in place.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The information I can give is that acting under the powers given to her by sub section (8) of subsection 34 - the one he has just read. The minister put in place regulations titled VAT (deferment of tax on plant and machinery) Regulations 2013 which specify the procedures for accessing VAT deferment. Are you with me?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It looks like the law I have with me does not have that.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So acting under powers conferred upon her by subsection (8) of section 34 of the VAT Act - currently, a taxpayer can utilise what they call deferred payment because this is contained in the VAT (Deferment of Tax on Plant and Machinery) Regulations of 2013. This is the information that I wanted to give you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I hear from the chairperson of the agriculture committee?

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the very critical question that we still have is whether we should adopt the proposal of zero-rated equipment or the deferment as is being proposed by the minister. I think that we need to first clarify on that. 

As the agriculture committee, the best option would have been, and we also proposed this in our report, to have zero-rated tax on the importation of equipment. However, if there is abuse and there is need for total registration of all the machinery that we have, and there will be strict monitoring of their untilisation, then we can go in for deferment, because we also need revenue to help the sector grow. 

Deferment is a stopgap measure that would help us utilise those machines and make sure that production is heightened. Those who abuse this should continue to pay the required taxes. I concede on the option of deferment, if it will be well protected and utilised. I thank you. 

MR KATOTO: Mr Chairman, if they can fail to know at the border before this machine enters Uganda that it is an agricultural input, how would they distinguish that it was actually used for agricultural purposes rather than for other purposes? How will they distinguish because now they cannot verify that this is an agricultural input at the point of entry? So, how will they put in place measures to make sure that at least it was used for agricultural purposes? How will they know?

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think it is up to all of us as responsible citizens. We are grappling - I have colleagues who intend to import tractors and they were totally against the over Shs 18 million they will be paying on top of the over Shs 100 million that the tractor would cost with all the implements. 

However, if we can make returns, if we can make sure that we have institutions within the agricultural sector and the local authorities that would monitor, then I think it can be possible. Let us not say zero-rated outrightly because we need resources as well; we are in a dilemma and we need to balance our budget. 

So, we can allow for importation and then deferment and if you do not comply or respond, automatically we can have a tracking mechanism which will give details of the instrument. The local authorities can then make sure that they follow up wherever the tractors and machinery are applied and returns must be filed. We have to do this if we are to improve on our systems, to make sure that we are able to track whatever business is being run whenever you are doing agricultural production. I thank you very much.

MR AYOO: Mr Chairman, I see us going into a very complicated system. First of all, most of this agricultural machinery is multipurpose. You cannot bring a tractor and you think that it will strictly be in the garden, because you even have to ferry your produce. Secondly, the taxes were also removed to allow us transport this agricultural produce to the market from the gardens. 

I would think that for now, we only strengthen the capacity of URA to ascertain and tax these people; if it is machinery for agriculture, then it is zero-rated and if it is for other things, they tax them there and then. If, after one year, you are going to assess whether one is actually using it for agriculture or something else, this will bring a lot of complications. That is why I say that we rather go for zero-rating; after all, even the Government had accepted this position. It is only that deferment is coming up after reconsidering that you need to tax them.

I think that for now, we have zero-rated tax on agricultural machinery while URA tightens assessment methods so that we can know which machinery is for agricultural purposes and which one is not, and then we start this at once. For now, it is going to be very difficult for a farmer or a business person to begin to look for the minister because his machinery has been impounded by URA because the proof has not been very clear. All this will come back to Parliament. I thank you.

MR YAGUMA: Mr Chairman, yesterday I talked about the national objectives in our Constitution. I think that as a country, we are making a very big mistake to leave agriculture to the forces of the market, to leave the entire agricultural sector to be run by the private sector. Actually, it should be the role of Government to import the machinery and the farmers get the tractors and machinery from Government, if we are talking about long term development. 

Therefore, honourable colleagues, in the meantime and short-run, let us do away with taxes on agricultural machinery. This is my contribution.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, there are only two questions that I would like to ask and I will labour to give the answers myself. 

The first one is: When you are importing agricultural machinery or any import, anyway, at what point in time is VAT collectable? My understanding is that as soon as you are bringing it into the country. That is my understanding; I am not an economist.

Number two: Is deferment a term usable, acceptable and easily implementable within the context of administration of tax in Uganda, with our hungry URA people? The answer, to me, is no. Something equivalent to deferment is what my honourable colleague was talking about. 

I am not an economist but my understanding is that a zero-rated tax is that which may not be included in your VAT account, and you are not even obliged to collect it but on purchase you can claim it.  Somebody buys, you pay the 18 per cent or it is subtracted from your account, and you can claim it back. That is my understanding. 

I now come to the similarity between deferment and zero rating. Let us go technical and say that we put all the machinery - That is if we have the zeal to tax them, because ideally, for me, agricultural machinery is supposed to be exempted from taxes so that President Museveni’s plan of modernising agriculture can take off. However, if we are going to tax agricultural machinery, let us give it leverage under zero-rated goods and services. When we put it there, we are protecting our farmers from that excitement of URA coming from nowhere and levying the tax even when you have not abused the intended use of the machinery. For me, that is far much better. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, is zero rating a permanent situation that is not reversible? 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, when Parliament passes it in the law and says that it is zero-rated, the same Parliament can remove it from zero rating and put something else.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that is not the question that I am asking. If I say that a particular item is zero-rated, is that situation so permanent that it cannot be reversed by the tax collectors?

MR OMACH: The tax collector follows the law to the letter. So, if you say that it zero-rated, that is what they will do, but if you say that it is VAT exempt, they will also do that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The debate seems to be suggesting that you can allow this as zero-rated then check after a year; if it is not doing the purpose for which the zero rating was granted then you impose the tax. That is what is being said. I want to find out if it is permanent and not reversible.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, actually, you will not be taxed. They are saying this is an item, which is zero-rated but in the event that you do not use it for that purpose then you will pay this tax. It is not charged to you on the assumption that this is being applied on equipment, which is zero-rated. However, the moment you put it to different use, then automatically the tax that you had not paid will now be payable.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So why do you want to remove it from zero-rated items?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, VAT is collectable when you import the machinery into the country. Deferment means you do not pay when you bring in the machinery, and by the way, this is already being practised. It is a practice that is on-going. As I said earlier on, there are regulations that spell out these procedures and so far, we have not had complaints that it is so complicated.

Two, to answer my young brother, hon. Katoto, yes of course what we are saying is that there is abuse. Abuse happens or occurs because the machinery brought in can be used for agriculture and also used for other things as well. If you bring it in as agricultural machinery and it is zero-rated or whatever and you go and use it for other things, then that is abuse.

So in order to beat this abuse, the onus has now shifted. Hon. Katoto, what you are saying is that we should have the capacity to tell that this machinery is for agriculture or not. Okay, we do not have the capacity to tell that this machinery, which can be used for agriculture and other things, will actually be used for agriculture, so we are shifting the onus onto you, the user, to come back and say that you have actually used this for agriculture; in which case, you will not pay tax. If you do not, then you will pay tax because the assumption is that you have used it for other things as well.

In VAT zero rating, one does not pay tax, but it entitles one to claim VAT paid on handling charges, transportation, storage and things like that. So zero rating is on supplies. Do you get me?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. I know this time you are reluctant; I think somebody has said, do not give him way, but you have always been good my brother, Prime Minister. 

Mr Chairman, you raised a very good question: What does it mean if we leave it at zero-rated and then we intensify and tax someone when they have messed up? That is what we are raising. Mr Prime Minister, you are right regarding deferment. What you read under the regulations of 2013 is VAT deferment on plants and machinery. You are now planning to add supply of tractors or agricultural equipment. 

If I imported a plant and machinery to make biscuits and my VAT is supposed to be Shs 200 million, I may apply to the minister - of course, the commissioner has the powers - to defer it, so that I do not pay it immediately. However, as I make money, I pay; that is what it means. I am not going to pay it now but when I make money, I will pay.

Now, on deferment of agricultural inputs, you are also saying that I am not going to pay now - I am exempted - but I go and make money and then I come and pay VAT later. That is why the chairman was asking, “What does zero-rated and deferment mean?” If you went to Budadiri and gave me tractors at a zero rate and you discover that instead of using them for farming, I am using them for construction of a road, you have the immediate right to withdraw the zero rates and tax me. This is because the equipment has stopped doing agriculture but is doing another activity.

Members who are saying we are going to get money immediately are not right. Deferment means you do not pay now but pay after five years. So you are pushing the payment forward. So, Mr Prime Minister, yes you may bring in the word “deferment” but it will not bring money to the Government immediately. Also, it will bring in more issues because you are saying you only pay after a certain period of time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have you ceded the Floor now?

MR KATOTO: Thank you very much, Prime Minister, for giving way. I totally support hon. Nandala-Mafabi because we are going to defer the payment. Someone has brought in agricultural equipment, then he goes and uses it for another purpose and later he comes to pay.  The Government is going to lose because this man would have used this for another purpose other than agriculture and it will be old. So if you find out that he is supposed to pay the taxes, you are not going to recover that money and he may not come back.

Furthermore, we know that there are combine harvesters and other equipment, which are brought in as agricultural inputs but again they tie in a lot of other things, for example, dynamos, which can be used for so many other things. They can be used in tanning, industrial production, etc. So when it comes to that, you will lose.

If we are to make them pay, let them pay instantly other than deferring the payment because you will lose and the farmers will also have some more issues.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We do not disagree; for you as Government, it is agreeable that taxes on implements for agriculture are not paid but only deferred, and we are saying they should be zero-rated. The clarification I seek is: what do you think the cost of administration to follow up on the tax you have deferred would be?

Let me make an assumption here. I have imported walking tractors, taken them to my constituency, distributed them and the walking tractors have carriers. You would need URA to follow my walking tractor under the scheme of deferment so that they confirm that the walking tractor in Oyam South is doing the work of agriculture and nothing else. What would the total cost be of what you expect as revenue vis-à-vis the administrative costs of following all the tractors, the ox ploughs, the walking tractors, the milling machines, all the machines I have bought for squeezing juice, etc? What would the administrative costs be? That is one.

Two, you read the honourable minister’s deferment regulation. Under the law, it is plants and machinery; you did not tell us whether the regulation is specific, because this zero rating is very specific. The zero rating says, “the supply of machinery, tools and implements suitable for use only in agriculture”. However, 34 (8) just refers to plants and machinery, which can be for any other purpose and not necessarily agriculture.

Can you assure us that that particular ministerial regulation is specific to what is zero-rated in agriculture? You did not say that. Otherwise, it is safer for us to have zero-rated because deferment would remain something discretionary to the minister. Can you clarify those issues?

MR YAGUMA: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, I think we need to classify what type of agricultural machinery we are talking about. I am thinking of tractors for ploughing, milling machines, water pumps, spray pumps and milk coolers. So, why don’t we specify them in the law! If I import a milk cooler, for example, to what other use can I put it other than storing milk? What of a tractor for ploughing? So, let us in the law specify the machinery, because we are being very general.Otherwise, a bulldozer which can be used for road works, even a truck, which can be used for transport, will be under that. So, let us specify and say tractors, milling machines, water pumps, etc. Thank you very much.

Given the controversy that has arisen, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need to specify the type of agricultural machinery, which we all know. We know the type of farmers we have and we know what we need. Take tractors for ploughing, milling machines, milk coolers, water pumps and others, which you can add. 

As the member mentioned, it is very difficult to employ them to alternative use other than agriculture. Also, if we are lucky and our people import the machinery, we are going to increase agricultural output and eventually, we shall tax agriculture. Even if we do not tax agriculture, if I have sold my cow, I will get into a bar and drink a bottle of beer and I will pay tax. So, we should be careful with agricultural machinery and agriculture; it is even politically dangerous –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I would like to seek clarification from you, and actually, the first issue has been stated by hon. Yaguma. He has put it very clearly – categorisation of the machinery; that was my first concern.

My second concern is on the deferment period. How long is the deferment period? In practice in Uganda, I think URA has always been doing three months. So, you need to clarify on that so that we make a very informed decision. Thank you.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, this concept of deferment came at that time when the importation of plant and machinery used to be entirely tax–free. When this VAT Act came into being, there was a problem for investors who were importing plant and machinery because they were required to pay VAT. To solve the problem, the idea of deferment came in. What this meant was that when the investor put up his machinery and commissioned his plant, that is when he would file his returns. This tax that he deferred would be part of what would have been the input tax and he would have to reconcile that with the output tax on the products.

So, you can see that the system was very clear. This particular investor is located in particular place x, and what we are talking about here is machinery, tools - The list of tools in agriculture is too long, and when we talk about implements in agriculture, they are very many. So, you cannot talk about deferment in this particular aspect. Deferment does not apply here. You can only talk about two options: we either maintain the zero rating or we delete. Those are the only options. Otherwise, we create new paragraphs within this schedule to define what we are talking about, if we are talking about tractors.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, considering what hon. Lugoloobi has said, does it mean that if we elaborated and brought in this whole statement of supply of machinery, tools, implements suitable for agriculture to that statement, then the deferment would apply? In that case, we would qualify that statement. Instead of plant and machinery, we qualify it to say, “the supply of machinery, tools, implements suitable for agriculture” and we do not just stop at plant and machinery. Would that work as far as deferment is concerned?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the explanation that has been given to this House - if the shadow minister could resume his seat - is that deferment means you have accepted to be taxed. Yes, you have already accepted to be taxed. The only thing you are doing is saying, “Okay, I accept to be taxed but please, postpone this tax for me; let me first recover from all these heavy investments and then at an appropriate time, I will start remitting the taxes, which are due as of today.” That is deferment. 

We should therefore distinguish deferment from exemption [Mr Ekanya: “or zero rating”] - or zero – With zero rating, yes, you must pay tax but your tax is rated zero; instead of 17 per cent, you are given zero per cent. So, exemption is different from zero rating. So, there are two or three lines of these things that I am also beginning to understand because of this debate.

Honourable members, there is need to have these maters clarified properly so that this House can understand them properly and take an informed decision.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, it is for the third time and that why the shadow Minister of Finance wanted to help me. I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPRSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014” and considered clause 3 for recommittal and clause 4 was considered but not adopted. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have two more Bills besides this one. We have the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, which I have directed the Budget Committee to handle and report back on Tuesday afternoon. We also have the Appropriation Bill itself, which has not yet been brought to the House and which I urge the ministers to being quickly. We also still have the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, which has taken us more than two days. Those are the Bills that are pending. We also have proposals for loans that I read out at the beginning of this sitting. That is part of the pending business.

I am going to give time for consultations to take place tomorrow and over the weekend so that we can be able to sort out all these issues. When we resume on Tuesday, we should be able to pass all these laws so that we close this process and take on other business that is still before this House for consideration. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, my apologies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Apologies received –(Interjection)- Only received. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you wound up the whole issue of the VAT (Amendment) Bill and the issues that we are going to consider over the weekend, as a lay woman I was thinking about something and I thought that I should pass it over to somebody to think about it over the weekend. It would appear to some of us at a certain level that taxing agricultural inputs, especially for those farmers that are established and can use tractors, at some point I would be very agreeable to it.  There is a point where a farmer has developed and has an income and they should therefore be taxed.

I am also at the other level that was described by the hon. Betty Amongi of the farmers who use walking tractors. These walking tractors at the show ground at Lugogo cost about Shs 5 million. So, I was thinking whether there is a way in which we can craft the provision so that we can create a threshold to cut out those walking tractors, ox ploughs and any other agricultural inputs that look very peasant, so that we can only tax those other farmers who are using –(Interjection)– Yes. 

I thought I should leave that with the House so that we can consider it. Maybe the people who understand the language of taxes can come out with a middle ground based on a threshold. Mr Speaker, I thank you for allowing me to put this idea across.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Apologies accepted now. (Laughter) I hope that point is taken by the people concerned with this. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to seek your indulgence and remind Members about the seminar to which you invited us to attend tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That invitation was already done. The seminar is for all Members of Parliament. It will take place at Speke Resort Munyonyo and you are supposed to report now. Please, ensure you report because the discussions begin at 8 O’clock tomorrow.
Honourable members, this House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.26 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 September 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)


