Tuesday, 22 September 2015

Parliament met at 11.26 a.m. in the Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting and I thank you very much for last weeks’ work when we said goodbye to our colleague despite your busy schedules.

I want to also take this opportunity to congratulate the Members who have been elected in their political parties for different positions and wish them well. Those who were not able to make it, there is always a next time.

Honourable members, last week I had said I had hoped not to call you again but I have again had to summon you from the recess because of parliamentary business, which is of national significance and has to be acted on as a priority.

Honourable members, you may recall that at the opening of the Third Session of the Ninth Parliament; at the opening of the Fourth Session of the Ninth Parliament; and at the opening of the Fifth Session of the Ninth Parliament, I had appealed continuously to the Government to bring whatever business was urgent so that it could be handled and as you recall, the Constitutional Amendment Bills came late and we were expected to also do the electoral Bills. Now after we had left here on Friday, three important Bills were delivered to the Clerk necessitating for the calling of this meeting.

I want to thank Government for responding to the recommendations of Parliament but again what we are doing is stampeding. I do not know how much fighting we can do in this type of business, given the political environment. 

On the other hand, we are still Members of Parliament until May 2016. Therefore, we are obliged to carry out our duties until that time but inevitably it requires a lot of interruptions. I do hope that this is a lesson to the Government, really not to take things for granted or the House for granted and I appeal to you to do what you can. Therefore, we shall want advice on how effectively we can handle this business during this time taking into account what is happening in the country but here we are and I hope we can do it.

However, there is another matter, honourable members, which I wish to communicate about. This relates to human trafficking. You may recall that on 18 December 2014, this House, after a very heated debate, resolved that Government should ban the export of domestic workers from this country. 

In that debate, the Chair of the Committee on Gender and other members informed the country that the export of domestic workers was a matter where other countries had withdrawn, specifically the Philippines and Ethiopia, which used to be the main suppliers of domestic workers to the Middle East. They banned that export of domestic workers. 

However, in the last one month or so, I have been reading in the press that our Government has entered into an agreement with Saudi Arabia to export domestic workers. How they expect to supervise domestic workers in the homes of Sheikhs in Saudi Arabia, when they cannot supervise homes in Uganda and they cannot supervise factories, is a matter of very grave concern.

I want an explanation from the Government. Have you signed these agreements to export Ugandan women to work as domestic workers in the Middle East specifically to Saudi Arabia? 
There was also an attempt to sign an agreement with the United Arab Emirates for domestic workers. So, is the Government of Uganda now feeling in the gaps for the shortage of domestic workers in the world? Are we now filling it officially as a Government? We want answers. We want an explanation from the government about this issue.

That is what I have to communicate. Otherwise, honourable members, it is good to see you again and I wish you well. Thank you very much.

11.31
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. Some time back, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi raised the issue of a Ugandan who had died in prison in Abu Dhabi and there were quite a number of Ugandans who are being killed in Abu Dhabi. We requested this House to find out and come back to report.

The Government of Uganda has got an embassy in Abu Dhabi and we got surprised to learn that the Ambassador of Uganda in Abu Dhabi had not even written a report. So we requested the Minister of Foreign Affairs to update this House and Ugandans about the situation of those Ugandans and the person who died in prison. And it is not only in Saudi Arabia or Abu Dhabi, they are all over, even in China. Therefore, we keep wondering what the Government is doing to rescue our people. Parliament passes laws and we expect Government to honour the laws we pass on this Floor. You must be there for the people of Uganda because these are the people who vote for us to come to Parliament and we are workers for the people. We are not their bosses. 

Therefore, when Ugandans are suffering in other countries, Government must intervene and we want a response about the people who are being held in Abu Dhabi and many in Saudi Arabia. We have seen these girls coming back crying and you people just look on; we want an explanation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.34
MS JUDITH FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry I did not come to your office to ask you to give me a slot to raise a matter of national importance but thank you for giving me this -

THE SPEAKER: Is it related to what is in my communication?
   
MS FRANCA AKELLO: It is about drought, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, today we want to deal with the other issues. Is it about what I said, hon. Dr Epetait?

11.36
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I am rising on issues to do with today’s sitting. Yes, the Clerk’s Office diligently sent messages to all Members, talking about a meeting today at 10 O’clock. I note with concern that upon arrival at 10 O’clock, I found a few colleagues wondering where other Members had disappeared to because I see much of the parking yard really indicating that there is a strong arrival of Members but only to learn that there is a parallel meeting of the NRM Caucus. 

I think we would have done it smarter. To really have another side meeting at a time when Parliament is officially supposed to be sitting is rather a degree of sabotage. Tomorrow, we will be blamed for not doing our work yet Members have been diverted to another meeting at a time when Parliament was supposed to sit. That I think is really not fair moreover, as you rightly observed, with the stampede in which we have found ourselves. 

We are supposed to consider Bills that ordinarily ought to have gone to a committee, which would then make a report to Parliament. 

Here we are handling business in a rush much as the Speaker called on Government all those years reminding them to bring the necessary amendments to the various laws in preparation for the 2016 elections. The stampede is on and it is right in our hands. I think the Government ought to do a little better than this. Most members are now wondering how we shall proceed.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, it is disheartening to find these kinds of agreements or memoranda of understanding with certain countries being signed committing our children – especially the girls – to countries with reports of human rights abuses, especially sexual harassment of our girls. 

We are demanding the withdrawal of our Ugandans who are being molested in other countries, while the Government is doing the opposite. That, in my opinion, is being insensitive to the plight of Ugandans. Why must we send the few who are safe back home here to the very areas where we are demanding the withdrawal of Ugandans? Really? (Member timed out.)

11.39
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the issue you have raised. Firstly, I would like to condemn the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for ignoring the parliamentary resolution on this particular issue.

I remember very well our position was that we can source labour from this country to other countries and the areas were very specific. The issue of domestic workers was very contentious because we have sent delegations right from this Parliament to these countries where our people have been exported to provide labour. We have had issues, particularly with the female labourers that have been exported.

As I speak, by last night, a young girl who has been in Malaysia was discovered very weak after she disappeared for three weeks only to go and die in hospital. This issue has not yet been brought to light by this same ministry, which is busy signing memoranda to export our children.

Madam Speaker, what we are actually calling “domestic workers” are “sex slaves” that side. Most of these young girls that I am talking about are actually university graduates who – out of desperation – have sought for these employment opportunities. 

If you go to the labour recruitment agencies here, the language that is being used is basically to lure the young girls. They are not given the right information. When they reach there, they become sex slaves. Some of the pictures that we have found on social media are very disturbing. 

Some of them are actually yearning to come back. However, immediately they are acquired, they become properties in these homes. Their passports are confiscated and they cannot have any way of communication outside until someone has got a medical complication. Many of these medical complications are with their private parts. It is these ones that are either dumped that make their way back home.

Madam Speaker, I think you have raised a very important issue and the Government needs to come clear before we risk the lives of these young girls. I have just seen in the papers the oil sector is looking for 30,000 workers. Why can’t we do skills-training to provide this labour in this oil industry rather than exporting them to this already dangerous business? 

I think there is need for us to reaffirm our position and bring the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to order to stop this process of exporting our girls. This should also go out clear to the public that there is no easy business out there in providing domestic services. It is sex exploitation and they go for girls only. You have heard what happened to the boys.

11.43
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regarding the issue of sending our children to foreign countries, this August House dwelt on the inhuman treatment and particularly of the young girls who are sent outside this country. The Committee on Gender presented a comprehensive report-

THE SPEAKER: Even Equal Opportunities.

MS ANYWAR: It was really saddening to know how Ugandans are suffering. It is even saddening to note that even when those children are outside there, we have our foreign missions and they are not in the know of these Ugandans who are being mistreated.

Madam Speaker, the problem we have from home is that we even do not have a minimum wage to cater for Ugandans. We are sending them out there without really adding value or even giving a fair pay. 

What I would like to present is that Parliament should take note that there are projects in this country created to export human resource and share the cost of labour. It is not only for these young people. We have had this with the security personnel who were sent to Somalia and Iraq. They are paid and part of their payment is retained by these companies, which are well established in this country.

Madam Speaker, to get to the root of this, Government must come as soon as possible to this House and explain in detail why they undertook to sign out our children to be enslaved when slavery still has wounds in Africa?

Secondly, we need to know these businesses – so called companies – which are advertising for recruitment to send the children abroad. Government is not even aware or they are turning a blind eye on these companies which are well established by officials in Government and protected so that they share the cost of labour of Ugandans.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, as women of this country, I think we must stand up and have a voice to say enough is enough. We cannot be used as sex slaves. Even within the country, we are suffering to regain our dignity. As a Government and country, we are still subjecting the women of this country to become sex slaves in a foreign country? We women deserve dignity. We need to do decent jobs and get paid for those jobs. This should actually be one of the resolutions we should take. 

Madam Speaker, you are our biggest voice. We need to have the dignity of women restored and as soon as possible Government should be restrained from exporting women as sex workers. I beg to submit.

11.43
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, one of the nine girls we were trying to help who returned from Iraq told us that some officials including some ministers from the Ministry of Gender and Social Development were commission agents at that time. I did not believe it.

However, after Parliament had stated that there should be no exportation of domestic workers especially girls and the ministry’s officials still go ahead to allow this, I am tempted to believe that what those girls were telling us at the committee was true. It is because if they are not commission agents and beneficiaries, why would they want to continue with the business.

Madam Speaker, two weeks ago, I had a stopover in Dubai. Dubai, especially the central business districts, business goes up to 2.00 a.m. We walked around and found a number of girls selling themselves and following us up. I was with one of the colleagues here whose name I will not disclose. We were first of all shocked and surprised to hear them speak one of our Ugandan languages. They were following us as we were moving in the shops thinking we were potential customers. They said they wanted to give us a massage, but we continued moving. They went back and spoke again in Luganda and my colleague said, “Gwe, tovva e Uganda?” They took off. 

However, there were those who kept following us and we stopped to engage them. We told them we are from Uganda that is why they heard us respond. We did not disclose we are Members of Parliament, but we asked them why they are involved in that act which dehumanises themselves and Ugandans. They said they escaped from Saudi Arabia, but their passports were confiscated and they have not found a way of going back home. They asked if we could help them get back home. It was very touching. We took their names, but we do not know whether they are their true names. Some of these girls do that business not because they want it, but it is because of the circumstance they have found themselves in. Therefore, when you see this kind of thing continue happening here, it pains some of us. 

Madam Speaker, Government must come out clearly and tell us first of all why they disregarded Parliament’s resolution on this matter.

Secondly, whatever MoU or agreement they have signed, they must lay it in this House so that we see what they have signed it for. This should take place before we go on recess again. That could be the only way we would be able to bring these people to book and help Ugandans. 

I know the problem of unemployment here. I also know there are some Members of Parliament who are engaged in the business of exporting people there. They have companies, but I do not know whether they are part of this or they are doing it in a very formal way. I say this because one of them has an office next to my residence.

However, we must have a very structured and organised way if we are going to export labour to other countries or if we are going to help Ugandans but not doing it the ad hoc way that subjects especially our female colleagues and sisters to this dehumanising behaviour.

I do not know whether the government has ears to listen. If you have ears to listen, then for once, hear us properly and act. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Katuntu comes and then hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Bahati, yesterday as I was driving to Kamuli, I received a call from Oman. One of the young girls in Oman said they wrote to me two weeks ago saying they need to be rescued, but I have not yet worked out the mechanics of how to bring them back to Uganda. She was ringing to check when I would be getting them home. I said I am still working with the police to see how they can come home. Another one rang me and asked whether I could raise Shs 5 million so that she pays her owner to release her. 

It is that bad. Once you go there, you are property and you do not even earn salaries. If you want to be released, you must find money to pay your way out. How you will get it, I do not know.

11.52
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

First of all, all colleagues around should thank you for raising this issue. You have been innovative because when we were summoned purportedly for serious business, the entire Government, except my three colleagues who have nothing to do with the business for which we are called, are absent. The Leader of Government Business, the Chief Whip and the minister responsible for this particular urgent business are not in the House.

Therefore, what is happening is now to be innovative and have a conversation among ourselves. Unfortunately, even the pertinent issue of this modern slave trade which you have raised, Madam Speaker, the minister responsible for it is not here. 

I find it a little bit difficult for us to continue doing business in the most unserious manner. It is wastage of taxpayers’ money and man hours. Above all, it is disrespectful of the Speaker of this House for Government to request for this urgent session and we are all here at 10 O’clock, the Speaker is here to call the House and literally, the Government is not here. 

I feel bad because we deserve better as the House. We are quite busy actually and Government may not realise it. There is a reason why the Speaker sends us to recess. We have travelled all the way from Ndorwa and all sorts of places. Now we are here discussing business which has nothing to do with what brought us here.

We are only lucky that it is a serious business which we need Government to attend to, but even the ministers responsible, Madam Speaker, are not here. I thought hon. Bahati was going to explain something which he has not yet done. Now that there is this urgent business about slave trade, let us handle it differently. Maybe, we put it on the agenda, discuss it substantively and forget about what these people called us here for so that we go back to our recess to do business which we are supposed to do.

I move that we amend the order paper and put this particular issue, discuss it and whenever Government is ready, they will summon us again. Really, for us to come here and waste our time to talk to ourselves and make the three of our colleagues on the - I am being reminded that Thursday is Eid.

Unless, Madam Speaker, you have some other reason, I request that you use your power under our rules and amend the order paper other than raising this issue haphazardly without direction so that we discuss it as a motion. 

I actually move a motion that the Speaker uses her discretion to amend the order paper and we discuss the issue of -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members are just responding to my communication. Let us go to the order paper. 

11.57
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have teachers and students from Kyoga Secondary School in Mayuge. They are represented by hon. Waira Kyewalabye and hon. Rukia Nakadama. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of late, when I go for recess, I am always worried that I will be called by the Speaker at any time for urgent business. My mind, therefore, always expects a call. 
As you are aware, we are in the election period. We have run back for the process but we have got more business. You are also aware that I am a Secretary General and I have a lot of work to do. These are the big things we go through. 

I have here with me a declaration. It is the Fourth World Conference of Speakers of Parliament. It was held in the United Nations Headquarters in New York on 31 August to 2 September 2015.

The Declaration is, “Placing Democracy at the Service of Peace and Sustainable Development: Building the World that People Want.” I am sure our Speaker was there during this declaration. I also hope the government has got a copy of this declaration because I got it on my mail and very few people read mails. 

I have seen instances whereby someone passed away four months ago and you get somebody saying, “May his or her soul rest in peace.” This is because the person has just seen the email after four months. They may not see this, Madam Speaker. 

I would prefer that this document appropriately be placed on the Order Paper here because even what we want to work on as a democracy about the electoral reforms was talked about in that conference. 

I would like to restrict myself to women. I do not know whether you call it clause 9 or something else - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the paper has not been formally laid. My plan was to lay it so that you can read it and then we discuss it later. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, that is why I am saying that would be very good. If you read it, I am sure these electoral reforms that we are talking about may be amended.

Part 9 says, “Millions of women and girls in every region of the world are subjected to all forms of violence including physical, sexual and domestic violence every day. We call on all countries to prioritise the elimination of all forms of gender-based violence now. There is an urgent need to put an end to widespread hatred and discrimination in all forms. We urge all countries to foster inter-cultural dialogue and to focus on promoting tolerant and inclusive societies where people are respectful of each other’s culture, religion and tradition. This should not run counter to efforts aimed at combating gender based discrimination.” This is a serious one and I hope our Government has heard. 

Part 16 under democracy - I am just picking those related to women. “We call for great effort to end all forms of discrimination against women and girls with a view of achieving their empowerment and making gender equality a reality. Development of our societies and economies hinges on the enjoyment by women and men, girls and boys of full and equal rights, responsibilities and opportunities. We must rededicate ourselves to the full realisation of gender equality and empowerment of women and girls by 2030- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude your statement. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The reason I am raising this is because the issue is very serious and the Speakers of the whole world are aware. However, our Government here, which is a signatory to these protocols of the UN is not aware that women are supposed to be respected. 

You are now saying that we are selling our women; I think it is because of unemployment issues. We are talking of women but even men are suffering especially the youth. 

Madam Speaker, as hon. Katuntu has raised it, I think after this communication, we need to amend our order paper to discuss youths unemployment and the women because women are being tortured every now and then. 

Three weeks ago, there was a woman who called me from Dubai. I do not know which part of Dubai she had gone to. Her visa had expired. Her employer had chased her and she was at the airport. She had been arrested and the police was on her case. They wanted $600 for her to leave Dubai or else she would become a prisoner. 

I do not know who gave her my number. I can tell you that I was on my way to Mbale in the night. I asked her how we could send her money. The following day was a Friday, which in Dubai seems like a Sunday. It is a public holiday. I told her that I had to send her money the following day through Western Union. 

However, I wondered how she would get out. I asked to talk to those police men to at least put her in a cell at the airport instead of taking her back. Indeed, they agreed. I used my connection; I remembered I had friends in Dubai. I wanted to confirm if it was true. I thought that the lady probably wanted to con me. When they went there, they discovered the lady was in a cell. 

Unfortunately, if she did not use that ticket at that time, it meant the next day she had to buy another ticket. It was already past midnight; she could not travel. We had to look for $600 and pay for another ticket which was $450. We spent $1,050 which I believe is about Shs 4,000,000. 

If she was here, we could have contributed for her to start a kiosk to sell airtime or mobile money other than leaving her. We have now spent it. She has come back and she is still in the same state. Our country is supposed to do it.  That is one of them. I can tell you when she came; she has narrated stories of how these ladies are mistreated by our brothers, the Arabs. Even dogs use them. It is bad. How can a dog sleep with a human being? (Mr Anywarach rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us hear from hon. Anywarach briefly then hon. Bahati. We need to close this subject. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to lay this document on Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, come and lay it on my behalf because it is my document. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, what the former Leader of Opposition and the current Secretary General of FDC has stated is a very serious matter. This House has recorded a very sad story of Uganda marketing or trading in prostitution, which has now become the most lucrative trade between Uganda and Malaysia. 

Nobody has told us how the government has followed it up and who is earning the revenue from this prostitution. I believe that whoever is prostituting must be a woman. You and I represent that gender. I find myself inadequate to be representing women yet they are being treated like dogs. In fact in Europe, they love their dogs more than human beings. However, here we are; we do not value our women. Our women are being exported under the watchful eyes of the government and nobody is making a statement. 

Madam Speaker, before or soon after hon. Nandala-Mafabi lays this information on the Table, I think it is very important, as our Speaker, to remind this Parliament of the various protocols that have been signed concerning the rights of women, not only in Africa but globally. This will enable us to hold Government accountable and specifically our Government. We cannot just allow this to continue and yet we are here and we pretend to be women. 

I find myself very inadequate – I think I am half a woman because if a woman can be exported and exploited and I still claim to be a representative; a parliamentary representative moreover, making laws and policies. It pains us to make those policies and laws and they are neither implemented nor respected. It makes me feel inadequate as a woman. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please lay the declaration for the meeting of Speakers.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I wish to lay on the Table the Declaration which was made by the Speakers of Parliament at their Fourth World Conference, in the United Nations headquarters in New York between 31st August and 2 September 2015. It says, “Placing Democracy at the Service of Peace and Sustainable Development; Building the World that People Want”. I wish to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I had wanted to put it on the Floor because of anger but I have now chosen to put it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for doing my job, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. A date will be appointed for the actual discussion. Clerk, please distribute it to all Members.

12.10
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some time back in 2012, we went to Iraq to follow up the plight of our girls there. Madam Speaker and colleagues, to note that the Generals in Iraq also fear to say where these girls are yet they actually know their whereabouts was something so painful.

These girls kept on calling us and telling us their locations, how they are being punished and mistreated. For the sacrifice that we made as the Committee on Gender, I think I will never regret. We had probably stayed for only three days but we did the work for one week amidst the fear of bombs. The hotel in which we were was deep inside the center of Baghdad. They were throwing bombs everywhere but we had to move left, right and centre.

We returned and made a very serious report. That report has never found its place here on the Floor of Parliament. As soon as we came back, the then minister of the line ministry was even the first to fight us. He accused us of not going to Iraq; that there is no evidence that we went there. It is only the pictures that we took with our iPads that became our evidence.

The annoying thing is that the company purportedly taking our girls to Iraq was even non-existent. We looked for it - we met the ministers for Defence, Internal Affairs, and Health and the Vice President of that country. They all denied knowing that company.

When we returned, of course the lifeline of any Government is policy, law and programmes. We agreed to come out with a clear policy on externalisation of labour and the Ministry of Gender agreed to do that. Recently, they even made an announcement that they are suspending all labour export from this country until they come up with a policy. When they were presenting the policy statement before us in the committee, they said that they were on the final stage of formulating the policy on externalisation of labour. To date, we have not seen that policy, leave alone the annoying thing that even our report which resulted from what you diligently sent us to go and find out - the truth - has never found its place on the Floor of Parliament.

Secondly, they went ahead and said that they are going to sanction all those companies that export labour and we proposed to have a national company on externalisation of labour that will actually regulate others by giving them a sub-contract -

THE SPEAKER: I am sure they have reason for that. Please conclude.

MR ANYWARACH: That proposal was fought, left, right and centre. Therefore, for now the whole Government – we thought the other one was a mistake for only the Labour ministry - to purport to sign a memorandum of understanding between this country and another country that they are taking domestic workers; some of these women are not domestic workers. You remember the ones who came here and were testifying in the committee on Gender, we saw the tears. One spent close to Shs 21 million to complete her studies and bribed her way – because they deceived her, by paying Shs 6 million in order to go abroad. She ended up earning only $400 for which even $300 was taken away. She only benefited from $100 and the transport she had used was nowhere to be seen.

Therefore, for Government to take away our girls that we have trained very expensively - whose parents have trained through thick and thin - is very disappointing. To go as domestic workers with those uneducated Arabs who do not even value our women, I think is a very big insult. I feel like I should resign from this Parliament or even stop being a member of the Gender committee.

I have been a member of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Affairs deliberately and on purpose from the day I came here. I said that I will never change because I feel for the rights of women, children and the elderly, the disabled and even the youth. (Applause) We need to move and make a resolution.

The annoying thing is that our resolution is not binding on the Executive. It is only convincing. That makes me feel that we are only here for just – if Government wanted anything right now, for example, the land they have given out in Namulonge, it was just a one day venture and our land was given away. However, when we are fighting for the rights of our people, we have to negotiate to a kneeling point. 

Madam Speaker, you are on the right cause and I think God should bless you more and more. If we could hear your voice and that of this country, we could make a change. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Surprisingly, the permanent secretary for the ministry of Gender was happily announcing the memorandum. It was in the press – she was really happy.

12.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I would like to particularly thank you, Madam Speaker, for raising this issue. It is very important that we get it clearly and also protect our women.

It is unfortunate that we continue to see this modern day slavery creeping in our time; it is very unfortunate indeed. The position of Government was that it is better to have a regulated regime of labour exportation than the unregulated one. That we would have a regime that will tell us where Ugandans who are getting out of the country to work are, what they are doing and in case of any problem, how they can be reached. There is therefore a memorandum of understanding based on that.

However, I think it makes us poor spiritually and it dents the conscience of a nation if there is any room in the MOU that allows our women to be exported as slaves. Therefore, Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg that tomorrow, the minister – I am speaking as the Government Chief Whip – of Gender, Labour and Social Development comes here with a statement and a copy of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). We cannot go on watching this happen in our time. If there are any mistakes in the MOU, we will be able to correct them. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I hope they will explain to us why they have ignored the resolution of this House of 18 December 2014 because we sat here and resolved that there would be no more export of domestic workers. We are not talking about drivers, bankers and supermarket workers. We are talking about domestic workers because once they enter the home of a Sheikh, no one will be able to check whether they are sleeping, eating, over used or abused; No one will be able to do that and that is our concern. Honourable members, tomorrow we will receive a statement on that issue and an explanation to the country about what is happening.

Please join me in welcoming the Catholic Agency for Overseas Development from the UK. They are here visiting us but they have found us busy. However, you are welcome. Item two. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

12.18
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2015 be read for the first time. I also lay, on the Table, a certificate of financial implications in respect of that Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is been seconded and sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

12.19
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the first time. The certificate of financial implications is also laid on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded and sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, the first Bill, which was read and seconded, was never sent to the relevant committee.

THE SPEAKER: I sent it. I am sending them one by one.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

12.20
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the first time and the certificate of financial implications is also laid.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Honourable members that Bill is also sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal expeditiously. I had requested the Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to be present but I do not know if they are available. Okay, the Chairperson is here. 

Honourable members, the Bills are urgent but in my communication, I said that this House has been ready, for three sessions, to handle this matter but it has come now. However, it is a matter that touches other people who are not before this House. Therefore, I would like to ask the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to work today and tomorrow and maybe we can reconvene on Friday morning because they might be people in the public who would like to give their views about these matters; we cannot just run over them.  We need to give them a chance, even if it is small, to express their opinion.

We shall leave Thursday for Haji Katuntu. That is why I am looking at Friday morning so that we can release you to go away. Let us work on Friday so that you can go for the entire weekend and go completely. Eid is on Thursday.

Honourable members, let us receive the report of this committee on Friday morning and complete it. House is adjourned to Friday 10.00 o’clock.

(The House rose at 12.23 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 25 September 2015 at 10.00 a.m.) 
