
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 28 September, 2021

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I hope you were able to go to your constituencies and see what they have on how we can improve on our debate in this House because you have just interacted with them. I also welcome you back from the weekend. Parliamentary week starts now and the business of the House commences.

I received a notification about a statement from the honourable member for Luweero, who is the Shadow Minister for Education. We will schedule that for tomorrow so that she can have her statement presented to the House. Thank you very much. The Order Paper is here. I have Members who requested to raise some urgent matters.  I will start with the Member for Lwemiyaga. 

2.16
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two weeks ago, hon. Ssemujju Nganda raised a matter here relating to the arrest of two Members of Parliament, belonging to the Opposition and you guided the House well on the facts that these Members were summoned and that the immunity of Members does not extend into other matters, other than the matter therein in the House.

Secondly, when these Members were summoned, the normal procedure was respected that the Speaker was duly notified and in fact, the summons were communicated through the Speaker of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, these two Members of Parliament were eventually aligned before court, charged, they applied for bail and they were granted bail by the court, under very stringent terms. 

On Thursday, hon. Ssewanyana was released by the High Court but immediately abducted by security agencies we cannot name. Yesterday, hon. Mohammed Segirinya was released by the court on the same stringent terms but also immediately abducted. 

Mr Speaker, my procedural concern is: I am seeking your guidance whether this time round, the Speaker was notified of these abductions because we have failed to make a trace of these two Members. I wanted to go and speak to the families of the two honourable members but I do not know what to tell them. I do not even know where their family members are and security is numb about it. They have been denied access to their immediate family.

Again, the detention of hon. Ssewanyana is beyond 48 hours and he has not been produced in any court. Here we are legislating while the state is violating the rights of our own Members of Parliament yet, for us, business is normal.

As Members of Parliament and leaders, the world is watching us behave as though the world is normal, when these violations are going on, including brutal abductions that have cast these Members of Parliament as criminals. We know the fact that these Members have not been found guilty of any offence. We certainly know that even if they were guilty, the laws of the land are very clear on how to treat those that have been indicted, prosecuted and found guilty.

Without the state explaining what is going on, we are constrained to participate with the Government in violating the laws of the land, the rights of citizens and leaders in particular. We demand in the immediacy, through your Chair, that the state explains the situation because my side is constrained to move as though it is normal business, when Members of Parliament can be abducted, taken away and no one says anything about it. Is it normal? Their lawyers, families and doctors cannot access them. 

Mr Speaker, through you, we are here to ask that an immediate explanation be supplied to this House and the families as to what happened. We are scared when we hear the Head of State communicate detention without trial.

THE SPEAKER: What is the procedural matter?

MR MPUUGA: The procedural matter is that the Rt Hon. Speaker should guide the House whether it is normal and, therefore, we should sit and relax that things are okay or that the Speaker was briefed, as the first case was about these abductions. [Mr Ssekikubo rose_]

MR SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, hold on please. The Member rose on a procedural matter. Of course, it is not normal for that to happen; it is abnormal. The best person to explain that situation cannot be me because I did not participate in any of them.

I had earlier received a request from hon. Ssekikubo to raise the same thing as an urgent matter so that we can hear from the Government, especially the Executive arm, how the situation is. I have also just heard about it for the first time. Can I allow the honourable member to raise it substantially and address it to the people who can deal with this matter rather than the Speaker? 

Regarding the rearrests of the two Members, certainly, the warrants were not in writing, in which case, they could not have come to the Speaker. I did not receive any phone calls that such a matter was pending. I have also just heard from hon. Ssekikubo that there were rearrests of Members who had been granted bail. Let him raise it substantially then the Government comes in.

2.21
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising this motion under rule 59 of the Rules of Procedure.

The background to this motion is that in the last Parliament, we had an honourable Member of Parliament arrested and treated in the similar way that hon. Ssewanyana and hon. Segirinya are being treated. This Parliament suspended the sitting until the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs was able to produce that Member of Parliament. (Applause) 

Therefore, the motion I am moving under Rule 59, is for this Parliament to suspend this sitting until our colleagues that were kidnapped by people dressed like thugs have been freed. If you allow me, Mr Speaker, I will justify it. 

The history is that it has happened before in this Parliament - when a Member of Parliament was beaten in similar circumstances, Parliament suspended the sitting. If you allow me, I will go ahead and move the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, for the orderly conduct of business in the House, the motion of such significance may be without notice but at least you brief the Speaker so that we know how to process it because you cannot surprise the Speaker. The rules do not allow that. That is why it is important that even if you are going to substantially do it, you alert the Speaker and say that because of the following reasons, I am planning to do this and that.  The rules allow it and there is a precedent to that effect. Otherwise, to do it that way jams the whole process. 

I am going to listen to hon. Ssekikubo and take a decision on what you have just said.    

2.23
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The events surrounding the manner in which honourable Members of Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: You are raising it as an urgent matter and not as speaking to a debate. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, Mr Speaker. The events surrounding honourable members of Parliament cannot go unchallenged by this very House. 

Hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya was rearrested yesterday - and I think to put it in proper terms, was kidnapped yesterday. Hon. Allan Ssewanyana was equally kidnapped last Thursday after they had secured their bail. 

Mr Speaker, it is a strange procedure yet it even involved the International Division of the Criminal Court whereby Members were certified that they had no other pending charges against them. They were accordingly set free.  

For us to sit here and look on as if there is no constitutional order in this country is a matter of deep regret. (Applause) That is the law!

All Members here swore to protect and defend the Constitution. The Constitution, in Article 28, is very clear; the presumption of innocence is cardinal in our criminal procedure systems. Therefore, Mr Speaker and Members, today you might think that it is over hon. Allan Ssewanyana and hon. Ssegirinya to be arrested but tomorrow it could be you. 

I remember I was arrested by Gen. Tumwine on a Friday from Lwemiyaga Market in January 2020 for the alleged breach of quarantine of Foot and Mouth Disease. By the time I was produced in court on Monday, the charges had changed to attempted murder. 

Here I am; an NRM Member on this side and so, for Members that might think that they are safe – (Applause) - because it is happening to the Opposition side, you never know which direction these winds might blow next. Therefore, we must be very careful, as Members of Parliament. I do not subscribe to NUP but I think they deserve the right, as Ugandans - even if they were not Members of Parliament – they deserve protection – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, are you now debating or raising an urgent matter? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: To that extent, Mr Speaker, I see that the Minister of Internal Affairs and Prime Minister are both absent in the House but at least I see Members of the UPDF seated here. They are very quiet when these matters are being raised here. They are not helping the situation yet they are supposed to sit and watch events in order to be able to help the House and the country.  

Mr Speaker, this is a top challenge to this House from which political side you stand. This is our Constitution and we swore to protect and defend it. Therefore, I support the motion that this House deserves a clear explanation on what is happening to our colleagues, Members of Parliament. Then, we can come out with a straight face and face the country. 

Otherwise, all of us are tainted. It is as if we are in a conspiracy. For one, I must say, I am not part of the conspiracy. Let us treat these matters of national importance, first of all, as members of this country, Uganda, and Members of Parliament. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I demand that the Government gives us its position as to why the Government of the people is resorting to kidnapping its own people. It is terrible and unexplainable. You cannot explain it; you justify it. I beg to support. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Member for Lwemiyaga. First of all, there is no motion to second or support. It is just a procedural matter that I would like to correct. There is no substantial motion before the House now. Until I allow it, it is not a motion. Let us see what the Rules say – and that is why the honourable member is quiet because he knows I have to give guidance on the matter. 

Honourable members, the matter being raised is serious to the extent that we do not know what happened. As presiding officer and leader of this House, I need to know the circumstances under which my Members are; if they are going to be arrested, I need to know so that I alert them, prepare them and move them forward. That is what the law says.   

When the summons were issued for the first time, the Office of the Speaker called these Members and talked to them and even discussed it with their lawyers and it was agreed that they go; they should not hide, run away nor do something. It was squarely agreed that they should go because the summons said so; and they went there. 

Our expectation was that the processes would continue - and I said it here that if the processes showed that they are guilty of conduct that is against the law, then, they would face the consequences of their action; and that in case the allegations could not be proved beyond reasonable doubt, then they would be excusable, in which case they would come and join us here. I said that the last time this matter came up and I say it again for purposes of clarity and consistency. 

What the honourable member for Lwemiyaga told me today, however, was not within my knowledge, neither was it under my authorisation or notification to the Members who have been rearrested. A re-arrest, in the circumstance, would mean they release you and once you are walking out and enjoying your freedom and then they re-arrest you. I do not think the people who re-arrested them had the knowledge or the time to come back to the Speaker to give him that notification on the Members being re-arrested. That was not done and it is irregular under the law. 

Be that as it may, in the circumstances, I need to know the reasons why they were re-arrested; I need to know where they are being kept, and I need to know why they are being kept. It could not be for the same reasons for which bail had been granted - there must be other reasons. I just need to know as the leader of the House. Can somebody give me that information because I need to know? (Applause)

2.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Ssekikubo and hon. Ssemujju for raising this important matter. As you have said, this is a very important and sensitive matter; it is true that the two leaders were re-arrested and they are with the Government. 

I want to request that you give us a short time; the Minister of Internal Affairs will come and give a statement about where they are because this issue has just been raised here on the Floor and it is an urgent and sensitive matter, to not only this House but also to the entire country. 

Therefore, we request that you give us a short time to get the appropriate answer to give to this House so that everybody can know where the two leaders are. 

Mr Speaker, if you allowed us up to tomorrow, that would be the best time. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when things are really tough, that is when you need to be calm because you make additional mistakes. When things are tough and you also start raising your voice and moving by action - When things are difficult, it is better to reflect on the next course of action and I call upon the House to do just that. In other words, we should not make a mistake because some other person has made a mistake; this is the House of Representatives. 

The situation is, as we know it, Members have been re-arrested. Should that now throw this House into confusion? I thought we would be best placed if we, in a much organised way, articulated issues and sent a clear message that this should never be done and this cannot be done and we are here - I thought that is the message we should send.

Therefore, I really call upon Members that we need to process these things with some level of calmness. Until I get clear information on the questions I have posed, we will not be able to proceed with business. (Applause)

This is what I am going to do; I am going to ask the Government Chief Whip to get in touch with the people responsible for this; the Minister of Internal Affairs - I am hoping that the police arrested them - so that in another 15 minutes we can proceed with the business of the House.
House suspended for 15 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 2.36 p.m. for 15 minutes.)

 (On resumption at 3.09 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think many of you did not go out. I am the only one who went out and came back in, so, I cannot say, “welcome back”. 

We suspended the proceedings of the House because there were questions I needed answers to, which will guide us on how we proceed. 

I now have in the House the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who will be making a short statement. She tells me that she had come with the Attorney-General to give some explanation and we see how to proceed. Let us receive this information.

3.10
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I would like to state that, it is true hon. Ssewanyana and hon. Ssegirinya were re-arrested. One was re-arrested the other day and another yesterday. 

It is also true that hon. Ssewanyana, yesterday, made a statement and was interrogated at Kireka CID, in the presence of his lawyers. Today, hon. Ssegirinya is also going to be interrogated by CID, in the presence of his lawyers. 

Mr Speaker, I know that you are supposed to be notified. This information, for you, is coming. I beg to submit. 

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I saw on NTV, hon. Ssegirinya being kidnapped or re-arrested – whichever term it is – and he was crying: “Afande, I am sick. I am sick.” He was being bungled into that vehicle. 

Now, the Prime Minister is saying that they have hon. Ssegirinya and a statement will be got from him. He has not been taken to hospital, yet he was crying on camera. 

How do we proceed when the Prime Minister says that our colleague is going to be produced at CID to make a statement, yet we heard him crying on camera that he was sick?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister. As courtesy and decorum of this House demand, even when the information is very wanting, we proceed under the etiquette of this House. 

I would like the Prime Minister to inform this House if, indeed, there was need to re-arrest them - the Office of the Speaker has been open 24/7; the Office of the Deputy Speaker has been open, too. 

What prompted the Government to conduct a kidnap of the Members of Parliament? The first procedure you used to summon them, through the Office of the Speaker – what was strange this time round that it was imperative that you had to kidnap the Members of Parliament? 

These very Members, on being summoned through the Office of the Speaker, presented themselves to Masaka Central Police Station. Indeed, they were granted a police bond and, when they were required, they still went back and responded to their bond until when they were produced in the courts of law. 

Madam Prime Minister, have you found the Office of the Speaker deficient that you are now taking over the roles of the Office of the Speaker of Parliament? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Can I seek guidance from you?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Are you still on procedure? (Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: The procedural question, Mr Speaker, is, is it procedurally right for the Leader of Government Business to mock the institution of Parliament, disregard it and take over the affairs of this Parliament as if there is no Speaker or Deputy Speaker in this Parliament? 

THE SPEAKER: Sometimes, we find ourselves in really difficult situations – and I find that, that is what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is facing, as well as the Speaker. Everybody in here is faced with that same situation. 

The solution is how we rise and deal with it in an organised way and find a solution. That is what helps, eventually. How did they handle it when it became difficult? That is the hallmark of true leaders. We do not over-radicalise the situation but find a solution that deals with the specific problem in a way that gives us decorum, as Members of Parliament and the House of Parliament. 

The Prime Minister has stated what she has stated. I expected that the learned Attorney-General was going to say something on this matter. 

When we start raising points of order and points of procedure, we take our eyes off the ball. There is a problem: Members have been re-arrested without the authority of the Speaker. Even notification was not given to the Speaker. 

The Prime Minister has informed us that one of the Members, hon. Ssewanyana, appeared before police in the presence of his lawyers yesterday and hon. Ssegirinya is due to appear before the police for interrogation, also in the presence of his lawyer. That is the information we have now, from the Prime Minister. 

She says the letter for the Speaker is on the way. (Laughter) I do not know whether it is coming by boda boda but that should have happened before the act. 

However, honourable members, I seek your indulgence on this matter. What we do now will either be good or will not help the way forward, in finding a solution to this matter. 

Issues remain outstanding. Maybe the Attorney-General can help us with some aspects. 

3.18
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join issue with the statement issued by the Prime Minister. Indeed, they have been arrested and everything is being done to make sure that they are treated in accordance with the laws. 

It was an error not to come to you in time –(Interruptions) –

THE SPEAKER: Let us have some order. After that show of strength, can we now become normal and deal with this matter? (Laughter) Hon. Ssemujju, please, let us listen to each other. We all want a solution, please.
 
MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The two colleagues are going to be presented in court in accordance –(Interjections) they can go back as many times, as the offences they commit – (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Can we have some order please? 

3.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your kind indulgence. These are the kinds of situations, as leaders of our people, we try to avoid. When I saw the Rt Hon. Prime Minister come here, I had a warmth in my heart that finally a mother is around to speak to the country. I was disappointed of course. She is excusable. Surely, she did not know what was obtained in – 

The Attorney-General’s statement is most disturbing. I am only learning from here that the Attorney-General has a new Constitution to which we are not privy. Therefore, he can circumvent the position of the law and submit that “they will be produced” – We have the 48 hours rule. Mr Speaker, I heard you clearly and you are right. When somebody makes wrong, you do not join them to commit another wrong. That should be the limit. (Applause) 

Between the citizens and an eternally “criminal state”, the Parliament is the firewall. On my side, I am constrained. I am a very good and patient listener. The Leader of Government Business had nothing to tell the House other than lamentation. The learned Attorney-General, a senior at the Bar, is being legally scandalous. I cannot sustain this. 

In this circumstance, I would like to join you in not joining illegality. The biggest statement that a “criminal state” must receive today is that this should not come again. In the circumstances, I am constrained from continuing to lead my team because you are milking the truth from the Frontbench. I am afraid I am out of this, as the Leader of the Opposition because the Leader of Government Business has no business to communicate to my side.

The rights of citizens are being abused. The Attorney-General believes that it is at his discretion to say “they will appear”. A Member was complaining that he is sick. The Prime Minister believes that his life is in the future; that he will be taken to a hospital or wherever at some stage. 

Mr Speaker, I submit that I am constrained. I have no choice but to withdraw my team from this vulgar debate.

(Whereupon Members of the Opposition withdrew from Chamber.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we have some order? Hon. Nsibambi, if you are sitting down, please sit. If you are not –(Laughter) 

Honourable members, it is part of the rights of any Member of this House to signify dissent in a decent way. I do not approve of the idea of changing the dress code of this House. (Applause) However, I am not in any disagreement with the act of walking out; I have no problem with that. It is part of the expression of dissent that is permitted; that if you are not happy with a situation, you can walk out because the option would be to stay and become problematic. 

Therefore, I applaud the Leader of the Opposition for his leadership for leading his team out of the Chamber of this House without any drama, with the exception of the change of the dress code of this House. I applaud him for that because that is good leadership. If they had resorted to any other thing, probably, it would not have been that good. 

I also applaud you for staying calm even when things begin to get rather heated. That should be the spirit in which we handle this business. If you disagree with the process, you can walk out. That is acceptable. The cause of the dissent, however, must be put on record. 

Honourable members, it is problematic. Each time we find ourselves in this situation it disturbs even the presiding officers. There are things that should be avoided. The Constitution is clear and all the supporting laws made under it are clear about processes and procedures. Why flout them? (Applause) What is the emergency? When you do that, we end up like this and you give people with bad intent the excuse to do the things they have been longing to do. (Applause) Can we just do things right? 

Today, I was talking to some group of people and I told them that the biggest problem we have in this country is technical people stepping down directives from top officials of the Government. When they are told, “Do this” instead of assessing what can be done within the law, they just rush and do it. When the President says “no boda boda on the pavement”, in the evening, the policemen will start beating boda bodas on the pavements, and yet what the President said is a policy direction, which must be stepped down by the policy people. 

What is the import of the President’s statement that there should be no boda boda on the pavement? It simply means, create another lane for boda bodas, so that you clear the pavement. However, in the evening, we deploy the police and start beating boda bodas. That is exactly what is happening in this situation. There might have been instructions that “do the following” but then you go and do it the wrong way.

Technical people must learn to step down instructions that come from their leaders in terms of being implementable within the law. (Applause) Just follow the law and you will be safe. 

I don’t need to have the Attorney-General apologising to the House that it was not done the improper way. No, it is not necessary. It costs nothing to do the right thing within the law at the right time. Here we are, honourable members.

MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, allow me to say, thank you. I would like to inform you that we have seen what has happened and as the Leader of Government Business, I am going to have all those MDAs come together and we look for a way forward. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 3.30 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 29 September 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)


