PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - FIRST MEETINGWEDNESDAY , 14 SEPTEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA5549Wednesday, 14 September 2022Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, was an immaculate action-driven monarch who did not sit back in Buckingham Palace. She rolled her sleeves with the kind of passion and commitment that left the entire world in admiration. The Commonwealth was created to foment international cooperation and trade links between its members across the world. As its head, Queen Elizabeth II grew its membership from seven to 56 countries, representing over 2.5 billion people. This is extremely commendable. She also achieved this by travelling to around 200 countries to share ideas and preach unity. She first visited Uganda in 1954 and again in 2007, to attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. To honour her, one of our national parks is named after her. Part of that park is in my constituency.She once said, “If we all go forward together with unwavering faith, high courage and a quiet heart, we shall be able to make this ancient Commonwealth, which we all love dearly, an even grander thing - more free, more prosperous, more happy and more powerful influence for good in the world...”I urge all of you, honourable colleagues, to learn from the distinguished service and exemplary leadership of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. The call to leadership is a call to unite, grow and inspire the people under your IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - SPECIAL SITTING - FIRST MEETINGParliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY  SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today’s special sitting. This is entirely dedicated to paying tribute to Her Majesty the Queen of England, Elizabeth II. Without pre-empting the motion about to be moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, I would like to say that the world is in a period of mourning, following the death of Her Majesty, which occurred on Thursday, 8 September 2022.The Speaker of this House led us in signing a condolence book at the British High Commission. Today, I also went with the Executive of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and signed the condolence book and paid respects.Honourable members, as the Head of the Commonwealth to which we belong, it is commendable that we join the rest of the world and other Commonwealth parliaments to pay tribute to Her Majesty.5550TRIBUTE TO THE LATE H.M. QUEEN ELIZABETH II [The Deputy Speaker]charge. Let us honour her memory and legacy by contributing to the Commonwealth and indeed, ensure that we leave it better than we found it.As a House, we also take this opportunity to congratulate the successor, King Charles III. Being from the Royal family, he will learn from the best and we know that the mantle is in very safe hands.I, therefore, take this opportunity to call upon you to stand up to observe a minute of silence in honour of Her Majesty.(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Indeed, may God grant the people of the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth fortitude in overcoming the grief, and may the ever merciful and loving Lord grant Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, eternal rest.MOTION TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II FOR HER EXEMPLARY LEADERSHIP OF THE COMMONWEALTHTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before the Prime Minister moves the motion, this afternoon in the VIP Gallery, we have a delegation from the British High Commission in Kampala. They include:1. H.E. Kate Airey – the British High Commissioner to Uganda;2. Mr Phillip Smith – Development Director;3. Mr Simon Tucker – Political Counsellor; and4. Ms Christine Nakirya – Political and Governance Officer.They are all here to listen to the motion to pay tribute to the late, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)Also, this afternoon in the VIP Gallery, we have our distinguished visitors: the former Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Prof. Ogenga Morris Latigo – he was one of those who welcomed Her Majesty to this House in 2007, when he was the Leader of the Opposition. (Applause) He represented Agago North Constituency, Agago District at the time. He is here to observe to proceedings as we pay respect to Her Majesty. Professor, you are always welcome.We also have Mr Joseph Munyangabo, Country Director of the Westminster Foundation for Democracy. (Applause) He is here to observe our submissions as we pay respect to the late queen.2.23THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS  (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker and colleagues, I move under rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure to move a motion to pay glowing tribute to the late, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, the Queen of the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth realms, for her extraordinary contribution to the development of the Commonwealth. The motion reads:  “WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received, with deep sorrow, the news of the death of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, which occurred on Thursday, 8 September 2022 at Balmoral Castle, Scotland; AWARE THAT Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, the Head of the Commonwealth, presided over the Commonwealth with distinction for a period of 70 years, and her reign saw the Commonwealth grow from seven nations to 56 members, representing more than 2.5 billion people, and more than a third of the world’ s population;FURTHER AWARE THAT Her Majesty transformed the British Empire from a colonial group of countries to the Commonwealth of independent and equal States and, through her reign, played an important unifying role that reinforced the links by which the Commonwealth joins people together across the globe;5551THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 14 SEPTEMBER 2022APPRECIATING THAT during her reign, Her Majesty undertook more than 200 visits to the Commonwealth countries and visited almost every country of the Commonwealth, two of which were made to Uganda on 28 to 30 April 1954 and later from 21 to 24 November 2007;ACKNOWLEDGING THAT Her Majesty’ s visit to Uganda exhibited her passion and commitment to keeping up-to-date with developments in Uganda, and her visits contributed immensely to Uganda’ s development, global standing, as exemplified by the ability to host international conferences and ultimately encouraged direct investment in tourism, among others;RECOGNISING THAT Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II modernised and transformed the Commonwealth into an association that fosters international cooperation and trade links between people all over the world, and also into an association that upholds and advocates for democracy, good governance, peace, rule of law, respect for human rights and the access to justice for all;NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows: i. That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the people of the United Kingdom, the British Royal Family and the Commonwealth, on the loss of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II; andii. That Parliament takes cognisance of the immense contribution of Her Majesty towards the cooperation and development of the Commonwealth.” Mr Speaker, I beg to move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, Hon. Niwagaba, Hon. Gilbert Olanya, Hon. Bahati, the Government Chief Whip, Hon. Okupa, Hon. Sarah Opendi – and the whole House.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would you like to speak to your motion? MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, this is my justification.On Thursday, 8 September 2022, we received the sad news of the death of Queen Elizabeth II, Britain’s longest reigning monarch and the national figurehead, titular head of the Church of England and the armed forces, and a respected figure across the globe. Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II was the Head of State of Uganda from 1962 to 1963. When the country became an independent constitutional monarchy, she was the ceremonial Head of State with her constitutional roles delegated to the Governor-General of Uganda. Mr Speaker, Her Majesty had a special bond with Uganda. She visited Uganda twice – as I have already told you. Queen Elizabeth II first visited Uganda on 28 to 30 April 1952 and Kazinga National Park, in Western Uganda, was renamed Queen Elizabeth National Park in 1954, to commemorate her visit.Her Majesty later visited Uganda to attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) from 21 to 24 November 2007.Her Majesty was a dedicated Head of the Commonwealth, linking more than two billion people worldwide. She was known for her sense of duty and devotion to a life of service, having ascended the throne at the age of 25.Mr Speaker, the Queen saw public and voluntary service as one of the most important elements of her work.Her Majesty was a loyal patron and president of over 500 charities, professional bodies and public service organisations. These varied from well-established international charities to smaller bodies working in specialised areas, all on a local basis only. 5552TRIBUTE TO THE LATE H.M. QUEEN ELIZABETH II [Ms Nabbanja]The Queen’s patronage and charities covered a wide range of initiatives, from creating opportunities for young people to preserving wildlife and environment. As a loyal patron or president, Her Majesty provided vital publicity for the work of these organisations and allowed their enormous contribution to society to be recognised. Mr Speaker and colleagues, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II was a role model in her family life. For most of her working life, the Queen was supported by Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, who accompanied her on visits in the UK and overseas. Her Majesty raised four children whilst undertaking her duties as Queen, later becoming grandchildren and great grandchildren to the British Royal Family.Mr Speaker, the Queen had a strong Christian faith and diligently lived her role of heading the Church of England. In one of her annual Christmas broadcasts, she spoke of what she had learned from the teachings of Jesus, thus: “For me, the life of Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace, whose birth we celebrate today, is an inspiration and an anchor in my life. A role model of reconciliation and forgiveness, he stretched out his hands in love, acceptance and healing. Christ’ s example has taught me to seek to respect and value all people of whatever faith or none.”To this commitment, Mr Speaker, Her Majesty shaped her lifestyle and work for mankind across the world. Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Government of Uganda – headed by H.E. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni – and the people of Uganda, I wish to join the people of goodwill to celebrate the life of this great icon of leadership, respect, valour, royalty and modernity with a purpose.We send our heartfelt love and prayers of comfort to King Charles III, the Royal household, the British people and people across the Commonwealth. May the Almighty God grant her soul eternal peace and rest. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for your kind words. Leader of the Opposition as a seconder?2.35MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I join the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, and honourable colleagues, in paying tribute to the now late Queen Elizabeth II, the Queen of England and Head of the Commonwealth. On behalf of the Opposition in Parliament, I would like to join you, colleagues, in extending our sincere sympathy and heartfelt condolences to the Royal Family, the people of the United Kingdom and the larger Commonwealth of Nations family, upon the passing of an icon of the British monarchy.Amidst the veneration of established customs and guardedness to change, the Queen made multiple concessions in the modern era. She demonstrated formidable ability to adapt to the changing times with a high sense of duty, goodwill and professionalism. Culture ceased to be viewed as a relic of primitivism, but rather a place at the centre of modernity. The success of her reign affirms the validity of cultural institutions in advancing social transformation and development. Political leaders should, therefore, not perceive them as antagonistic, a tendency that is gaining ground in Uganda. I take this opportunity to welcome the reign of King Charles III, who automatically assumed monarchical authority upon the passing of his mother. This demystifies the norm that men cannot be heirs to women and vice versa. Wherever appropriate and based on ability, people ought to be encouraged to not undermine best-suited heirs based on gender considerations. Queen Elizabeth II distinguished herself as a world leader, and perhaps for many, the longest reigning queen we have known in our time. Unfortunately, some African leaders 5553THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 14 SEPTEMBER 2022have selectively cited her long reign as a Head of State to justify their clinging to power. However, they purposefully blind themselves to the fact that she was a head of a monarchy while they are heads of republics. (Applause)As a case for Uganda, the long stay in power by President Yoweri Museveni falls short of the admirable attributes of the reign of Queen Elizabeth II as a Head of State. (Applause) Her tenure on the throne superintended smooth transitions of governments worth emulating. She oversaw successful governments in the United Kingdom led by 15 different prime ministers, last of whom the Queen accepted her credentials just two days before her passing on. The President interestingly made this observation in his tribute, but has, on several occasions, been shy to facilitate a peaceful and smooth transition in Uganda. (Applause)For many generations since the accession to the crown, Queen Elizabeth II had a remarkable influence on how the world is run. No more was her influence felt than in the Commonwealth of Nations family. As a patron of the Commonwealth, she was at the helm of pursuing and facilitating a development agenda. At the time of her death, there is a huge outstanding opportunity as a tribute to deepen democracy and normalise transfers of power among Heads of State. Mr Speaker, in the death of the Queen, the United Kingdom has exhibited a systematic and seamless funeral as well as a transition arrangement. For years since the early 1960s, state organs have simulated the funeral plan of the Queen under a code phrase, “London Bridge is down”, whereas such simulation in Uganda would be perceived as disturbing the peace of the President. It is critical that funeral plans of Heads of State be developed ahead of time to avert the catastrophe that may befall our country, especially when we have life presidents. I invite colleagues to recall the message of Her Majesty in her address to the Parliament of Uganda in November 2007. The Queen alluded to the former UK Prime Minister, Sir Winston Churchill’s enduring description of Uganda as, “The Pearl of Africa; truly gifted by nature.” She also reiterated the United Kingdom’s committed friendship to the Pearl of Africa. She prudently themed her discourse on the recognition of the primacy of parliamentary democracy to Uganda and the Commonwealth as a whole. In the death of Queen Elizabeth II, we are called to order to emulate the life of our institutions and systems for prosperity and legitimacy. May God rest her soul in eternal peace. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. We are united in mourning the Queen and I hope we can give a united message to the country so that she knows she has left behind a united people. I think that is very important, honourable colleagues. Hon. Agnes Kunihira, Hon. Beatrice Anywar, Hon. Ecweru, Hajji Idi and Hon. Alex Byarugaba. Colleagues, I am going to give all of you chance. Clerk, set the clock for two minutes, each; no additional time. Is Hon. Enosi here? Hon. Enosi is the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Uganda Chapter. And, there is a message from that chapter where the Queen was our patron, and they represent us. Please, pass on that message first, then Hon. Margaret Rwabushaija. 2.43MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association branch, we stand to second the motion to pay tribute to the departed Queen for her exemplary leadership of the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth. It is with deep sadness that the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (Uganda Branch), and all Members of Parliament here who are members by subscription and representation, 5554TRIBUTE TO THE LATE H.M. QUEEN ELIZABETH II [Mr Asiimwe]learnt of the death of Her Majesty the Queen, who was our Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) patron and Head of the Commonwealth, on Thursday, 8 September 2022. The CPA has a membership of 180 Commonwealth Parliaments at national, state, provisional and territorial level with around 17,000 parliamentarians including the 529 of us, and parliamentary staff across nine regions and 54 countries. The association creates opportunities for parliaments of the Commonwealth to share best practices in legislation, executive oversight, democracy, gender equality, climate change, parliamentary leadership, and other evolving subjects of governance. Queen Elizabeth II supported the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association since her ascension to the throne in 1952, and later became the patron of the association in 1989. As Head of the Commonwealth, Her Majesty, recognised the importance of the association’s core values and aspirations, expressed through the Commonwealth Charter, which she signed in 2013. Including democracy, human rights and peace. The Queen was also a strong advocate for the young people of the Commonwealth. During her 70-year reign, the Queen visited Uganda - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude.MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: The Queen visited Uganda twice, and she gave her goodwill message where the she wished the delegates well and appreciated the theme of the conference, which was, “Adaptation, Engagement and Evolution in a rapidly changing Commonwealth”. To this end, she wrote, “I must appreciate your thoughtful words”. As an Association, we take note of the leadership qualities that we learnt from her, from the time she ascended to the throne at a very young age of 25 years. She showed maturity, character, determination and commitment of the highest order, which has made her one of the longest reigning monarchs in the world. In her reign of 70 years, she had several qualities, but specifically, as an association, we take note of her leadership qualities, and her leading by example. Her leadership qualities were exhibited during her 21st birthday speech. She addressed the nation and shared her vision with the world when she said, “I declare before you all that my whole life, whether it be long or short, shall be devoted to your service and service of our greater imperial family to which we all belong.” Again, we take note of her leadership by example; she exemplified servant leadership. She considered her work as a service and greater other works in the same way. When Queen Elizabeth ascended to the throne, the UK was still suffering from the effects of World War II. She took responsibility to improve the situation and succeeded in getting the UK out of trouble. During World War II, she joined the auxiliary territorial service to become an expert mechanic and driver, despite being a queen. She trained alongside other British women, which is a testament of her commitment to serving her people. As an association, at the time of her death, we have been trained particularly from the African group. We had petitioned the British Government to change the status of the CPA from a British charity to an international parliamentary organisation. Unfortunately, at the time of her death, we had not achieved that, but we believe with time, we shall achieve it through the association leadership and engagement with other stakeholders. Lastly, her death deprives the British people, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, and all good-willed people, of the thread that wove the nations and the people under the Commonwealth together; that linked us to the past with the British. As an Association, we beg to support the motion. 5555THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 14 SEPTEMBER 2022May the soul of the departed Queen rest in eternity. Thank you so much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Margaret, Rwabushaija. Colleagues, two minutes each.2.48MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion, moved by none other than the Prime Minister. I want to add my voice to say that the person we are mourning today was a unifier and very open, to the extent that, in our past, as Ugandans, when one of the former Presidents expelled the Indians, they found solace in Britain and started a new life. That means that she, and her team, were concerned about the fact that this country had been a British colony. As we mourn, we should remember, that during her time, one of her ancestors, King Henry VIII, led the break away from the Catholic Church. But even then, she did not look back. And, when you look at the history and what is happening today in Britain, it is not only members of the Anglican Church –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Please, colleagues. Two minutes, maximum. I had allowed Hon. Beatrice Anywar and Hon. Ecweru. 2.50THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT)(Ms Beatrice Anywar):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to support the motion. Honourable colleagues, we are here to mourn Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, who was a mother to many people, a lady of class and fashion, and yet she was so humble and loving. She was an inspiration to all, especially women in leadership. She was an environmentalist and she loved nature. She was a distinguished leader - a leader who showed commitment and united the Commonwealth. And for that, we, who aspire for leadership, especially the women, do not doubt the leadership of a woman because Her Majesty stood out. I was in Parliament in 2007 when she visited Uganda. I saw a lady who loved Uganda. At her level, she would not have bothered so much, but we have already been told how she had visited all the Commonwealth Parliaments. For this, colleagues, we must pay tribute to such an outstanding lady. The benefits to the Government of Britain, under the leadership of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth are enormous. We appreciate, as a country, but more particularly, I am touched by the continuous scholarships that are given to this country, to our young generation, empowering them –(Member timed out.)2.52THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS)(Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I rise to second the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, to pay tribute to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. In my culture, Mr Speaker, when a person of dignity of this stature passes on, we who are still lucky to be alive must all show unity and we must never allow anything that appears to divide us be presented when paying tribute to a person of this calibre. Queen Elizabeth II was a very dignified lady. She has left both an illustrious life and a very illustrious career. It is true I was also privileged to be in this House when she visited, and we hosted her at Munyonyo. You could see dignity, you could see a mother, and you could see somebody who was in tandem with the changes that have taken place over the years. We are indeed proud, as a country, that whereas colonial history may have had its own challenges, the post-colonial arrangements have brought us together as a family, such that 5556TRIBUTE TO THE LATE H.M. QUEEN ELIZABETH II [Mr Ecweru]today, I can stand here and speak in English and all of you here can communicate in English. My English may have a bit of Ateso in it, but at least I can communicate with you in one language that makes us a family.  (Applause)2.54MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, I would like to join my dear colleagues and everybody here to pay tribute to a great person that lived on this earth. We are all gathered here to celebrate the life of an extraordinary woman who was a warrior, a stateswoman, a great mother and the leader of the Commonwealth for such a long time. To be able to speak about her is quite precious and gives me great honour, and I want to thank you, so much, Mr Speaker. I had the opportunity to also move around with the Queen through this corridor up to where she was going to plant a tree. I did not get the opportunity to take a photo with her, but I still have those great memories. At least I brushed shoulders with her. (Laughter) She was always very buoyant and had a great sense of humour. She was extremely courageous in times of hardship, especially during the Second World War. She never ran away from London. She spoke -(Member timed out.)2.56MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join the rest in seconding the motion to pay tribute to the distinguished leader of the Commonwealth. As a country, we join the rest of the world to mourn and talk about the good things that Queen Elizabeth II did, especially in the Commonwealth countries.We shall always remember her as a unifier and a great leader who did a lot of things, especially in the Commonwealth countries. She even gave us – actually where we are now - we cannot fail to talk about this because the Chamber we occupy now is part of the fruits that we shall always remember Queen Elizabeth II for. Having led the Commonwealth for a period of 70 years, it should always remind us that age is not a measure of performance; even when she was 70 -(Member timed out.)2.54MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to join Members in seconding the motion, as moved by the Prime Minister, to pay tribute to the late Queen Elizabeth II of Great Britain.On a closer social note, when the Queen first came to Uganda, my stepmother, the late Asio Betty Ebiau, was one of the children who received her.In 2007, when she heard that the Queen was again coming, she was about 70 years, and I brought her here to witness the Queen’s visit to Uganda. Also, the children of St. Elizabeth Girls Secondary School, Kasilo, were among those who received the Queen in 2007 during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM).As people from Kasilo, it is a great loss because we feel connected to the UK. The late often called upon the young people to play a part in many global challenges that cannot be resolved by older generations alone, whether in the Commonwealth as a whole or in each of the member states.When she last visited Uganda during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in 2007, Queen Elizabeth left us with a challenge -(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, because your mother welcomed the Queen in 1954 -(Laughter)- you get a favour today.MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. She said to our President: “President Yoweri Museveni, you will be familiar with the Ugandan proverb, which says, “Those who walk together warm each other. In its sense of unity giving strength, this could just as easily be a Commonwealth proverb as it is a Ugandan one.” That is the quote from Her Majesty at that time.5557THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 14 SEPTEMBER 2022Mr Speaker, the late left and shaped the fashion world. Even at her age, you saw how well dressed she was; it was a message to everyone. That is why we give tribute also to our Speaker - you can see how she dresses. I think she is trying to emulate the Queen. I would like to call upon all Members to always be smart. It sends a message. May her soul rest in eternal peace.3.01MR OKIN P. P. OJARA (FDC, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion to pay tribute to Her Majesty, the Queen of England. I would like to continue from where the Rt Hon. Prime Minister stopped, that the Queen was a role model for peace building, conflict resolution and reconciliation.I would like to concur with you that from 1992 to 2004, we applaud the British Government, through the Queen, for financing the Amnesty Commission of Uganda. And we all know that the Amnesty Commission did a great deal to bring about peace in Northern Uganda. Besides that, we have had Mega FM, which was financed by the Department for International Development (DFID), which is the British arm of the Government, in terms of development. In terms of peace building and conflict -(Member timed out.)3.03MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (Independent, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ojara, your mother never welcomed the Queen; you do not have that opportunity. (Laughter)MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am here to support the motion to pay tribute to the fallen Queen of Britain. When the Queen visited Uganda during CHOGM, I was a young boy in primary school and I remember being paraded along the way to welcome her. It is only proper that today, you have given me the opportunity to also speak. (Laughter) I could speak about the personality of the Queen, but that will not be enough. I just want to thank Government for picking one yardstick from the Queen’s life; the yardstick of showing that women are great leaders in this country. I do not take this for granted. We have had a woman Vice-President, a Speaker, who is a woman and we still have a Speaker who is a woman, and we have many ministers on the front bench who are women. This does not go unnoticed and I request Ugandans that if there is anything we can learn from the Queen, it is to show that our girls, women and the future girls, can lead this country too. Thank you, Mr Speaker.3.04MS SUSAN ABEJA  (Independent, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Otuke District and on my own behalf, I extend my heartfelt sympathy and condolence to the people of the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth upon the passing of Queen Elizabeth II. Our history expresses a strong relationship that the Queen had with Uganda, leaning to our colonial history. She has left a strong legacy of service for the many years she served as the supreme leader of the United Kingdom. When she succeeded her father, King George IV , at the age of 25, she approved our independence, after a protectorate relationship of 68 years. Her stewardship clearly informs the world that women are fit to serve at the top-most national positions and, indeed, she became a living example of women emancipation and –(Member timed out.)5558TRIBUTE TO THE LATE H.M. QUEEN ELIZABETH II3.06MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbale City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to the others’ to support the motion to pay tribute to the fallen, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. It gives me great joy to be part of those paying tribute to the Queen, given the fact that she lived an exemplary life; a life to serve beyond self. Many parents have emulated her by supporting the girl-child. I have one of my nieces, who even named her daughter after Queen Elizabeth II. We call that girl “Queen Elizabeth” because she has left a mark. As Uganda, we shall never forget her. Even when she visited us, our park at Kazinga Channel was renamed “Queen Elizabeth National Game Park”. This will remain in the books of Uganda –(Member timed out.)3.08MR GODFREY WERE (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to join colleagues to pay tribute to the fallen leader by singling out one thing. When Her Majesty came to Africa, she continued to forge a strong bond among the African leaders. This was seen when she visited Nelson Mandela twice. She also visited Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana. This was with the view of bringing a strong bond between UK and the African leaders. Also, her visits to Uganda in 1954 and 2007, strengthened the relationship between Uganda and UK.Therefore, I join the rest of the world to wish and pray for her soul to rest in peace. Thank you.3.09MR NKUNYINGI MUWADA  (NUP, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise as the Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs, to support the motion to pay tribute to the fallen Queen. She was a great leader, who loved Africans and Ugandans. I was very young when she visited Uganda, but I acknowledge the fact that Britain and the whole of the Commonwealth have been development partners to Uganda. As rightly cited by the mover of the motion, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Queen was an advocate of the rule of law and human rights. I hereby urge the Government to use the week of mourning to pardon political prisoners. Release them on bail. (Applause) We have Members of Parliament – Hon. Ssegirinya and Hon. Ssewanyana – and many other political detainees. Why not pardon them or even release them on bail, at least, in acknowledgement of the wonderful contribution of the Queen and in support of human rights, rule of law, good governance and democracy. I beg to move. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think Hon. Nkunyingi is saying that the UK Government should release all prisoners it has –MR NKUNYINGI:  Mr Speaker, I was -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, you do not access the microphone without my permission. 3.10MS ESTHER MBAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Luuka that I represent and on my own behalf, I join colleagues in mourning and paying tribute to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, who was a regnant of 32 sovereign states during her lifetime and 15 at the time of her death. Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II executed her duties excellently. As the keeper of the nation’s constitutional flame, the monarch used the powers to appoint and dismiss ministers, summon Parliament and give royal assent to the Bills passed by Parliament.The interesting facts about Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II are that she was not born in a palace, yet lived there most of her lifetime. She was in Kenya when her father died –(Member timed out.)5559THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 14 SEPTEMBER 20223.12MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. On behalf of my family and the fraternity of the persons with disabilities, I would like to pay tribute to the British Royal Family, people of UK and the Commonwealth nations. Under the leadership of the Queen, Uganda received funds to support the elderly people – SAGE – which we are all proud of in this House. All of us want it in our constituencies. Under DFID, we were able to support persons with disabilities. Under the leadership of the Queen, we were able to see that the Commonwealth was disaggregated.  We had Commonwealth for young people and Commonwealth for people with disabilities. She was an icon of humility. She would think of everybody. However small or disadvantaged you were, the Queen would think about you. It is my hope and prayer that her attributes are emulated by us, the leaders, who are living today. I wish His Majesty King Charles III and the Royal Family good life. To the British High Commission in Uganda, Uganda stands with you in this time of mourning. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Omara and then Hon. Ebwalu.  Now, colleagues, if you change your sitting position so that you attract my eye, you know that I will not pick you; please go back to wherever you were seated. (Laughter) Because I know some of you - and you are my friends; you know that I am good at watching.3.14MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, about paying homage to the departed Queen. Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate Her Majesty’s Government for being a friend to Uganda over the years; Uganda has received a lot of funds through bilateral support, which has been instrumental in the fulfilment of our various budget outcomes. The second point is about her role as the monarch in the United Kingdom, and in maintaining peace in the Republic of United Kingdom. You remember that during the early days of our democracy, we had a shattered history, where we experimented with mixing a monarchy with a republic. I hope that as a Parliament, we get to learn that we can coexist with monarchs, while having a republic at the same time. In addition, there should be no gray areas in terms of our roles, and I believe that the Queen has been able to play that role very well. So, I hope that the Government and the monarchy - (Member timed out.)3.16MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti):  Mr Speaker, I join the Prime Minister to pay tribute to Her Majesty the Queen. The Queen has died at the age of only 96; she has died young and at the time the world needed her most. But we pray that her soul rests in eternal peace. Mr Speaker, the Queen was the epitome of the British culture and civilisation. I want to appeal to our leaders in Uganda, that if you are occupying any office, you must create a conducive environment so that if you fall, like the Queen, the country must move on. In memory of the Queen, this Government can have its own shortcomings, but in the promotion and recognition of women, this Government scores a distinction. I want to thank Government for that. May her soul rest in eternal peace. 3.18MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and on behalf of the people of Uganda, particularly 5560TRIBUTE TO THE LATE H.M. QUEEN ELIZABETH IIthose from Pakwach, I want to mourn with the people of the United Kingdom for the loss of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. Mr Speaker, under the leadership of the Queen, the Government of Uganda has received a lot of budget support in areas of humanitarian needs and in health. In Pakwach District, especially, we got funding from the Irish Government where a fish handling plant was constructed at Dei Subcounty, but unfortunately, it has been washed away by the flooding. Now, that we mourn the Queen, I urge this Government to restore that fish handling plant so that the Queen’s memory lives in this country. Mr Speaker, I want to mourn the Queen. As a woman, she has shown that women are very strong and firm when put in position of leadership. I once again thank our Government for giving the women of Uganda opportunities. That is why I stand here, very firm and very strong, to represent the people of Uganda. I condole with the people of the UK. May her –(Member timed out.)3.19MR FREDRICK GUME (NRM, Bulamogi North West County, Kaliro): Mr Speaker, I join the rest of the Members to mourn and celebrate the life of the fallen Queen. I support the motion, and in one statement, I would like to mention that when you pass on, you belong to the past. I have this to say: The past is past and nothing can change it. However, for your sake, you learn from that past and let it go. We have learnt from the Queen’s life; she created a sense of unity in the country. We were scattered in different tribes but now we can address ourselves as Ugandans. We have a common language that unites us all. I have been thinking and imagining that if it was not for colonialism - there are advantages. If one was speaking in Lusoga, another in Ateso or Lulamogi - my own language - we would be scattered. Therefore, it is an opportunity for us to also celebrate some advantages of colonialism. I join the rest -(Member timed out.)3.21THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Hamson Obua): Mr Speaker, in 2007, while serving as the Youth Member of Parliament representing the Northern Region and the Regional Youth Representative to the Commonwealth Africa Regional Office in Lusaka, Zambia, I had the opportunity to be a member of the International Planning Committee and the spokesperson of the Commonwealth Youth Forum that was hosted by the Republic of Uganda - a meeting that precedes the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM). As a member of the International Planning Committee, and the spokesperson of the Commonwealth Youth Forum, we were privileged to have dinner with Her Majesty the Queen at Buckingham Palace in the United Kingdom. During that occasion, we were able, as youth from the Commonwealth member states, to interact with Her Majesty the Queen. Mr Speaker, coming to Uganda, the fact that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister alluded to the issue of the Queen visiting Uganda twice speaks volumes -(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need the full story; can you conclude the full story in one minute?MR OBUA: In a minute, Mr Speaker, when you look at the list of countries visited by the Queen twice, Uganda is one of the few. To me, this was a vote of confidence, not only on the people of Uganda, or our country Uganda, but also on the leadership that we had put in place as a country. I am happy to affirm that on the two occasions the Queen visited Uganda, one of them is already on record that the National Resistance [Ms Pacuto]5561THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 14 SEPTEMBER 2022Movement (NRM) was the one in power under the leadership of Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni -(Interjection)- That is a fact that you cannot run away from. Mr Speaker, this indicates that Uganda upholds the principles and the values of the Commonwealth. You cannot host the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) where all the fraternal family of the Commonwealth come together. It is only until you fall within the category of those upholding the doctrines, the principles and the mission for which the Commonwealth stands, and I want to thank Her Majesty the Queen for visiting Uganda twice.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chief Whip. Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have National Youth Council leaders from Teso subregion. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)Hon. David Bahati?3.25THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY, AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, Queen Elizabeth II, now belongs to the ages but we remember her in so many ways. I do have fond memories of her when she came here in 2007. I played the role of a prince and Hon. Catherine Mavenjina acted as the queen. (Laughter) And, when I was a student at Cardiff University, we had the privilege to visit her at the palace and those memories will remain in my mind. We also remember the Queen as a force of influence on the world stage. She was a force of democracy in the world. She was a force of unity in diversity. You recall, colleagues, in 2009, when we moved here in this House and debated the issue of anti-homosexuality. All the world leaders condemned this House, but the Queen believed that we had different cultures and never condemned this House. (Applause) The Commonwealth has different values, we have different cultures but we cannot have one culture, and that was a very good way of recognising that there is unity in diversity. The Queen promoted democracy in the Commonwealth, and I think as a country, we should really be proud of ourselves that we have been a great ally for the promotion of democracy as the Queen believed. Every five years, under the leadership of President Yoweri Museveni, we hold elections. (Applause) We hold elections; so, the voices that come should really be appreciating that having a democratic process in this country is in the spirit of the Commonwealth and in support of what Queen Elizabeth believed in. Lastly, I want to say that the Queen was a symbol of peace, and His Excellency the President, in his memory, was able to tell us when we had a little conflict with the Government of Kenya under Daniel Arap Moi, she was able to bring -(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. General Muhoozi. 3.27THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker, allow me to support the motion by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to pay tribute to the life of the departed Queen, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. Through her leadership; a large and influential persona, her life was truly monumental. She represented the British national psych. She was the epitome of the balance between a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy. Lastly, she was a depository of British global positive soft power and influence as Head of the Commonwealth. Our souls go to the British people. May her soul rest in peace. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Anifa Kawooya? 5562TRIBUTE TO THE LATE H.M. QUEEN ELIZABETH II3.29 THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Kawooya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in seconding the motion and in paying tribute to the longest reigning monarchy, icon and the longest custodian of uninterrupted democracy, peace-building and the rule of law. Mr Speaker, it is on record that the Queen and the Government have been at the forefront in the preservation of our environment. When it comes to this moment, it is very befitting as a country that we should pay high tribute to the Queen, especially in the area of tourism. Ever since the Queen came here in 1952, and up to 2007, we have seen our tourism industry growing and accelerating, and becoming one of the accelerators of our economic growth. Mr Speaker, as the Minister of State for Health, I would also like to request that the country appreciates the Queen’s contribution, especially to the Government towards our health sector, and especially during the time of COVID-19. The assistance we got, the vaccines and all that we have received, the country will remain very grateful. Finally, Mr Speaker –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: UWOPA?3.30MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to colleagues who have mentioned the good things that the Queen was able to do during her time, specifically in Uganda. Mr Speaker, I want to state that the Queen was an icon of peace and she was a lady who was committed to dignity and democracy. In 1947, when she took over this mantle, she pledged to dedicate her life to service and she did that consistently. Mr Speaker, she also ensured that she stuck to her lane. She did not get involved in the politics of the country, and that is why we are able to see a stable United Kingdom. She said, in one of her quotes, “Let us not be too serious. None has a monopoly over wisdom; let us be tolerant to divergent views.” This is where, sometimes, we make a mistake because you cannot think that you are always right. Listen to the other side too and then make a decision. Mr Speaker –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Rutahigwa, then Dr Anthony Okullo. 3.32DR ELISA RUTAHIGWA (NRM, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion as moved by our Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to pay tribute to the fallen Queen – let me say – of the world, and specifically because of her good traits which made her a visionary leader, hardworking and someone who is different from many other leaders; someone that embraced change. One of the traits I want to talk about, Mr Speaker, is her ardent support to health service delivery. Because of that, since she visited Uganda and Kazinga National Park was named after her – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Anthony Okullo, then Hon. Mawanda and a maiden speech from Hon. Kamara. 3.33DR ANTHONY OKULLO (NRM, Lamwo County, Lamwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, and join the previous speakers in paying tribute to Her Majesty the Queen. She was the pinnacle and epitome of the power of a woman the world over. (Applause) The Queen was the pinnacle and epitome of all mothers of the world. She gave birth to King Charles III on the 14th of November 1948. I was born around the same time though the year earlier.It is, therefore, at a personal level, that my love and that of my family goes out to Her Majesty the Queen and the Royal family of the UK. On 5563THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 14 SEPTEMBER 2022behalf of the people of Lamwo District, I say that may her soul rest in peace.I want to add, since I have a few seconds. Colleagues, I understand there is a rumour –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from Hon. Mawanda. Hon. Okullo, since it is a rumour, we can wait for it. ( Laughter)3.35MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in paying tribute to the fallen Queen. Mr Speaker, allow me sum up the life of the Queen, by reading a verse in the Bible: 2 Timothy 4:7-8, which reads: “I have fought the big fight. I have finished the race. I have kept the faith.” Mr Speaker, she has lived up to that. Secondly, the former Prime Minister, John Major, while talking about the late, said thus: “Everybody is capable of being famous, but not everybody can be great.” That Queen Elizabeth was a great woman, that greatness is determined by the services or the hearts you touch during your lifetime. Queen Elizabeth, through her charities, through her programme –(Member timed out.)3.36MR JOHN KAMARA-NIZEYIMANA (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is correct and true that the Queen died. (Laughter) But a man of today looks at that of yesterday, to know that of tomorrow. However much we debate, the Queen is not going to resurrect. (Laughter) What is important is that if the Queen died, there is a new king. What next? This is a Queen who has been heading over 50 countries. Some of them get problems, others do not mind. Uganda is a member and other countries, as you know them. To me, the Commonwealth should not be looked at as just a Commonwealth. This must be a symbol of unity, where countries must realise that they are under one umbrella and in case there is a problem in one country or another, then Commonwealth countries must understand - if King Charles has taken over - (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamara, please conclude; due to public demand.MR KAMARA-NIZEYIMANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When my brother, the Hon. Okupa, said that his stepmother was among the girls that went to welcome the Queen - and when someone said that she came to visit Ghana, when Ghana had problems, this must not continue like this. We are in Uganda, for example - we have other countries that may be facing some of these problems. But one country must not sit idle looking at another, just waiting -(Laughter)- my brothers and sisters, we must look into the future. We must understand that this world has challenges and changes. Any other time, anything may happen. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Kamara.3.39MR HERBERT ARIKO (NRM, Soroti East Division, Soroti City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that this parliament pays tribute to Her Majesty, the Queen of Great Britain. I support this motion for a few reasons, one of which being that the leadership of Queen Elizabeth II provided a sense of stability and continuity in governance. Indeed, the world over, Mr Speaker, you will find that many of the ethos of leadership was attributed to the Queen, which is why many times you hear people say, “I am going to the Queen’s land. Will you speak in the Queen’s language?” That was a sense of aura and stability that she provided while a constitutional monarch. Mr Speaker, during her reign, the Queen and her Government shared in recognising excellence, success, as well as voluntary service of the people. That is why the ranks of the Orders of the British Empire (OBE) –(Member timed out.)5564TRIBUTE TO THE LATE H.M. QUEEN ELIZABETH II3.41MS JULIET ACHAYO (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The death of Her Majesty the Queen brings great sadness that is felt in the Commonwealth, where our commitment was resolute and by countless people around the globe. She leaves behind an extraordinary legacy of exemplary services and dignity in public life. For more than 70 years, she devoted her whole life, selflessly to the people of the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth. May her soul rest in peace.3.41MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to second the motion. By the traditions of the Luo people, death, at the age of the Queen and with her enormous work, is considered celebrated rather than mourned.Secondly, I want to acknowledge two core lessons that we learn from the Queen’s exemplary life.The first is the acknowledgment of the youth as leaders of today and not just leaders of tomorrow. If you listen to stories about the life of the Queen, you realise that she rose to the throne at the age of 25 years. This is also a reminder that we need to continue placing the young people on the decision-making table. Secondly, we need to deliberately mentor our young people. If you also look at the life of the Queen – (Member timed out.)3.43MR SOWEDI KITANYWA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising to support the motion and join the rest of my colleagues in paying tribute to the fallen Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. Queen Elizabeth was a woman of unmatched dignity, whose public life needs to be emulated by many people in the world. Her public conduct, especially the way she used to dress, is worth emulating.The Queen was a kind-hearted woman who has left a lasting impression all over the world. For example, look at the number of donations that have been coming from the United Kingdom and the rest of the Commonwealth countries under -(Member timed out.)3.55MR SIMON WOKORACH (NRM, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I was dying to mention my prayers. Like the Bible says, there is a time for everything. Time came when Her Majesty was born, offered her service, lived her life and now, has passed on. Mr Speaker, I want to make this simple prayer and I wish that the institution takes it very seriously. It should not stop at the British High Commission in Uganda here. I wish for this institution of Parliament, led by the Speaker, to send a delegation to pay tribute during the burial of Her Majesty. As the rest of the Arms of the Government do their work, this institution must send a delegation. I pray.3.46MS ROBINAH RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Gomba West, I rise to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to Her Majesty the Queen. She shared a bit of herself with all of us across the world and demonstrated an admirable work ethic. We remember her in Uganda because of the physical features and parks named after her and her visits thereto. She was a remarkable dresser – ever smart; the hat, the dress, the shoe and the jewellery were a good example to ladies all over the world. She feared God and dedicated her work to God’s guidance. We thank her for coming to grace the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in 2007, and for all the benefits we obtained. We thank her for being a 5565THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 14 SEPTEMBER 2022family person, for being by Prince Phillip’s side and for treasuring the British Royal Family. We always saw little children around her. May God rest her soul in eternal peace.3.45MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I am in charge of time. We can even sit up to midnight.MR MUZAALE: Mr Speaker, I join the rest of the colleagues in celebrating the life of the Queen. Personally, I will remember the Queen for two things; one being when she came to commission the dam in Jinja. Today, we are still enjoying the fruits of that dam. The Basoga here must be proud of the Queen – and the Baganda, equally  -(Interjections)- okay, all Ugandans.Mr Speaker, for the many contributions that the British Government has made to this country, we appreciate the Queen. We all agree that during the time of colonialism, there was a lot of good planning in this country. For all the cities that we are enjoying now, including Jinja City, the planning was actually supervised by the British Government. We thank Her Majesty the Queen for whatever contribution she made to this country. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, very often, I have told you not to get side talk and formalise it on the Hansard record. The person who will be reading the Hansard will be asking himself or herself where these words were coming from. The people on the sides, who are trying to influence the direction of your speech, are not being recorded whereas whatever you speak is recorded. So, please, do not respond to colleagues who are calling you from the sides. It will make it very easy for our Hansard to be very clean and intact. 3.49MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice to pay tribute to Queen Elizabeth II. She was born a leader and died a leader. I would like to talk about her as a mother, leader and wife. We all acknowledge that she was the leader of many sovereign countries. However, Queen Elizabeth never compromised her responsibility as a mother and wife. She raised her children responsibly. No wonder today, King Charles has taken on the responsibilities of his mother without fear. May her soul rest in eternal peace.3.51MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, these days, when men work hard, they are called “Madam”. (Laughter) It is okay. It used to be that when women work hard, they are called “Sir”. Now it can be the other way round. So, continue with “Madam Speaker”. (Laughter)MR OTIMGIW: Apologies, Mr Speaker. I stand here to take on my second citizenship as a Ugandan-British citizen. I feel very sad to have lost our Queen, and it is sad that I am not in the United Kingdom to pay my respects at the palace, but I am paying them here today. I would like to thank our late Queen for opening up the United Kingdom to the rest of the world. I actually lived in that country for 15 years. I returned three years back and I am now serving in the politics of Uganda. Hopefully, when I retire, I may end up going to retire in the House of Lords. The Queen did her best not to close the United Kingdom to the rest of the world. She opened the doors to everybody to be able to integrate with anyone from the UK. May her soul rest in peace. We shall miss her dearly. Thank you.5566TRIBUTE TO THE LATE H.M. QUEEN ELIZABETH IITHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Isaac, how come you do not speak like Hon. Katusabe? (Laughter) Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery, this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Boston High School Mpala from Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso District. They are represented by Hon. Michael Kakembo and Hon. Betty Naluyima. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)I had called Hon. Okumu – and we have an unfinished story between Hon. Bahati and Hon. Mavenjina.3.53MR GABRIEL OKUMU (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): On behalf of the people of Okoro Constituency in Zombo District, I join the rest of the world to pay our sincerest tribute to Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II. On her coronation day, she said, and I quote: “It does not matter how long I live; I will dedicate my life to serve.” Indeed, she served humanity with dignity, grace and a warm heart. She visited Uganda in 1954 and 2007. She has kept the Commonwealth countries together and this will always remain in our memories. With that, May God rest her soul in eternal peace. I submit.3.55MS RUTH LEMATIA  (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I rise to support the motion for three important reasons. On behalf of the people of Maracha East, I would like to say that the Queen lived a very decent and fruitful life. First, I remember the Queen because she was born a year after my mother. Secondly, I remember the Queen because English was introduced as a subject when I was in Primary Two. I was in Primary Two when she visited Owen Falls in 1954, and we were taught to sing for her health. We used to sing yori during her birthday for God to save the Queen, and that she is a gracious queen; so, she should live long. Since she has lived a long life, I praise God for that. Now that the one who is ascending to the throne is 73 - and I think Ugandans should stop saying – (Member timed out.)3.56MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (NRM, West Budama North East County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Her Majesty’s Government is on record for supporting the building of institutions in this country. I will illustrate this. Many of you who are as old as I am will remember the British military training team that helped us to transform our Army from the NRA to the current UPDF. You may also recall that in the 1990s, the British sponsored a number of expatriate judges to the Judiciary. We had a Judiciary that had totally collapsed. Her Majesty’s Government sponsored the likes of Justice Platt and Justice Barko that laid the foundation for the Judiciary we have today. Mr Speaker, you may also remember that up to today, many of our military officers get training from an elite training school - Sandhurst. I do not know why Gen. Muhoozi forgot to talk about this. I am citing all these examples to show that Her Majesty – (Member timed out.)3.58MR GIDUDU MAFWABI (NRM, Older Persons, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the older persons in Uganda, most of whom sung, “God Save the Queen,” I extend our deepest condolences and commiserations to the British.The Queen was a lady of clout, majesty, dignity, humanity, femininity and a unifier. By coincidence, the Queen is a mother figure. Her son was born on 14 November 1948, and I was born on 1 November 1948. Our President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni is a son of Kaguta. President Museveni is not a monarch; he is in power because he is a 5567THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 14 SEPTEMBER 2022democrat. He has given us elections every year and we appreciate that. (Applause) This is part of the British heritage – democracy, rule of law and humanity and that will continue. We hope that when the Opposition -(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the record, elections are every five years.4.00MR TARSIS RWABURINDORE (NRM, Ibanda Municipality, Ibanda):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice and support the motion of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. A lot has been said about the Queen - the unifying factor, the icon, peacemaker, etcetera. I will add only one thing: I will offer my prayers for her soul.I would like to make one request, that I should be included on the team travelling for the burial on the 19th. Thank you. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you know you have collected any mabugo from Ibanda Municipality, then we shall see a way of delivering it through the British High Commission.4.01MR JOEL SSENYONYI  (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues in commiserating with the family of the departed Queen, the people of the United Kingdom and the entire Commonwealth family. However, I will not only commiserate and mourn. I wish to celebrate her life - the 96 years that she lived and the 70 years she reigned as Queen. Next month, we are going to celebrate our country’s 60th Independence anniversary - I get bothered when I see leaders in our country blame some of the challenges we have today on our colonial masters. It does not make sense to me; 60 years later, we should have grown up.  (Applause) If anything, today, we should be thanking our former colonial masters for some of the good they did. Today, they support our healthcare, education and all of that. Therefore, I get bothered when I hear people who blame issues of governance, bad health and so on, on our colonial masters. You hear them say, “Our colonial masters.” I think we need to grow up. You cannot be 60 years old, for example, and say that you are an orphan. It just does not make sense –(Member timed out.)4.03MS CHRISTINE KAAYA  (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to mourn the fallen Queen. We are very happy that her death was announced as a peaceful one at 96. We celebrate the Queen’s life that was very cognisant of climate change management. I remember in the UN Conference on Climate Change last year, 1 November 2021, the Queen reminded us, the leaders, to act above Government and politics. She requested us to act as statesmen because that is when we shall be able to serve the children and the children of our children. She also reminded us to always do actions, aware that will end in some time and be aware that we shall all one time die. Therefore, we are supposed to mind about climate change; we shall remain echoing your message, the late Queen. May your soul rest in eternal peace.  4.04DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Queen lived an exemplary life in leadership, as a Commander-in-Chief, as the Head of State, also as the Head of the Commonwealth. In Uganda, we are going to remember her and her contribution to modern Uganda. She oversaw and commissioned power generation in this country; the Owen Falls Dam, which contributed to the new Uganda. We are not going to forget her role in charity that has touched millions of people globally. May her soul rest in eternal peace.5568TRIBUTE TO THE LATE H.M. QUEEN ELIZABETH II4.05MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A lot has been said but I would like to add my voice on behalf of the people of Buhweju to support this motion. Mr Speaker, when people become “big” many of them develop a sense of entitlement. They want to show that they are powerful, with a lot of money and authority; but we are talking about a humble human being, very powerful but humble. Other people would want to show you who they are. They tell you how they are Generals who can fight, imprison you, beat you and they can do anything to you; they have a lot of money, they even splash it in public. I would like to thank her for living an exemplary and humble life. May her soul rest in peace. Thank you.4.06MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Mr Speaker, I stand on behalf of the united people of Bukomansimbi South County to support the motion. The Queen has been very instrumental in supporting sports. This has been exhibited through the Commonwealth Games, which is one of the highest platforms where sportsmen come and showcase their talents.Secondly, in 1954, she supported us to build Nakivubo Stadium in memory of our grandfathers who fought in World War II. In 2013, the stadium was demolished with a promise that within three years, it would be put back to service; it is nine years now, Mr Speaker, but we have no Nakivubo Stadium. I want to task this Government to look into the memorandum they made with the developer to make sure that Nakivubo Stadium exits. We have a lot of memories from that stadium. What if King Charles comes now and wants to visit Nakivubo, where will he go? (Laughter) I beg to submit. 4.07MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I watched the news in the UK that clouds had made a formation in the image of the fallen Queen, which was a bit miraculous to many people. I think the universe has made connivance to pay tribute to the fallen Queen. I join the Prime Minister and the whole universe to pay tribute to the great lady. In addition, as we pay tribute to her, I would like to make a dedication of two of her quotations. One to the many people that are suffering and those imprisoned, many of them illegally detained. The Queen said, “While we may have more still to endure, better days will return, we will be with our friends again, we will be with our families again, we will meet again.” I dedicate this to Hon. Ssegirinya and Hon. Allan Ssewanyana.  The Queen also said, “It is worth remembering that it is often the small steps, not the giant leaps that bring about most lasting change.” I dedicate this to many that are fighting for change. Finally, friends -(Member timed out.)4.08MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion of paying tribute to the late, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.  Mr Speaker, in 2007, when the Queen came here, I joined Ugandans in welcoming her with a baby girl God had blessed me with, and I named her after Queen Elizabeth II just because I had read a lot about her. I was very much impressed with this great, brilliant, beautiful and hardworking lady. Mr Speaker, I come from Northern Uganda; the Queen helped us through the UK Government when we had instability by supporting our cultural institutions. Therefore, I support the Rt Hon. Prime Minister when she talked about peace-building. Indeed, she was a peace builder. 5569THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 14 SEPTEMBER 2022Lastly, she performed very well in her productive and reproductive roles. As a leader and a woman, we have seen many women leaders like Prime Ministers coming up. I want to salute the UK people for having a woman leader again, Liz Truss, at this very time that the Queen has passed on. I salute you and I want to thank you very much.4.10MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): On behalf of the people of Kumi Municipality, I second the motion of paying tribute to the Queen. Mr Speaker, she was a peaceful lady, soft-spoken; she knew what she was always doing. In addition, while opening and closing Parliament, she would always be brief and articulate. Whenever she would lay out the government policy or policy ideas, she was sharp and brief to the point; not like some people sometimes confuse their ideas and get lost. (Interjection)- I did not name anybody, but I said “some people”. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, the Queen died after seeing the new Prime Minister of the UK, but she died before seeing our oil in Uganda. Secondly, she died before seeing the next President –(Interjection)-  it is my right to speak because I am a Member of Parliament. This country deserves good examples. We need to copy -(Member timed out.)4.12MS AGNES KIRABO (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the young people in central region, I extend condolences to the people of the United Kingdom, particularly the royal family upon the passing away of the Queen. For my generation, history informs us about a strong bond the Queen had with the people of Buganda and Uganda as a nation during the colonial times. She has been a pillar in empowering women, which answers the question of whether women can be at the top of the helm of leadership; and indeed, she has left a good legacy. Mr Speaker, the Queen’s love for sports - she supported Arsenal, but I support Liverpool and Bulemezi FC. However, I find it a great contribution to the sports fraternity and the entire world and a rich lesson to us, leaders, to be deeply engaged in sports because it engages different people from different -(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nancy Acora?4.13MS NANCY ACORA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Mr Speaker, I join the rest of the world to condole and pay tribute to Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II. On behalf of the people of the Acholi subregion, I would like to say “thank you” to the United Kingdom Government. When the northern region was ravaged by the Lord’s Resistance Army insurgency, we received so much aid that helped people when we were living in Internally Displaced People’s camps.Secondly, I want us, as leaders, to emulate the footsteps of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, especially the women leaders; her smartness speaks volumes. On this note, Mr Speaker, I want to thank Rt Hon. Anita Among because even when Queen Elizabeth has died, she ”lives” in Uganda - I see Rt Hon. Anita Among depicting her smartness and everything. (Applause)Thirdly, on issues of sports, there are many sportswomen, but they are not being recognised. Even in this House, I have my sister, Hon. Alum Santa. I think she has picked some of those lessons from the UK Government. We want, as Ugandans, to emulate the good deeds that Queen Elizabeth did for this country and for the world. 5570TRIBUTE TO THE LATE H.M. QUEEN ELIZABETH IIMr Speaker, as a member state, I propose that we join the world – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable colleague.   4.15MR TOM EKUDO (FDC, Gweri County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the House in paying tribute to Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II. I remember her when the royal family sent funds for the construction of Princess Diana Memorial Hospital in Soroti District; a hospital that now serves the people of Teso and Soroti at large, including those from my constituency and my people in Gweri County. (Applause) That is why I remember her so much. I feel like I should join those travelling to bury her. (Laughter) I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, the Parliament of Uganda has not stopped any of you from going to bury the Queen. (Laughter) If you want to go, you can go. Just come and seek for my permission, in case – yes, Hon. Sekabira.  4.16MR DENIS SEKABIRA (NUP, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also want to thank you and honourable members here, for allowing me to be the chief mourner for the fallen Queen Elizabeth -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not allowed you to be the chief mourner; we have only allowed you to mourn. (Laughter)MR SEKABIRA:  Thank you. I want to join the rest of the colleagues, Ugandans here and overseas, to mourn the death of Queen Elizabeth II. I had a lot to talk about the Queen but I was moved by the statement from the Leader of the Opposition, on how the people of the United Kingdom prepared themselves for tough times when their supreme leader died. I want us to also borrow a leaf as country; as Uganda, to prepare ourselves for such moments. Even the way they broke the news, by stating, “the London Bridge was falling.” I do not know how we would break news here in Uganda. May the soul of the fallen Queen rest in peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  Yes, Hon. Namugga Gorreth. 4.17MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join the rest of the world to pay tribute to the fallen Queen. On behalf of the people of Mawogola County, I realise the role of women in leadership. I cannot underestimate the contribution of the Queen towards democracy and good governance. The rule of law is very important to any country that looks forward to serving its people. As we mourn or pay tribute, we should also think about some of these aspects. Good governance and security are some of the areas where we spend a lot of money in our budget. We should think about some of these and have a very genuine conversation on how we can see a peaceful transition in this country. Mr Speaker, I would say we have a Uganda ahead of any individual and as Ugandans, we should be held accountable for the future of this nation. May her soul rest in eternal peace. 4. 19MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join the people of the United Kingdom in paying tribute to Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II. In our culture, when someone reaches the age of 90 plus, we really celebrate her life. Looking at the age of Her Majesty, 96, I really feel we should thank the Almighty God for taking care of her and all that she has done. [Ms Acora]5571THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 14 SEPTEMBER 2022Mr Speaker, I pray that this Parliament and Government, in memory of the Queen, give her the gift of organising a smooth change of Government. I am happy that yesterday, our President was in Kenya witnessing the smooth change of Government from one president to another. Let us organise this gift in memory of the great, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. Further, Mr Speaker, I am happy that the Queen set a very good precedent as far as –(Member timed out.) 4.20MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (Indepen-dent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to join the rest of the world and the Parliament of Uganda in paying tribute to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. Mr Speaker, the world has lost a great leader, a mother and someone who stood for peace. As a country, we got our independence in 1962. We thank her very much for having granted us independence. There are some African countries that took long; they begged, and some countries like Kenya, went into popular struggles and blood was shed, but here, we went to a round table and Uganda was granted independence. That is why we are now independent and running our own affairs. I want to thank her for that and stand with the people of the United Kingdom in mourning. I thank you. 4.22THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the women of Serere District, the people of Serere District, and on the behalf of the fishing communities in Uganda, I join the rest in supporting the motion.This brings me to the point of encouraging Ugandans not to always appoint men to be heirs instead of their daughters because women can change families. Women should also be heirs, no matter whether they are married or not. Let us honour them, as long as they are the firstborns. Let us give them the honour to be in charge of our families when we are not there. Secondly, I visited the United Kingdom several times and noticed that the way they protect their lakes; they do not accept illegal fishing. I want to encourage Ugandans, for the love that the Queen had for the country and the need to protect the environment, may Uganda keep the wetlands and keep the fish until they are mature enough in order for us to emulate –(Member timed out.)4.23THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, Her Majesty officially visited Makerere College on 20 February 1959, and presided over the opening of the University Library Building as well as the 1959 graduation ceremony. In her remarks, Her Majesty said: “I learn with particular interest that amongst those students, whom I have just received, is the first African woman…” – Josephine Nambooze, currently an emeritus Professor of Public Health at Makerere University School of Public Health – “…to qualify as a doctor in East Africa by virtue of a standard in Medicine and Surgery recognised by the General Medical Council of Great Britain.” May her soul rest in peace. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, colleagues. This is to inform you that a special commemorative service –(Members rose_)- Please, sit when the Speaker is speaking.This is to inform you that a special commemorative service has been organised by the British High Commission in honour of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II tomorrow, Thursday, 15 September 2022 at 2.30 p.m., at St. Paul’s Cathedral Namirembe. All of you have been invited. (Applause)5572TRIBUTE TO THE LATE H.M. QUEEN ELIZABETH IIColleagues, we have had a long debate. What you said about our Queen has reminded me of the famous words of Ralph Waldo Emerson. I quote: “To laugh often and to love much; to win the respect of intelligent persons and the affection of children; to earn the approbation of honest critics and endure the betrayal of false friends; to appreciate beauty, to find the best in others; to give of oneself; to leave the world a bit better, whether by a healthy child, a garden patch, or a redeemed social condition; to have played and laughed with enthusiasm and sung with exaltation; to know that even one life has breathed easier because you have lived. This is to have succeeded”.  The Queen lived such a life. I thank you for having paid glowing tribute to her. I now put the question that this House pays glowing tribute to the late, Her Majesty, the Queen of England, for her exemplary leadership of the Commonwealth.(Question put and agreed to.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now direct the Clerk to transmit a copy of the resolution, together with an extract from the Hansard on this motion, to the UK Government, through the British High Commission. We shall always pray for you. Colleagues, I am going to adjourn the House for 10 minutes. We will come back for another session, during which we shall consider one of the Bills. I hope you will be here in exactly 10 minutes. I hereby adjourned the House.(The House was suspended for at 4.37 p.m.) [The Deputy Speaker]