

Tuesday, 5 September 2017

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

    1. Mr Taban Idi Amin

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Taban. Is the Clerk assuming that you had got a copy of your Constitution and the Rules of Procedure already, and you are not entitled to any?  
	
Hon. Taban Idi Amin, I receive you again in Parliament. Today, you are taking oath for the second time in one year. I congratulate you upon your election to continue representing the people of Kibanda North. I will give you another copy of the Rules of Procedure and Constitution to help you to continue doing what you have already been doing. Welcome back. Please, resume your seat and we proceed. Congratulations again. (Applause)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have just received hon. Taban Idi Amin. However, something about his campaigns touched me and I think as a country, it is worth noting. I saw in a picture in the newspapers, President Yoweri Museveni standing on the top of his vehicle with hon. Taban Idi Amin. I think that picture could not be taken for granted. It speaks very largely to the nature of this country and the gift of the people of Uganda. (Applause) It speaks to the fact that Uganda has a way of reinventing itself even after crisis. 

When I saw this picture of Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni standing on the top of his vehicle with the grandson of Gen. Idi Amin –(Laughter)– as a country, we should celebrate this kind of thing. (Applause) Therefore, hon. Taban, I noticed your father is even here and I welcome him in a big way as part of a testimony to a country that has succeeded very well. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this sitting after a break that has not been very long. There is another break coming soon to enable you complete what you had started. 

I note with sadness that many of you have lost dear ones during this recess. Hon. William Nokrach lost his son, Mr Moses Ocaya, who was the Director of Finance in HelpAge International and was due to take up an international job with the International Committee of the Red Cross. I wish to remember the Ugandan ladies who have been recently affected in this wave of killings in cold blood in the suburbs of Kampala and Entebbe. On behalf of Parliament and my behalf, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences and pray to the Almighty God to comfort the affected families. Honourable members, in that same spirit, let us rise for a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

Let me take this opportunity to formally congratulate hon. William Nokrach and hon. Hood Katuramu, the Members of Parliament representing Persons with Disabilities who were recently re-elected in the bye-elections following court petitions that were successful against their initial positions. (Applause) You are very welcome. Honourable colleagues, your resounding re-election is testimony that you enjoy the confidence and support of your electorates. I wish you well in your endeavours and active representation of your people. 

Before we broke off for recess, honourable members, there were many matters you raised and some await responses from the relevant ministers. The Clerk to Parliament communicated to all the concerned ministers the outstanding issues and therefore, I would wish to remind them to be ready with their responses once we reflect the items on the agenda. 

As we wait for actions on some of the issues raised, it is getting increasingly alarming that women are being wantonly murdered in Entebbe and Nansana. Fear has been instilled in the population and Government through the security agencies need to reassure the public that their safety will be guaranteed. I wish to, therefore, direct the Minister of Internal Affairs to present a comprehensive statement on Thursday, 7 September 2017, to inform Parliament and the general public on what has been done on this matter. 

Honourable members, the United Nations declared 15th September, almost 29 years ago, as the International Day of Democracy. As Parliament, we have been celebrating this day annually and the theme for this year is “Democracy and Conflict Prevention”. It focuses on the critical need to strengthen democratic institutions to promote peace and stability. A more integrated approach to foster resilient societies calls for effective and inclusive democratic governance with respect for human rights and the rule of law.

Parliament of Uganda, in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA), will commemorate this day as follows: 

    a) On Wednesday, 13 September 2017, a talk show on the International Day of Democracy will be hosted by Radio One. Panelists on this show will include Her Excellency Rosa Malango, the United Nations Resident Co-ordinator; hon. Oboth Jacobson, Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and Ms Perry Aritua Webb, the Executive Director of Women Democracy Network, Uganda Chapter.

    b) On 14 September 2017, a public lecture will be held in the Parliamentary Conference Hall with the participants drawn from Parliament, civil society organisations and the academia. The lecture on democracy and conflict prevention in Uganda will be presented by the President of the Uganda Law Society, Mr Francis Gimara and discussants will include the Chief Justice, the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Med Kaggwa, Chairperson of the Uganda Human Rights Commission and Dr Livingstone Ssewanyana of the Foundation for the Human Rights Initiative.

    c) On Thursday, 14 September 2017, there will be the presentation of an award to hon. Florence Alice Lubega, the first female Ugandan national to sit in the Legislative Council in 1957. She replaced Ms Pumla Kisosonkole who was of South African origin and married to a Ugandan. This year, therefore, marks 60 years since hon. Florence Alice Lubega entered Parliament as a legislator and 60 years of women participation in political governance in Uganda. 

    d) On Friday, 15 September 2017, newspaper supplements will appear in the Daily Monitor and New Vision commemorating the National Day of Democracy.

    e) On Friday, 15 September 2017, Parliament will conduct the women’s march to launch the collaboration of women’s achievement in political governance and democracy in Uganda. 

Honourable members, I wish to put you on notice to prepare and attend the said important activities to commemorate the International Day of Democracy and the 60th Anniversary of the ascendency of women in politics in Uganda. Please, let us give due attention and recognition to this important event and show up in good numbers. 

I, therefore, wish you good deliberations this week and the week to come.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have Mr Keith Brown and Mr Richard Purnell, Sub-editors from the UK’s House of Commons, Hansard Department. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

We also have this afternoon a delegation composed of 15 women activists from various civil society organisations. They are here to observe the proceedings with emphasis on the current crisis of women who are being killed in the areas of Wakiso and Nansana. That is what I had commented on earlier. 

In the VIP gallery this afternoon, we also have hon. Maria Matembe and hon. Ovonji-Odida. They are here to listen to what we are discussing today. We also have Maj. Gen. Taban Idi Amin, Deputy Director of Internal Security Organisation and father to hon. Taban Idi Amin. (Applause) Thank you.

I have Members who had matters to raise. I will start with the representative of Busiro County South if he is here. If he is not yet here, I will have the Woman Representative for Lira District.

2.26
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I would like to start by appreciating your chair for recognising what is happening in this country, especially the killing of women. I would further like to appreciate your directives, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker, much as you have directed, there is no way we can sit as Parliament without having a say on what is happening. We are not happy as a country, as women and as families about what is happening. In less than six months, about 21 women have so far been murdered. These murders have happened in Katambi in Wakiso, others in Nansana and a recent one happened yesterday and the body was discovered in a wetland while another one was shot in her own office - the Chinese. It is alarming. Some people have said that some of the victims are prostitutes, but they too are human beings. We have not yet got clarity and even if they were prostitutes, they do not deserve to be killed. Among those murdered are business women and the nature of their killing is so bad. There are those women who have been raped and sticks inserted in their private parts and this is so painful, Mr Speaker. 

The affected are young girls between the ages of 18 to 20 years who are murdered over nothing. We are wondering what is happening within five to six months and security is not telling us the causes of the murders. Mr Speaker, as a Parliament, we would like to know who the perpetrators are, their motives and why women specifically?

Mr Speaker, it was last week when we addressed a press conference in the Speaker’s Boardroom where the Speaker directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to come up with a comprehensive statement explaining to Parliament what is happening. To date no statement has been made and it is not included anywhere on the Order Paper. This has left us wondering what the Minister of Internal Affairs is up to. If you read today’s papers, the IGP is saying that the killing of yesterday should not be linked to the one that happened in Wakiso. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, killing is a killing and a woman is a woman. Women are insecure and need safety. Women need protection in this country. Why are we being targeted as women? We need an answer. Women do different businesses and with the traffic jam of this country, sometimes they reach their homes late in the night, but they are not protected.

As women, we therefore, call upon the Minister of Internal Affairs to come up with a comprehensive statement detailing what is happening. We would like to have protection from the Government because we are living in fear and we feel we are not secure anymore. If a woman can be targeted in an office and shot dead with all those gadgets - what is happening? Today it is them but the next day it could be any of us. We are insecure and would like the Government to protect us. May their souls rest in eternal peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.                      

2.32
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and the matter is about the gruesome terrorism that is taking place in Busiro South and it is concerning the murders of women. Between the months of June, July and August, in Busiro South, we have lost over 10 women. They were kidnapped, tortured, sexually raped and abused and killed in gruesome murder.

Mr Speaker, I would like to express great disdain and anger on my behalf and on behalf of the people of Busiro South against these crimes. The people of Busiro South have rallied together to protect themselves but I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Uganda Police and the Minister of Security for having joined us in this exercise. In conjunction with the Police and Minister for Security, we have been able to arrest very many perpetrators and we are still looking for more. Unfortunately, the murders continue.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to commend the people of Busiro South for coming together to try and heal the wounds of those families that have been affected by the murders. A lot of people are supporting the cause. Personally, I have taken three of the orphans whose mothers were killed and I will pay their school fees until Senior Six. However, I am only one person among the many that can do this in Busiro South. 

However, there is a threat of these murders continuing not only in Busiro South, but also spreading to the rest of Uganda. From what I understand the latest murder of a lady in Uganda took place in a different constituency outside Nansana. 

Therefore, there is an urgent need for us as a nation to get together and find out what we can do to not only stop it where it is happening, but also to stop it from spreading. I therefore, would like to take this opportunity to pray to this August House and all the great institutions that are represented in this House, especially the related ministries that we still have a problem. We have made some headway in capturing some of the perpetrators and their contacts, but the problem is still alive and could spread. 

My prayer is that this August House and all its resources join us in Busiro South to ensure that we bring these gruesome murders to an end. More importantly, we need to ensure that these cowardly, wicked and discouraging acts, which are very un-Ugandan do not happen anywhere else. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I beg to submit.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. While I agree that these killings are an issue of Internal Affairs, I also believe that it is a security issue. Last week, I was watching NTV news and witnessed the minister in charge of security disagree with the IGP. The IGP on behalf of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the minister on his own – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the IGP speaks on behalf of the police not internal affairs.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you for that guidance. However, the disagreement was between the IGP and minister in charge of security.

Mr Speaker, before, we broke off for recess; there was a directive and commitment from both the Minister of Internal Affairs and that of Security for a joint ministerial statement regarding these killings. Today, a directive has been made narrowing it to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. However, I still believe that such killings are a matter of security.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, are we proceeding correctly when we are ignoring security issues concerning these killings? Thank you very much.              

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That matter is as directed. The details of the statement can be brought and resourced from different departments but the lead ministry on this statement will be the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

2.39
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, I would also like to join you in congratulating our brother, who has once again joined us in this House. I also concur with you that it was a really nice moment to see President Museveni with the grandchild of Gen. Idi Amin. How I wish we would go back to those days to possibly highlight the good things that Idi Amin did for this country. This is because sometimes when we are discussing, we tend to begin from 30 years ago; we do not bring on board the contribution of the many leaders, who have participated in the affairs of this country before. 

Therefore, my brother you could possibly remind the Head of State of the great contribution that your late grandfather made while he was the Head of State of this country. 

The procedural matter, Mr Speaker, over which I stood, is in regard to the issues that are being discussed. I am a little bit uncomfortable that – and that is why I would imagine that you are now giving the second directive - at the beginning while we were discussing these killings, the Minister of Internal Affairs was not here; the Minister of Security was not here. Today it is even worse because both the Leader of Government Business and the Government Chief Whip are not present too. 

I remember there was a day when we had a discussion here that took almost the entire session whereupon the Government Chief Whip kept saying, “I am in control; the ministers would report.” Later on, we were surprised when we met again and asked for assurances to be fulfilled but the Government Chief Whip turned and said she didn’t have the power to stand in and take assurances on behalf of the ministries. 

Is it procedurally correct for us to discuss these serious matters when the said ministers are not in the House? I am aware that communications will go from the Clerk’s Office to the different ministers - but they needed to see for themselves the feelings of Ugandans and the mood in which Members of Parliament are discussing these matters. As mothers and as Ugandans, we are tired of the rampant killings yet nobody seems to be in control and caring. 

Mr Speaker, it is sad. For those of you who have taken interest in listening to the women’s anthem you will realise that when they say, “We are the proud mothers of this nation and the backbone without which it cannot stand…” now the backbones without which we cannot stand are being killed and nobody seems to be bothered. You are forgetting that these are your wives, mothers, daughters and sisters. When you call them prostitutes, are they prostituting amongst themselves? They prostitute with men and so why you the men, who prostitute them, not bothered about them? (Applause)

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally correct for us to discuss this very important matter when the Minister of Security, the Minister of Internal Affairs and that of Defence are not in the House to listen to the cries of Ugandans? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if this House wants to sit, it will sit and discuss matters with or without ministers. We represent the people of this country and it is our prerogative to do that; nobody else can do that on their behalf. Therefore, if we are to wait for a minister to discuss these issues, sometimes we might have to wait for a long time because we do not control them. 

We have made directives here. May be you need to invoke other provisions of the Rules of Procedure to deal with these matters. Otherwise, these matters are urgent and important and like I said, we need a statement that should be brought here on Thursday. 

We are not debating this matter today; we are just receiving the information from the Members. That is all that has happened and my directive is that on Thursday afternoon, we should receive these statements and should be by the lead presenter, the Minister of Internal Affairs.

2.42
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col. (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand in for the Leader of Government Business and the Government Chief Whip and so we are here. I am under instruction to perform that responsibility today. 

Mr Speaker, it is definitely clear - and everybody knows that in order to have the problem of security resolved, investigations must be done. The fact that by now, you have not yet arrested or got the culprits, just means that investigations are continuing. I have no doubt that as soon as the pursuit for these criminals is done, then the answer will be given.

Secondly –(Interruption) 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, the matter of Ugandans being killed is not a trivial matter. To make it even worse, it is the mothers of the nation; the women of this country being killed. Without them, all of us here would not be in this House.

I feel hurt that when it comes to the point of discussing the security concerns of the women that are being killed - the police are all over; we have Village Internal Security Officers (VISOs), Parish Internal Security Officers (PISOs), District Internal Security Officers (DISOs) and Gombolola Internal Security Officers (GISOs). I think very soon we shall also have Household Internal Security Officers (HISOs) because every household now has a security officer. We have crime preventers in large numbers - it is sad that at this time, we are still being told that investigations are being carried out. Can we get a statement now? Can we at least get a partial statement on what they think are the likely causes of these murders? Brushing them off as just ritual murders is not enough - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you rise on a point of order? 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Yes, I am still giving a preamble to the point of order. Anyhow, I was trying to ask the Minister of Local Government a question - because the women being killed are residents in local governments – whether he is in order to continue telling us that investigations are still being carried out when we want to know the exact cause of these killings and any perpetrator that has been brought to book? Is he in order to continue trivialising these matters when they are very serious matters that affect the lives of women, mothers and your wives? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these matters are very serious and they can get very emotive but I think we should take the view that we are in these issues together. It is only together that we can find good solutions to these issues.

I have made a directive here that we expect a statement on Thursday. The Minister of Local Government is giving information about what is going to happen. Can we listen to the minister and hear what he says, and then we will leave it to Thursday so that we can deal with the issue comprehensively? We cannot start a debate without information; we need the information before we can have the debate.

COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition knows very well that I have some experience in security matters, and therefore she should take me seriously - (Interjections). Even disagreements within security may be acceptable until the answer is found - I have no problem with that. I really have no problem with the Inspector General of Police (IGP) not agreeing with the Minister for Security, as long as they are security matters. As soon as the answer is found, then all these other issues will be solved. 

Finally, as soon as –(Interruption)

2.42
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion without notice for the adjournment of the House, as provided for in Rule 16 of our Rules of Procedure. We are just back from holidays and the whole world would like to know why the women are dying. (Applause) 

The Speaker has been very lenient to the Executive, but we are not hearing any statement and we are not seeing any minister running to Parliament. In the circumstances, I would like to move a motion that this House be adjourned until such a time as the Government is ready to present business. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Aye

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to justify your motion?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I would like to thank you once again, Mr Speaker, for being very lenient with the Executive, which is very thinly represented on the Frontbench. My justification is this: we are just back from recess, and some of us have been watching these endless killings on television. That serious business should have been the only business that this House transacted today - (Applause). We may be here talking about roads and health, among other matters, but tonight another woman might be killed. 

The most serious message that this Parliament can send to Ugandans, and the biggest notice that we can give to the Executive is that we need answers, and we need them at the Government’s earliest possible convenience. If that is one hour, it is up to the Government to decide. 

Mr Speaker, we are not going to proceed like this. We have very many ministers. This is the most critical time in the life of Uganda, something unprecedented, and we can see no prominent minister in the line area; they are all not there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I will take the point of order.

COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member for Aruu County to insinuate that the Minister for Local Government is not a prominent Minister; that the Minister for Health, who is also here, is not prominent; that the Minister of State for East Africa is not prominent; that the Minister of State for Work is not prominent; that all the ministers here are not prominent; and that a retired general of this country is not prominent? Is the honourable member in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I listened to the hon. Member for Aruu County, and he said that there is no prominent Minister in the relevant sector. I do not recall any statement that challenged the prominence of the Ministers for Local Government and for Health. If ministers can inform the House that a prominent minister in the line of security and internal affairs is available, I would be able to hold that Member out of order. If nobody can give me that information, then the Member was proceeding properly. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If I may continue, the whole world would know that the Parliament of Uganda needs answers. If the Government feels capable of bringing the statement in one hour, it is at the Speaker’s discretion to adjourn the House for one hour and we can go to the lobbies. If they think that Thursday is the right day, I implore honourable members that we have no business in the House until we get answers as to why our women are dying. 

This is a serious indictment on the institution of Government, because there are no answers. The pattern of death is the same. We are not even sure whether another woman will die tonight. The stories are endless, and the police do not look very confident presenting a statement to the world. In these circumstances, I stand firmly to move the motion that this House should be adjourned. The Speaker should find another convenient day, and on that day the first item of business, after the prayers and the Communication from the Chair, should be a statement on these killings. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adjournment of the House, in the circumstances on which I elaborated earlier and the proposals are clear. Do you want to debate this motion? Can I propose the question? 

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Mr Speaker, as the Member of Parliament for Wakiso District, where the killings have been taking place, and as a mother and a woman, I am equally concerned. I have been there several times, to work with the security organisations and see what is happening. It is saddening that we have not yet got the actual suspects, because whenever we hear that suspects are being held, then another day we have another death. 

Mr Speaker, the women who are being killed are leaving their young children - they are very young women. They have been killed in a terrible and humiliating manner. Honestly, as the Member of Parliament for Wakiso District, I support the motion. (Applause) However, I beg my colleagues to bear with the Government, because the minister is bringing a report - I am just concluding. We hope to get a conclusive report. I really request that we ask the minister in charge to bring it as soon as possible; we wanted this report by yesterday.

I would not want to go to my constituency and my district and the keep lamenting with my people without a concrete reason to give them.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleagues for the passion and the pain we are all showing for the cause of the women that are being killed. I, therefore, support my colleague and the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will definitely put the question and we take a decision on this. As we talk now, there are issues additional to this that the House could do well if it listened to them. For instance, thousands of people have been thrown out of their homes in Mubende District - No. I am just bringing to your attention that there are issues that you could also do well if you listened to them. We could take them into consideration while we deal with these matters.

There are urgent matters and they are difficult for this country especially when we see the things that are happening and there seem to be no guidance and end to them.

Therefore, the concern is really merited that we should take the steps that we are about to take. However, my counsel from the Chair is that there could be other matters that are also urgent that have been requested for by other honourable members that need to be listened to. For example, the matters coming from Bwamba County. If this House does not listen to the Member, you do not know what is likely to happen there. There is also an urgent matter from Dakabela. There has been a matter in Buhweju – that is also urgent. There is also an urgent matter from hon. Lydia Chekwel of Kween. There are also matters from Erute North, Budadiri and Mpigi. Those matters could also be urgent and about people’s lives – the landslide in Budadiri, for example. 

However, if it is the decision of the House to sweep all those other issues away, at least you should know that the people from Budadiri will also be listening to this discussion.

As presiding officer who has been informed about other areas where women and children are suffering, I think we would have done well to listen to those as well. That is my counsel to you. However, honourable members, who wanted to raise those matters, will now know that they cannot raise them because I am going to put the question for adjournment. 

I will now put the question to the motion for the adjournment of the House for this specific purpose - until a statement is ready from the Minister of Internal Affairs. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is adjourned until we hear a communication from the Clerk that we are ready to proceed with the matters.

(The House rose at 3.03 p.m. and was adjourned sine die.)
	

