
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 15 September 2021

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to today’s sitting. Today, we shall receive additional regional reports on Emyooga. After they have been presented in the House, we will have a debate on all reports on Emyooga tomorrow. This means that by tomorrow, we should have received all the reports. We will then receive a report from the minister. Thereafter, we will debate them before making a resolution on the issues of the Emyooga Programme.

As I said before, the debate on the Emyooga Programme - the analysis we will make and the recommendations - will determine how the Parish Development Model is going to perform. So, Members, put all your minds on that project because we need to make sure Government programmes work. 

Honourable members, I also received a request from one honourable member representing older persons to the effect that they want to present a report on their own. I think we shall allow the elders to present their own report. Members representing persons with disabilities also want to make a presentation on their own. 

As the Speaker reported yesterday, we lost Dr Al Hajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige, who was a great contributor to the growth of our economy. The family should be here shortly. We are going to have a motion presented and debated to pay tribute to him. Yesterday, you observed a moment of silence but today, we shall have a motion debated to that effect.

As you may be aware, Parliament has a baby care and breastfeeding facility. The facility was closed and of recent, I have seen so many of our Members with – because we have very active Members and staff, the facility will be active in the next two weeks. We want you to feel at home while here. 

The Minister of Education and Sports has commenced a programme to promote sports activities in the communities throughout Uganda. The ministry has donated 8,000 balls (5,000 footballs and 3,000 netballs) to Parliament. They are going to be distributed amongst the Members of Parliament. The Director at the Parliament Commission Secretariat and all Commissioners will make sure each Member gets some balls to take to their constituencies. 

The Office of the Speaker has also noted the rising number of workshops and seminars, which are being organised by some ministries and agencies at the time when Parliament is sitting. We request these ministries to allow Parliament to sit. The workshops should only take place on Fridays, Saturdays and Mondays to avoid them affecting parliamentary sittings. We cannot afford to have Members out of Parliament going for workshops. 

Finally, today is the International Day of Democracy. This day is celebrated around the world on the 15th day of September. It was set through a resolution of the UN General Assembly in 2007 to encourage Government to strengthen and consolidate democracy. 
Parliament of Uganda, in the recent past, celebrated the occasion by organising various activities. However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, it has not been possible for us to do so this year. Anyhow, please join me in congratulating the Inter-Parliamentary Union and indeed, the Parliament of Uganda, as we celebrate this day. 

The support for the International Day of Democracy originates from the core beliefs of the Parliament of Uganda and democracy, which is required under Article 1 of the Constitution of Uganda because it emphasises the sovereignty of the people. 

The Secretariat of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, on this day, has arranged an online debate on the following issues:

    i. Is democracy in crisis?
    ii. Can democracy rebound and still deliver for the people?

I would like to encourage Members to contribute to this debate through the IPU’s website, which is www.ipu.org or via their Twitter handle on democracy. I wish to thank you for that. I congratulate all of us on the occasion of the International Day of Democracy. 

Honourable members, allow me to amend today’s Order Paper. However, before that, allow me to announce that Parliament has learnt, with deep sorrow, of the death of one of our mothers; the mother to hon. Hellen Asamo, the Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development (Disability Affairs). The body is still in Kiruddu General Hospital. Can we rise for a moment of silence in honour of our late mother?

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that we have matters of national importance but kindly, allow me to amend the Order Paper and we have the motion to pay tribute to the late Dr BMK, first. They have requested that they have other functions; they actually have a family meeting. Thank you.

2.36
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In your communication regarding the International Day on Democracy, I would like to seek your guidance because when we were taking oath here to be members of Parliament, upholding the Constitution and also democracy were some of the key words or articles.

I am wondering whether you cannot use rule 59 of our Rules of Procedure to allow us, even for a very limited time, to speak about democracy. There is no way we are going to sit here as Members of Parliament on the International Day of Democracy and receive only your communication and proceed as if we have not been touched by your communication.

Madam Speaker, I beg you because democracy in Uganda is under very serious attack; the beatings and arrests. These days, I see leaders of the Government going to meet a retired soldier in Gulu - from the Vice-President to the Prime Minister and government parastatals - as if Ugandans never elected leaders.

Madam Speaker, I would like to beg you and invite you to allow us, even for a very limited period, to speak about democracy under rule 59 of our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Ssemujju. One, I must tell you that the communication is from me. Therefore, for you to say that I am not touched by my own communication is wrong. That is my communication. 

Also, in the communication, I have told you that you are free to deliberate on this matter on democracy, online. If you want us to have an issue or a debate on democracy, let us organise a day and talk about democracy and you have it. For now, I have communicated and said that as Members of Parliament, let us join the whole world and debate democracy online.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I am sorry if I in any way - I did not say you were not touched by your communication. I said “we” because by the time you made it, you were already touched. (Laughter) However, I thought that this Parliament needed to be touched by your communication.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course, I know that you are touched and that is why you have been able to stand up. I would be surprised if you never stood but I like the way you spice the House. (Laughter)

2.09
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regarding your communication, first of all, I would like to thank you for the gesture of promoting sports. I think it is the first time that the Ministry of Education and Sports is coming up to give Members of Parliament sports equipment and you have put in a lot of effort.

However, sports is something that is big; we look at volleyball, football, cricket and golf, among others. Therefore, next time, the ministry should look at supporting Members of Parliament with more than just balls and –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, one of the functions of this Parliament is to pass the budget every year. In the budget that we passed last financial year for the Ministry of Education and Sports, there was no item for donating equipment to Members of Parliament.

Is the honourable member and the Parliamentary Commissioner in order to ask the Ministry of Education and Sports to violate the Appropriations Act by diverting money from other expenditures and using it to give Members of Parliament equipment? Even this equipment, the footballs for which we are thankful, later, I will be asking from which Vote it is coming. Is it personal from the minister or the ministry?

However, the point of order is for my colleague, Commissioner of Parliament, who participated in the passing of the budget and there was no item for giving Members of Parliament: is he in order to invite this Parliament to participate in the violation of the Appropriations Act?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a donation and if somebody has given you, you do not say, “Give more.” First of all, we must be thankful for the gesture; that we have been given. 

As hon. Ssemujju has said, we do the appropriation. Now that we have seen that somebody can give, in the next appropriation, we should be able to budget where you will include the balls, if you need them.

2.43
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is from your communication in regard to Emyooga. The communication from the Speaker or the Chair is supposed to serve us in three scopes:

    1. Content specification;
    2. Boundary demarcation, and;
    3. Avoidance of pseudo scenarios.

Why? Because the Chair in this House has the last word.

Madam Speaker, you have just talked about Emyooga and many of us are passionate about it because it touches on the existence of our fellow citizens. We already know how the Emyooga may or were a fraud and a scam.

Madam Speaker, from your communication, I would like you to guide this House and the entire country on what specifically is going to happen. We have jails, safe houses and prisons in this country that are populated with political prisoners. I am requesting you to ask or send an invitation to the prison authorities that they should depopulate the jails, safe houses and prisons. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins, how did it come from my communication? You are going to debate the Emyooga issue when you are presenting the paper. I did not talk about prisons. So, take up your seat.   

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, this is basically what I am trying to say: there is not going to be any middle ground –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, let us not smuggle issues. 

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I respect hon. Atkins very much, given the quality of English that he speaks in this House. (Laughter) However, is he in order to continue overturning your ruling and speaking the same good English, when you have made a ruling? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins, even though you are my “Muko”, you are not in order. Members, I would like us to be mindful of time. The family of the late Dr Alhaji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige (BMK) is right up there in the Gallery. We have:

    1. Hajji Haruna Kalule Kibirige - brother to the late;
    2. Eng. Ngobya Isaac Mubaraka - brother to the late; 
    3. Hajati Hadijah Kibirige Nakayiza - sister to the late; 
    4. Hajji Ali Kibirige Muwanga - son to the late, who is the Omusika; and
    5. Hajji Ali Mwanje - son to the late Kibirige. He is the famous Ali you always get in China. 

Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We thank you for coming to watch the proceedings of the House. This is the Parliament of Uganda; the Parliament of the people of Uganda. You are most welcome.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO LATE DR ALHAJI BULAIMU MUWANGA KIBIRIGE

2.48 
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Dr Alhaji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige, moved under rules 56 and 57 (c) of our Rules of Procedure of this Parliament of Uganda: 

“WHEREAS the country woke up to the death of the late Dr Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige, the founder and Chairman of the BMK Group of companies, which occurred at Agha Khan Hospital on Friday, l0 September, 2021; 

AND WHEREAS the said Dr Alhaji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige contributed to the growth of the economy of the country, having started working at the age of 14 in his father's restaurant in Masaka and later graduating into a petty trader and a big businesses mogul in Kampala, Kenya, Zambia and in all other countries of the globe, including the far East as far as Bangkok, Japan, Thailand, to mention but a few; 
 
AWARE that on his return from exile in 1986, BMK set up the now famous BMK Group of Companies, importing spare parts, reconditioned vehicles and motorcycles, which was housed on Jinja Road and was the springboard for what was to follow; that he started the boda boda import business in this country, which he grew to a level of assembling and manufacturing of the famous BMK motorcycles with various branches in Ndeeba, Katwe, Masaka, and later expanded his trading empire to Kenya, Zambia, Rwanda and China; 

FURTHER AWARE that he did not shun the competition but rather encouraged and showed some of us that budding businesses is what was appropriate to do; BMK moved to Japan and China overcoming the fear of risk and expansion. As a new entrant, he diversified into the hotel business, starting the now famous Africana Hotel, which started out as a small 50-room business but later was to grow into a 250-room business with apartments alongside, and also boasts of a 3,500 persons seating capacity of a conference of its like, where even Parliament of Uganda has been hosted on different occasions;  

NOTING that unlike other business persons in this country, he shared his trade secrets when he authored a book titled ‘My story of building a fortune in Africa.’ He was decorated with many honours such as the Honorary Doctorate of Philosophy in Humanities, won the Umoja Helping Hearts Uganda Award and recognition for the many years of exceptional leadership and unconditional commitment towards humanity; he was the Chairman of the Uganda North American Association (UNAA) in the 2000, was part of the founding body of that organisation; 

FURTHERMORE, he was the founder of the Uganda Hotel Owners Association, which has given birth to very many hotels in this country owned by indigenous Ugandans. He was the founder of the Uganda American Sickle Cell Rescue Fund, member of the Presidential Investor Round Table (PIRT), won recognition for commitment and dedication towards the successful completion of the Presidential Investors Round Table V (2015-20l7), was a member of Private Sector Foundation of Uganda, won the Investor’s Year Award in 1997, won recognition for Outstanding Contribution to the Uganda North American Association (2004, and 2005); he was decorated with the Rafiki Award for Excellence in Local and International Business (London, 2005), the Rotary Club of Kampala East Vocational Award for distinguished service to Hospitality (2005) and the Uganda Awards of Excellence for outstanding contribution in business; 

APPRECIATING that in his philanthropy, BMK was starkly aware of the needs of the poor and society at large whereupon, he used his generous heart to donate to social causes by paying school fees for many disadvantaged students in this country of all forms, shape and gender, building mosques and contributing to the construction of churches and community centres, financing the Uganda American Sickle Cell Rescue Fund, purchase of land that was gazetted as a cemetery in Nkoowe in Wakiso District for those that could not afford to lay their loved ones at their homes or those who did not wish to lay their deceased in their ancestral homes; this cemetery alone has given home or been abode for over 5,000 persons, which has been a donation from the Muslim community.

He further provided space for the offices of the Uganda Hotel Owners’ Association.

NOW, THERTFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:

    i. Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and people of Uganda at large for the loss of Dr Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige;

    ii. Parliament takes cognisance of the contribution made to the economy of Uganda by Dr Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige;

    iii. In honour of the legacy built and left by the late Dr Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige, this House collectively urges the Minister responsible for Kampala and in so doing the Executive, to rename the now Wampeewo Avenue as BMK Avenue within a period of seven days;

    iv. That we pray to the Almighty Allah, Creator of all creations, Most Merciful, Most Gracious to sustain the bereaved family and grant Dr Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige an eternal rest.”

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Alhajji Muhammad Nsereko. Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) The motion is seconded by the Government Chief Whip, Minister of ICT, hon. Bahati, hon. Atkins and the whole House. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, honourable members, for the overwhelming support for this motion and secondment across aisles. I have no doubt that wherever Dr Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige is resting, he must be proud that his name is amongst those few names that have made its way onto the Hansard of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

I have no doubt that his family shall be proud of his achievements and even those that he helped will look back and say, “We indeed had a great leader, a great mentor and father.” Thank you very much.

Dear honourable colleagues, I will give you a simple synopsis to help give us justification as to why the prayers that I put in our motion should be adopted. The contributions of the late Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige (BMK) are enormous. I cannot talk about them alone but every one of us in this country knows that he was a man of good character and a man of all seasons.

We also know that Dr Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige was an entrepreneur since 1986 and pre-1986. He started as a young man and he gave every single young man hope through his writing that one can be in this country and live to grow from the smallest that is despised to building an empire not only in Uganda but outside Uganda and even in Asia. 

The dream that we can all conquer, the dream that we can all be, the dream that when you believe you can make it and that when you do not fear to make mistakes, you can iron them out and become a better person whether in politics, in business, trade or religious affiliation and all round - We deserve to give him that attribute because he is a person you can look up to as young men and women who are trying to move strides and believe that when you have a firm belief in something and you put it in action you can achieve it.

As an entrepreneur, he created jobs directly for over 3,000 people in the hotel and tourism sector. For the last 10 years, Uganda’s leading foreign income earner has been from tourism. Tourists have come to Uganda basically because we have the following: (i) relative peace (ii) warm people and (iii) because we have facilities.

I am very sure that because he was one of the contributors to the construction of the various hotels and as the founder member of the Uganda Hotel Owners’ Association, he participated and took part in promotion of tourism through training and apprenticeship of different people, recruiting talent but also providing comfortable accommodation for tourists in this country. For that he must be applauded.

Honourable colleagues, directly and indirectly, Dr Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige contributed to the tax base and Consolidated Fund of this country. When we calculate the taxes that he contributed since 1986, they come to billions of shillings; they are enormous. Therefore, construction whether of schools, roads and hospitals at least has a penny from this decent Ugandan just like all other Ugandans.

I tried to look around for which day he defaulted his tax and I did not find any. Therefore, he was tax compliant. There is no reason as to why you do not join me, honourable members, in justifying the renaming of the Wampeewo Avenue with the name of such a Ugandan who has paid taxes, has been clean and who has put capital developments in that area.

Honourable members, Dr Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige was not selfish; he shared his knowledge through different writings. He wrote a book known as My Story of Building a Fortune in Africa. The late Dr Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige wanted to share part of his story and part of his knowledge with different Ugandans and indeed in this writing that I have - Madam Speaker, this is my copy which he personally gave me. Allow me to lay this copy on the Table and also urge honourable members to purchase it and read a story of a humble man rising from deep in Masaka with a dream to build an empire in the entire region.

Dr Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige made a great contribution to the education of citizens of the Republic of Uganda as he introduced a fund to sponsor over 25 children per year - girls and boys - that are not from his lineage and from all walks of life and from all tribes and religions. They have been sponsored on his initiative. 

Therefore, he has contributed not only to building people’s minds but also in providing apprenticeship and skilling Ugandans; providing the much-needed human resource from all disciplines including ICT, education, medicine, pharmacy, to mention but a few. He particularly chose those that were not able to pay for themselves or those that had parents that had passed on.

Dr Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige, in the health sector, made a tremendous contribution in building human resource by himself but also as the Chairman, Executive Board of the Uganda Sickle Cell Rescue Fund. This is amazing, honourable members. The late Dr Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige did not have any relative not even a child that was suffering from sickle cells. Normally, we are reactive as a result of some challenges that come into our homes and I will include myself. When you have challenges, that is when you come to realize that you need to help people. However, he was such a generous man that he sponsored over 10,000 people living with sickle cell. He gave them hope that they can live and he would host them for an annual conference and pay all the costs. He also helped them to believe that they also have a future. He was, indeed, generous and a fighter.

His contribution to sickle cell was also boosted by His Excellency, Gordon Wavamunno, Alhajji Kaddu Kiberu, Mr Emmanuel Katongole, Gaster Lule, Alhajji Umaru Mandela, Mr Robert Kabushenga, to mention but a few. He introduced this topic as well to the Buganda Kingdom officials and to the Kabaka himself and it was unanimously agreed upon that all funds that were raised from the Kabaka’s Run would be donated to the sickle cell victims. Isn’t he a great man, honourable members?

BMK’s contribution to climate change is enormous. He planted acres of forest cover not for economic benefit but for the restoration of the environment. 

BMK’s religious affiliations and love for his religion is undoubted. He was strong but also respected people that were not of his religion. Indeed, for all of you that went to Hotel Africana, you can bear witnesses that you were welcomed by people of different colour, people of different religion, and you could not know whether this hotel was owned by a Muslim. The reason is very clear; he made it comfortable for everyone to live around him.

He was not sectarian in nature and not even in the way he conducted his businesses. Yes, he opened up a hotel in Moroto. This is a sign that this gentleman was there not only to develop his people but the country.

I would like to also note that he did not leave out his family. In the management of his businesses, he employed all his relatives and children but his approach was very simple; he would crack the whip when it was desired. 

In addition, the approach was also very simple; it was never up to bottom, where his children would be let to grow from bottom to up. At the vigil, one of them recounted that he employed one the children and told him that the job he had for him was cleaning the rooms at the hotel and that if he could not do that job, he would rather leave. 

Hajjati Hadijah also remarked that BMK was a tough man. As her brother, one time he sponsored her to go and pursue her Master’s degree. On return, he told her to go back and do a PhD. Remember this was a primary school dropout but encouraged people to read hard. When she hesitated, he told her, “You are fired.” That was a message to the sister. She had to oblige in one way or another and she is pursuing her doctorate in Philosophy in honour of BMK.

He was a great contributor to the music industry, art and talent. You have seen very many music shows being launched at Hotel Africana. I am sure most of you have attended these shows. Those shows have always been granted to these musicians at subsidised prices because he wanted to promote talent and harness the best out of Uganda. 

Just like one musician, Mesach Ssemakula remarked, he encouraged him to compose a song that was unifying to people of all religions praising the Lord. He came up with a song Kankutendereze Ssebo, which all of you enjoy listening to. 

BMK was an epitome of patience. Five years ago, he was given only two years to live as a cancer patient. The doctors told him that he only had two years to go. He rejected that. He recollected himself and even dared to write a book, which is in the offing and it is about how to fight cancer.

Madam Speaker, it is not easy for anyone to live with a tale from their doctors that they were only left with two years to live. Many people either run mad, others get mental health problems but the late remained strong, for, he knew that the Almighty Allah was the only one who had his calendar.

During these four years of pain, BMK was flown out several times at a very high cost of over US$ 750,000 for treatment. Contributions came from friends and family but he was always strong and he did not bow down to this reckless disease. Even many naysayers came out on the Internet to state that he had died at times but he used to come out strongly and say, “I forgive you but do not blackmail me.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, can you summarise, everybody wants to talk?

MR NSEREKO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, as I windup, I would like to say that the late BMK lost his mother three months ago. He was carried from his sick bed to come and burry his mother. 

In the same period of six months, he lost a daughter but he did not waver; he remained strong just like Job and Prophet Muhammed, Peace be with him! 

As I conclude, I would like to describe BMK as courageous, humble, simple, generous, visionary, equitable, warm-hearted, polite and finally, a pan Africanist. 

Madam Speaker, with those few justifications, I would like to persuade this House to join me in the prayers that I have sought that we pay tribute, recognise his contribution and also rename Wampeewo Avenue - persuade the Minister for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs or enjoin on her, as Parliament, to have the Kampala Capital City Council change the name immediately from Wampeewo Avenue to BMK. Wampeewo was for the Impalas but now we should have Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige Avenue.

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. (Applause)  

3.12
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to first take this opportunity to thank my colleague, hon. Muhammad Nsereko, for moving this motion, which has unanimous support from all sides. When your deeds speak for themselves, then words do not mean a lot. With BMK, whatever we say here will comfort the family but his deeds, which have touched many, will always impact on most of us, who came to know him.

Madam Speaker, like you told us earlier that today is International Democracy Day, it is very important to celebrate the life of a giant, who has benefited from the democracy ushered in by the NRM. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, if you could allow me also to inform the House that this day of democracy coincides with the birthday of our President, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Happy birthday to our President – (Applause) – (Hon. Ssemujju rose_) - I do not know what is wrong with celebrating someone’s birthday – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, sit down.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the President is on record having said that he does not know when he was born. (Laughter) Even when you read his book, “The Mustard Seed” it is only most recent that he said his children attached a day for him to be able to celebrate. 

However, he said that he does not know when he was born. Maybe the Government Chief Whip was still young. Therefore, is the Government Chief Whip in order to lie to Parliament that today is the birthday of His Excellency the President, who personally said he does not know when he was born? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, I would also like to extend by birthday wishes to the President. (Laughter) Today is the President’s birthday. Happy birthday, President Museveni. (Applause)

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, no person could mourn the late BMK better than our President, who said this from Karamoja after learning of the death of this great entrepreneur, “The country has lost a great entrepreneur, an innovative business leader who profitably took advantage of Uganda’s vast business opportunities to create jobs and incomes for our people.” He added, “Persistence and dedication to correct principles yielded positive results, in the long run, for BMK.”

This is what was very different about the late BMK. He did business with what the President calls ekibaro or cura. That is, with calculation. Most of us just move. 

I met his son, Hajji Ali, in Guangzhou China, where the family has helped very many Ugandans. You would go to China and you would be surrounded by Nigerians but as soon as BMK saw that, he put in place a mechanism of ensuring Ugandans, who would want to do business in China, are helped. (Applause)

The virtues of honesty, being principled and knowing – in fact one of the biggest writings in BMK’s book is, “Never eat the capital. Money belongs to the business not the business owner.” 

For most of us Africans and Ugandans in particular, one of the biggest problems we have is that we start by eating and then we save the balance. 

People like BMK have managed to build what they built because they would first save and then eat after saving. But for us, even when someone goes to the bank and gets a loan, he first enjoys and then he goes to invest. Many marry a second wife and then invest later.

This is what we need to learn from BMK; that we should remain focused. If money belongs to a business, it is money for a business. If money belongs to a certain community, it is money for that community. 

It is very important for some of us, who are learning from him, that indeed a saving culture is needed in this country. That rhymes well with the message of the NRM around Emyooga and around this Parish Model. We must build a saving culture to fulfill the legacy of people like BMK. 

The late BMK, whom my friend hon. Nsereko has eulogised very eloquently, preached and practiced unity. He built the Masjid Musa Mosque at Hotel Africana, in memory of his son, Musa, who passed away. 

He was, however, not limited by his love for Islam. In Namilyango, Gomba, he built a Catholic church in memory of his aunt who raised him. 

Where you find some of us looking at each other as if when one doesn’t practice my religion, then one is not an upright person, BMK went ahead to build shelter for the other faiths to make sure they practice their religion well. 

His belief was simple, that if you are a Muslim, be a good Muslim; if you are a Catholic, be a good Catholic; if you are Anglican, be a good Anglican; if you are a pagan, be a very bad pagan so that you know how bad it is to be a pagan and then you change. (Laughter)

As the Government, we support this motion. As hon. Nsereko has prayed, we support the fact that the right procedure should be followed so that something memorable, like Wampeewo Avenue, can be renamed after the late Hajji BMK. I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the Government Chief Whip. What we are doing is following the right procedure. 

When you look at Section 3(2) of the KCCA Act, KCCA is under the Central Government and the Central Government is under us. So, whatever we are doing, we are doing it under the law. 

When you also look at Article 5(4) of the Constitution, it mandates us to be in charge of the Central Government. We are, therefore, doing whatever we are doing under the law and we have the powers. Nobody out there should imagine that we do not have the powers. The powers are in this House.

Members, let us limit time so that many of us will be able to talk. 

3.21
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion paying tribute to the late Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige, popularly known as BMK. 

The story of the late BMK is the story of an illustrious Ugandan entrepreneur, who rose from a petty trader to owning a number of businesses in Uganda and abroad. The story of the late BMK is the story of a hardworking man who persevered, was honest and diligent. 

The late BMK espouses all the qualities of a good leader, including integrity, accountability, empathy, humility, resilience, vision, influence and positivity. 

The late BMK did not allow his humble background to define him. He established the BMK Group of Companies dealing in hotel business, importation of spare parts, reconditioned cars and motorcycles, manufacturing of plastics, real estate - including commercial and residential property - farming and education. 

He was a visionary leader, who established businesses in other parts of the world, like in Zambia, Thailand and Hong Kong. Through those business undertakings, he provided jobs for Ugandans, contributed to the economic development of Uganda through the payment of taxes and import substitution. 

The late BMK undertook a number of projects for the benefit of the poor through provision of school fees, construction of schools and health facilities. He also contributed to the building of churches, mosques as well as other religious projects. 

On a personal note, I first met the late BMK in Zambia in 1996 where he had established businesses. He was a generous man who wanted others to succeed in business, and he did not hesitate to lend a hand in the business success of other people. 

When I met him in Zambia, he offered to accompany me to South Africa, Namibia, Angola and then back to Zambia. I was pursuing a mobile telephone second national operator in Angola and Zambia. 

From then, till his death, he remained a friend and he has, on very many occasions, offered counsel to me in my business undertakings. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that Ugandans emulate the late Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige who rose from obscurity to international fame by working hard, being honest and helping others. 

I, therefore, extend my personal and heartfelt condolences to the family of the late Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige, especially his wife and children. I pray that Allah rests the soul of the deceased in eternal peace.  I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Mawanda. Let us use three minutes each. 

3.25
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to thank hon. Muhammad Nsereko for moving the motion. I rise to support the motion and also persuade the House to pass the prayers as presented.

First of all, we convey our condolences to the family and all Ugandans. It is because BMK is a household name in the country that we all feel touched by his demise. 

I would like to concur with you that Parliament has the powers and authority to consider this motion and pass the prayers. I have heard the Lord Mayor of Kampala Capital City Authority complaining but this is a matter which should not raise any complaints. Parliament has authority in accordance with the Constitution and other attendant legislations.

There are many lessons we pick from the life of BMK. If we were to list all of them, we would probably sleep in this House. Let me, however, pick one or two in the interest of time. 

I was just scanning through his book. He was somebody who dropped out of school in Primary Seven and rose to the stature which we all know. What this teaches us is that what we need is opportunity and space for us to exercise our talents and skills. Therefore, anybody born alive and growing can prosper, depending on the environment and the opportunity provided to him or her. 

Indeed, like the Government Chief Whip earlier commented, we salute the environment in Uganda that enables people like BMK to rise to greatness in business and many other areas. Therefore, this is a great lesson for our young people and all of us in this country.

We thank BMK for his big heart. This is a person who helped many people irrespective of their faith, where they came from and whether he knew them or not. He has also passed on this spirit amongst his family members, particularly the children. Like you said, those who travel to Guangzhou know the members of his family, especially Hajji Ali who helps Ugandans to do business and also make connections.

I appeal to the members of his family who are here to protect the legacy of BMK and also the business enterprises which he had set up. Most often, Africans especially start businesses but they do not involve their families. When they die, their business empires die too. BMK, however, to a great extent, brought in his family and I am sure whatever business enterprises he started, the family should be able to continue with them. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I wanted to speak on the issue of cancer. We have a great challenge because cancer is on the rise. Maybe at some point, we should find some time as Parliament, and get a report from the Ministry of Health so that we can discuss this challenge of cancer, which is on the rise not only in Uganda but the entire African environment.

We need to see what kind of solutions we can continue to propose to the Government and other agencies to address this issue. Thank you, Madam Speaker. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Dr Chris Baryomunsi. Maybe to allay the fears of the Lord Mayor, when you look at the Constitution, Article 5(4) says, “Kampala, located in Buganda, shall be the capital city for Uganda and shall be administered by the Central Government”. Article 5(6) says, “Parliament shall, by law, make provision for the administration and development of Kampala as the capital city.” When you look at section 3 of the KCCA Act, it is very clear that Kampala Capital City is under the Central Government so, the powers lie with the Parliament of Uganda. 

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I extend condolences to the family of our friend and brother, BMK. On behalf of the people of Ndorwa County West and the people of Kabale, please accept our condolences. 

The second point is that the story of BMK is part of the story of private sector development in this country. Out of the GDP of US$ 40 billion now, which is equivalent to Shs 150 trillion, the Government, which is the treasury, only appropriates Shs 40 trillion meaning that Shs 110 trillion is actually contributed by the private sector. Out of that, only Shs 10 per cent is actually contributed by our indigenous businesses. BMK was part of that contribution. I think we need to appreciate his contribution as an indigenous businessman. 

The story of BMK says to us and many million Ugandans that our background does not determine our destiny. Whatever circumstance that you go through, when you are determined, with God’s grace, you can succeed in whatever situation. This is the story of BMK. 

BMK was a generous man. For example, I can disclose here that before the COVID-19 pandemic, we used to organise the National Prayer Breakfast every 8th of October. BMK offered Parliament the use of the hall at Hotel Africana for free as part of his contribution. (Applause) So, we appreciate him and celebrate his life. We wish the best of luck to his family. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kasolo, I was going to call you “Emyooga”. (Laughter)

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO FINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that my name is synonymous with Emyooga. 

Madam Speaker, in the first place, allow me to register my heartfelt condolences to the family of the late BMK, Ugandans and Africa at large. Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you very much, for allowing the mover of the motion, hon. Nsereko, space on the Order Paper to move this motion. It does not only comfort the bereaved family but it also energizes the business community and the local investors that we appreciate, as Government, whatever they do to develop this country. 

Madam Speaker, a lot has been said by the mover of the motion. However, I must emphasise that the late BMK was a nationalist because he did whatever he could to make tremendous contributions in terms of taxes for the development of the economy of Uganda. 

Secondly, after His Excellency the President stabilising security in northern Uganda, the late BMK took it upon himself to ensure regional economic and social balance. He went and set up a heavy investment in Moroto. Many Ugandans would love to invest in Kampala, the heart of Uganda, but this gentleman went as far as Moroto and put a heavy investment and employed Ugandans in that area. 

Alhajji BMK was a secure investor; he could share whatever knowledge he had with all Ugandans that would approach him, irrespective of whether they were into the same business. He could advise unlike some of the Ugandans that want to be monopolists. Ugandans will miss Hajji BMK. 

Madam Speaker, the Government Chief Whip has emphasised the issue of saving. Hon. Nsereko has taken us through the ladders that the late BMK climbed. You see, it does not necessarily mean that you must have a lot of capital in order for you to progressively invest in business. You must ensure that you embrace a saving culture. 

Honourable members, I would love all of us to save some money and invest so that we can make serious contributions towards the development of the economy. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to speak about where people have come from when they are still alive. Even for Members of Parliament here, we have come from far. If you can share with hon. Bahati here how he came up from vending sweets on Kabale streets to now the Minister in charge of Industry, we need to write books so that Ugandans can be encouraged. It is not enough to see you enjoying when people cannot trace where you came from. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to stop here and I am sure that the late BMK is now with God. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kasolo. On that note, the books of BMK that can help us know his origin and where he ended are available; you can acquire one. It may help you to read his story. 

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Mary Mugasa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I support the motion but I would like to emphasise that the road called Wampeewo Avenue should be renamed Dr Alhajji BMK because this man broke the glass ceiling – from primary seven to a doctorate. It is an award for actions. I, therefore, beg to move. Thank you.

3.41 
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion to honour the late Dr Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige (BMK), a man who loved humanity. When choosing where to put his investment, he chose to invest in Karamoja even when the return of investment was not guaranteed. He invested the biggest part of his investment to put up Hotel Africana in Moroto. Very few businessmen can take a risk of that kind.

Therefore, he saw our potential as a subregion when other people could not see it and put in his money there hoping that it would yield profits. Unfortunately, he died before getting that return. I pray that God will make sure that the business progresses so that the family gets a return on investment for believing in us as a subregion. 

As if that was not enough, he sponsored a number of children; he gave them an education. Those who wouldn’t have otherwise had education, he gave them education. 

When the news came that he had passed on, the people in Moroto and many parts of Karamoja set up fire camps; that is our method of mourning a person we love so dearly. Therefore, we shall miss him very much because there are very few people in Uganda of his kind, who look beyond profitability and also invest in humanity – and invest in a hope that there is something of value that will come out of these people also. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.43
MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise as a proponent of the motion. I have been privileged to read two very important writings of Dr Alhajji BMK. One is the book that has been laid on the Table which is “My story of building a fortune in Africa.” As a young person, one important thing that I have learnt from his book is the virtue of resilience.

Madam Speaker, Dr BMK shared a story of his maiden business trip to Japan via Hong Kong, where he lost a bag that had US $52,000 in 1982; that was approximately Shs 190 million. The story of how a person is able to pick up even after losing everything that he went with is one that most of our people need to learn from. 

Finally, I would like to commend the late Dr BMK, for availing many employment opportunities to the young people of this country, especially the region that I represent, which is Karamoja. Hotel Africana in Moroto provides many opportunities for our young people. 
May his soul rest in peace! 

3.45
MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. The statesman we are talking about has had an impact on the people of Kitgum. 

When I was still the chairperson of the youth council, I met a young person, who had been given a scholarship to study in Canada. This young man did not have any hope but we thought about going to Mr BMK because we were told he liked helping people. We went and met him at Hotel Africana and when we told him the story, he did not hesitate and this was his statement, “I will support you. Go study but make sure you come back to the country and invest here.” Today, as we speak, that young man is a doctor. 

Secondly, there is a white woman called the late Irene Grisoni, who left Australia. This lady sold everything she had and came to settle in Kitgum District during the war to help the people. May her soul rest in eternal peace! She also passed on due to cancer. And every year, we organise charity walks to support the initiative she started. Mr BMK always contributed to that charity walk each year in support of the children that the Irene Grisoni Foundation takes care of. The testimonies are many. 

Let me conclude with another testimony about the late BMK. Again, when I was in the youth council, a lady came to my office with a sickler young daughter. I first went to a one Joyce Bagala. She again referred me to Mr BMK. When I went to him, he picked up the phone and called abroad in the USA; this child is being taken care of by a foundation in the US. 

We have lost a statesman and a good man. I would like to urge Ugandans that when we are still living on this planet - those whom God has blessed with money - should sow a seed to support Ugandans and humanity. Then, we will remember you the way we remember BMK here today. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.48
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are seated here to pay tribute because of your initiative. I remember during the burial of the late BMK, you said - if I got you correctly - that you will make sure BMK is honoured for the contribution he has made to this country. I thank you very much for that initiative. 

I would also like to thank the hon. Muhammad Nsereko for bringing this motion, which I would like to support. BMK “cut his teeth” in Japan. He went there quite early. I knew this because I served as an Ambassador of Uganda to Japan at the time. There are many Ugandans who go there to find a fortune and try their luck and he was one of the early ones.

Japan is a country of great savings, enterprise, new technologies and ventures. This man that we are honouring today went there to learn to save; we are honouring him today because of what he learnt in Japan. Furthermore, he also taught and guided his fellow Ugandans in Japan. 

Madam Speaker, if you went to Ndeeba today, up to Nateete, you will be shocked to learn that all those developments there are of Ugandans who ventured into Japan and brought their savings to invest in this country. Therefore, it is right and proper that this man is honoured and a befitting road be named after him. 

3.50 
MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (Independent, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion, the hon. Nsereko. 

The late BMK did not physically help anyone in Pader but if there is anything to go by mentally, he attested to the dream of our founding fathers of this country; to build from a primary level to the status where he reached. It is a dream that is almost unattainable. 

The youths have learnt from him and I know he did this because the founding fathers and the great leaders of this nation have put up a medium; that anyone can rise in this country. 

Secondly, it is the quality of this product – the late BMK is one gentleman who first imported motorbikes called the jaguars now replaced by Bajaj; the jaguar was the only motorbike that was known by then to carry almost five bags of flour and other commodities. Up to now, if you are to buy second hand parts – for us who buy second hand parts – the mechanics will tell you to buy from BMK. This means that he was a man who was never corrupted. His products were always to standard and this is something that he showed to this country; that you do not have to be corrupt to get to the wealth of the nation. 

Finally, I beg that this 11th Parliament makes a change. Why don’t we always recognise such great personalities when they are still alive? I believe that if he was still breathing and we called him into this Parliament and showered him with the praises that we are showering right now, he would really appreciate it. I thank you very much and I beg to second the motion.   

3.53
MR JACKSON ATIMA (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion raised by the hon. Muhammad Nsereko. As hotel personnel from the West Nile Region and Arua City, an entrepreneur and a legislator from the central division in Arua City, I stand to pay tribute to the late BMK for the wonderful things he has done for this country. He has been a nationalist and a patriot.

When hon. Nsereko elaborated on his achievements, I said I cannot sit down and fail to stand up and pay tribute together. 

I have personally benefited from attending workshops in Hotel Africana. The late BMK did not only go to Karamoja and other parts of this country but also, as you enter Arua City, you will see a well-levelled ground with containers and equipment labelled, “Hotel Africana”. That means he recognised the country as his own and wished to develop every part of the country.

3.55
MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion in recognition of the contribution made by the late BMK, a very great lesson learnt from him, a man from the grassroots.

Madam Speaker, when I was a district councillor, I had an opportunity to have an engagement in Hotel Africana. When I entered and saw how it was developed, I thought it was a government enterprise. Some of you may laugh but it was the reality because I could not imagine a person doing such. However, out of interaction, I learnt that it was owned by an individual.

Above all, I met a number of people from Teso working in Hotel Africana; a lesson that we must learn that tribalism must be fought in the country. He accommodated all people from the different subregions that we have in this country.

Madam Speaker, we have also learnt that entrepreneurial skills are key amongst Ugandans. He was not much of an academician but was able to practice the little knowledge that he learnt. He was a great man who must be remembered in this country.

Many of us who get PhDs and Master’s degrees think that is the best but we must learn something from this gentleman. May the Almighty Allah rest his soul in peace.

3.56
MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo East County, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to condole with the family of the late Dr Kibirige. It is not easy for people to know that either a role model or mentor can have influence. 

I am one of those who have benefitted from this family and especially from the late Kibirige. When he opened a spare parts shop in Mbale sometime in the late 1980s and early 1990s, at a time when I was a student and of course doing business, he inspired me. 

Secondly, at the time - I want to say this as a testimony to this House as a retired smuggler –(Laughter)- I benefitted. That shop became a hub of my trans-border business in Kenya, carrying spares to Eldoret and Nairobi and here I am today. It is good for me to say all this so that people know that some of us have come from far.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, rule 17 reads, “Subject to these rules, the House shall meet on such days and such place as the Speaker shall determine.” Madam Speaker, it comes to you, in memory and tribute of this great icon –(Member timed out.) 

3.58
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I would like to join the House to support the motion moved by hon. Nsereko. I would also like to thank you because I have seen that whenever we have trouble in this country, like when someone dies, you are one of the first senior citizens to go there. (Applause) I saw you at the burial of BMK dressed like a full Muslim woman. I appreciated that, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, I first met BMK personally with hon. Kasule Lumumba, the then Government Chief Whip. That time, we had issues in Busoga of inadequate mosques and children who wanted to go to school. The then Government Chief Whip introduced me to BMK. I want to testify before this House that BMK supported the people of Busoga, especially the Muslim community. Children went to school out of his support and mosques were built.

He was a statesman, a person who had a heart that supported someone in need and he did this wholeheartedly. I would like to implore all Ugandans and all of us, Members of Parliament, the business community and everybody that when you have the chance of helping, please help. I beg to submit.

4.01
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to pay tribute to the late. I met him in 1992 when I came from my village in Lira. He met me running at the golf course where Hotel Africana is. When he saw me running, he asked me to come and do gym work but I did not know what a gym was. When I reached the training room, I saw that the gym material looked like those hoes we used for planting crops in the village. I began lifting weights and I think that is what made me win the World Junior Championship gold medal for Uganda in 1994. My legs and arms were strong like a crocodile bite.

In 1996, the Olympic team that represented the country was training from his gym for free. Therefore, honourable members, I urge you that when you have money, let us be humble and learn how to use it right. If you hold money too tight like a goalkeeper with a ball, you will never succeed in your life. Thank you.

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion moved by hon. Muhammad Nsereko to pay tribute to BMK.

I have a consanguineal relationship with BMK, through marriage. One of my nephews married hon. Betty Naluyima, MP Wakiso District, who is a sister to BMK’s first wife. Therefore, we have been together for many years through this journey and he has been in our family for a long time.

The time I remember very well is when my nephew was getting married. When he appeared, everybody wanted to seat him in front but he sat at the back. We said but you are an important person in the family. He said, “No, please. I am just a member like any of you.” At one point, my mother was very sick and we were in Germany in April 2019 and he had already started travelling around the world seeking treatment for cancer. As a family, we had already known that he had cancer. 

When we met him in Germany, there was another old Ugandan lady who was very sick. BMK came to St Augustine Hospital and knelt down to greet this old lady. I looked at a very rich humble man and I could not really understand. He was a man with a meek and very composed demeanour. You could not understand him, if you did not know him. You would not tell that this is the man who built an empire in Uganda; he looked so normal. 

However, what impressed me most in the last days of his life is that he involved all his children in his businesses and told them what to do after he was gone. On the day of his burial, where hon. Betty Naluyima represented the family, I attended throughout on zoom and I saw the Deputy Speaker at the burial. 

I saw how the children eulogised him and spoke about how they were going to keep that empire. I was impressed that they knew each and everything and every connection he had outside Uganda. I am glad they will take this to another level.

Members, I would like to appeal to you that it pays a lot to be humble. This man has earned a name and may God continue to bless his soul.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I said humility is very important. 

4.06
DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West Jinja City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I am aware of Wampeewo Avenue; a very prime area and full of business properties. I do know the inconveniences and expenditure that comes with changing a name of a road; correspondences and letterheads are all written in the name of Wampeewo Avenue, including land titles. 

Given the knowledge we have heard about BMK, he deserves to be named after Wampeewo Avenue over and above the inconveniences and cost that will be associated with the change. 

Last but not least, we should not hide from the shame most especially, from the side seated on your right. A man who has been paying taxes, who has taken care of sickle cell patients much as he does not have a sickler in his family, to have cancer and move to Nairobi yet the basis of tax, is for the Government to provide service. 

Madam Speaker, on a day like this, decisions should be made after reflecting on that. We should examine the Uganda Cancer Institute and know what exactly is missing such that Parliament works towards putting that right. I do not know of any other big person that should die to bring down the people seated on your right - the Executive - to think about how to improve some of these services. For a long time, the Uganda Cancer Institute operated without a radiology –(Interjection)– well, that was in the Tenth Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I seek your leave to proceed under rule 59(k) to move a motion without notice that the Ministry of Health gives us the status of the Uganda Cancer Institute such that we know what it can handle and what it cannot handle. Otherwise, we should be treating Ugandans in Uganda. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Batuwa. One thing I would like to assure you is that the Uganda Cancer Institute is working. BMK did not go to Nairobi because there was no hospital in Uganda. If money could save a person and if you were there to listen to what was said at the funeral - how BMK went to all the best hospitals and if money could save, then BMK would not have died. It is not about not having a hospital here; cancer is cancer and it is not time for a blame game. 

We have the cancer institute and BMK tried all his best and went to all the best hospitals. He even went on the internet and searched for the best cancer hospital. In Germany, he got the treatment but it could not help. It was not related to money because he had the money.

4.10
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My deepest condolences to about four groups namely; Ugandans, the family, the Kingdom of Buganda and the Kabaka in particular, and lastly, to the Islamic brothers and sisters.

I am quite saddened that there are a lot of Dr BMKs; they have the will, zeal, commitment, result and determination. However, as Parliament, we are not doing enough to help them make it to the top. I am, therefore, asking the leadership of this Parliament to provide all the help to this family that is in the moment of grief to carry forward the legacy of their father. I would be one of those that would be saddened, if I see a downscale of the progress.

Madam Speaker, in addition to the motion, I think we should interest the Government to give all the support that this family needs to carry forward the legacy.

Lastly, like it happens everywhere or elsewhere, especially in the developed world, we could impress it upon Makerere University to put up BMK scholars, and they could be housed like the college of business so that we have scholars that would be coming out of the university but with the name of BMK. My deepest condolences. May you and your legacy live forever. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.12
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you, in particular, because late in the night, I was at BMK’s house seated somewhere and you came along; very late in the night. That was fairly humbling. (Applause) 

The death of BMK caps a very difficult chapter for many reasons and I will be particular to the Muslim community. We have lost quite a number of eminent Muslims in this country. As a Muslim in this Parliament, we lost Hajji Katongole, Dr Anas Kariisa and eminent sheikhs like Muzaata. They are very many. It has been a difficult time for that community – those of us who closely work with them but the death of BMK hit us quite harder and for many reasons. 

Hon. Nsereko, hon. Kasolo, Hajjati and all of us across the board know how far the Muslim community has come in this country, from colonial days. It has been a difficult journey. It was very difficult for BMK to break the glass ceiling and rise to this level. We celebrate a life and an achievement of a humble person. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to draw the attention of this country to a very important thing. We roll out the red carpet for foreign investors and fall all over them, and give them all kinds of incentives. Let us know that out in our villages, there are talents that this country can tap into to develop Uganda. (Applause)

We give a lot to foreign investors; we give them a lot of incentives and we forget that in our villages, a humble young man who stopped in primary three can rise to the level of BMK. How many BMKs can we help if they were given the incentives that we give foreigners? 

Today, even the education sector is becoming an exclusive club of the rich and the well connected. Had it been that way, we would never have had President Museveni. He was a son of the poorest of the poor. 

Can we now look forward as we celebrate the life of BMK, introspect and see what we can best do as a country to help very many other humble people who have talent? There are very many who can make it in life. 
 
As I end my tribute, let me speak briefly as the chairman of the Buganda Caucus in Parliament. BMK has lived as a true African. There are very many rich and educated people who deny their tribal and ethnic belonging but he remained loyal to the king. (Applause)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, there are very many people in this country who, once they reach levels of eminence, they forget where they come from. All of a sudden, they want to portray themselves as like they came from Alaska but BMK truly belonged to Buganda and epitomised the Buganda culture. Let us be true. You cannot be an African without a tribe. You cannot be an African without roots. Let us be true to who we are as we remember BMK. I beg to move. 

4.17
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for allowing this motion, which was befitting. 

The death of a successful man like this - a very rich business man - reminds us that despite our riches, despite the power we have, it is vanity. Therefore, we do not have to be very proud. We do not have to oppress others or to shut them down; after all, at the end of the day, the journey is the same. 

Secondly, that determination and hard work lead to success. You do not have to steal to be successful. I was with hon. Kasolo at a meeting in Zambia sometime back and we were told how Hotel Africana was doing very well in Zambia. We had gone for a pension scheme meeting and training. 

This man has succeeded almost everywhere but you do not trace any record of corruption or theft - like some people want to do. (Applause)

I would like to salute him. I would like to salute all the businessmen who have succeeded without stealing. If only all of us could do that - and we should because now we know that at the end of the day, there is nothing impossible under the sun. And if you work very hard, you will –(Member timed out.)

4.19
MR JOEL SSENYONYI (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues to commiserate with the family of the late Dr BMK. 

Nelson Mandela once said, “It always seems impossible until it is done.” That has been the life of Dr BMK. He has exuded that from a very humble background and here we are, celebrating him. It is a source of encouragement. 

I would like to focus on one thing: The Government Chief Whip mentioned something that tickled me. He said that one of the things to learn from the late Dr BMK was his sound financial principles. He talked about how he would acquire a loan and make good use of it. I hope we can practically learn these things as opposed to just talking about them and claiming that we are learning and yet we are not learning. 

I thought about our debt to GDP ratio as a country. Then I thought about the many non-performing loans we have as a country; that we borrow money and then plan later to use that money. So, it remains idle for a year or two while we are paying interest on it. Let us be serious when we say we are learning from great men like Dr BMK and we actually apply those principles here. Otherwise, it is not enough for us to say these things, get everybody excited claiming we have learnt from him and yet we have learnt zilch. Thank you. 

4.20
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Nsereko, for bringing up this motion. 

I rise to commend the contribution the late BMK made to civil society organisations despite the shrinking space. 

Very many proprietors, when they host big conferences, start erasing low-paying conferences. They begin putting criteria that discriminate the poor from accessing such hotels - like no entering with a camera, no phones. But with BMK, we saw low income, middle income and high income conferences. The civil society would host exhibitions of small-scale farmers at Hotel Africana. We saw the elevation of civil society and their space in that. 

There was a request to name Wampeewo Avenue after the late BMK. I do not buy into naming this old road after him. There are very many upcoming new roads. These roads may even have poor historical backgrounds. Let us get a newly constructed road, they are very many in the city, and we name it after the late. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The essence of Wampeewo Avenue is that it is where BMK House is, Africana Hotel is also in that area. So, if you want to know anything about BMK, it is on that street. Maybe we could have a second road.

4.23
MR HILLARY KIYAGA (NUP, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the Shadow Minister for Arts and Culture, permit me to thank the late BMK for uplifting of the art industry. 

Initially, we used to organise shows in local places like bars and others. When we approached the late BMK, we told him we wanted to tap into the corporate world and BMK never resisted. He gave us Hotel Africana and it is one of the first venues where a corporate event was organised. From then, we begun tapping into the corporate world that never used to come to our bikalis that we used to be in.

We have many BMKs. Comrades, I know you remember very well Sembule Steel Mills or Sembule Group of Companies. As we celebrate the late BMK, there are many BMKs rotting; I think we should interest ourselves in knowing the whereabouts of the Sembules. Sembule Steel Mills was a very big company that we used to visit while we were in our primary schools; it was about seeing how companies operate. 

Sembuule Steel Mills, at one point, wanted the Government to lend it Shs 7 billion. This company collapsed because the Government could not lend it as an indigenous company –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had a good debate on this issue. We appreciate that you all love BMK. We appreciate that you all have what to say. Okay, let us hear from hon. Kayemba.

4.25
MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Madam Speaker, I feel humbled to be here when the House – 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I thought you said, “Ssemujju.”

MR KAYEMBA-SSOLO: No, she said Kayemba.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I said, hon. Kayemba. Hon. Ssemujju - 

MR KAYEMBA-SSOLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I feel humbled that this House is celebrating the son of greater Masaka; the son of Buddu, who came to Kampala and expanded his wings to the world.

As people of Masaka, we have a road from Kyabakuza to Mateete, which passes via Bukomansimbi. Good enough, hon. Muhammad Nsereko comes from the same place. As a contribution and sign of honour to the people of greater Masaka who produced that child, I request the Government to tarmac that road in honour of the late BMK so that whenever we use the road, we recall that the Government was happy with BMK, who came from greater Masaka. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us first name the road and then the Ministry of Works and Transport will do its work.

4.26
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kira Municipality, I extend our condolences to the family of the late BMK. I will make three brief points. I was pleased recently when Makerere University invited the late Dr Mulwana and bestowed upon him a professorship. Wavamunno was also to begin teaching at their business college. I hope that is how it is named. 

In the United States, successful businesspersons are invited to speak to university students. Wealth is not distributed. You cannot make people wealthy by your operations. You learn from people who have made it. You learn from BMK, Mulwana and Wavamunno. What the Government does is to provide the environment. 

So, my brother the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Microfinance), you do not have to carry money on your head to make people wealthy. You just have to take – (Interjections) - it is because BMK did not come with any money from Masaka. He came with his head and now we are celebrating his achievement.

The first time I read about his hotel was two decades ago. A local newspaper then called Engabo asked him the one thing he would like to do before he dies and he –(Member timed out.) Madam Speaker, I request for one minute. He said it was completion of Hotel Africana.

I support the motion that we name that road next to his hotel, BMK Road. The Lord Mayor is not here but he is not opposed to naming the road. He was only saying that they need to be involved as the local authority. I spoke to him about it and he is actually very happy. Therefore, the process, as proposed by you, Madam Speaker, is going to be very easy because everybody is in support. 

Finally, there are artificial tycoons; these ones who are seasonal. Every Government procurement is going to lead to the birth of another tycoon. Hon. Bahati and hon. Kasolo who are in that sector, we need the BMKs to teach people how to make money. (Laughter) They should stop hanging around Government offices waiting for the next procurement –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, stop naming people. 

MR SSEMUJJU: I am not naming anyone. I am only asking ministers. Those people who are hanging around your offices waiting for the next procurement to make them rich - give each one of them a copy of BMK’s book so that they see how money is made. You do not go and carry money in a sack after one procurement and you become a seasonal tycoon. That is why – Look at India; they have 800 million people in the middle class. The artificial tycoons here, who are involved in every scandal, cannot make a country rich but –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will have hon. Nsanja and hon. Okupa. Those who have not spoken on this item will speak on the next one. 

4.30
MR PATRICK NSANJA (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank my brother, hon. Nsereko, for moving the motion as well as persuading the entire House to support it. 

In this world, life is not a total accomplishment. It is a contribution. What contribution do you make to your closest community before you leave this world? When we hear of deaths, the lessons are picked by us the living. I personally picked a particular lesson from BMK as somebody who understood the values of network relationships. 

We are told that he purchased land to cater for the indigent people as well as those who would wish to be buried there. If I can pose a question – because even in his will, he indicated that the land be expanded for other occupants - how many of us here would do such a thing apart from accumulating wealth and building bungalows for our children? 

It is important for the living, especially us, the Members of Parliament, to always pick lessons from the dead. A person like BMK must really be appreciated. 

Secondly, we see a gentleman who is trustworthy and a timekeeper. That is why he was able to – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, hon. Opendi and then we will hear from the minister. 

4.32
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my brother, hon. Muhammad Nsereko, for the motion. I stand to support the motion. On behalf of the people of Kasilo and Teso in general, we send our condolences to the family of the late BMK. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to just say one or two things. A lot has been said. Hon. Ssemujju has just talked about the artificial tycoons in Kampala who are busy struggling to parcel the little land in Kampala but Dr Kibirige did not do that but went to Karamoja and Arua. Can the businessmen in Kampala learn to spread their businesses outside Kampala and stop struggling for and parcelling the little land in Kampala? I hope they do that.

The late was a national leader. When he went to Karamoja, he adopted a girl. I saw that girl on the day when we were attending the burial, crying and wailing. How many people in Kampala can go up to Karamoja and adopt a daughter? This is a person with a national character, which we must all emulate. 

I will give you one example. When we were forming PAFO and FDC - those who were there at the time - we used to organise meetings in Hotel Africana. Hon. Lumumba was one of our team members. At that time, it was very different to organise something contrary to the Movement system. He was threatened by those who thought he was allowing people to hold meetings there. 

However, I remember him telling me - because I was one of the organisers - that he told them, “Dr Besigye and others were together at one time in the bush. There is no money which is from the Opposition and there is no money which has the colour of the Government. For me, I am a businessman.” That was Dr Kibirige and that is the type of person we would love Ugandans to be.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you, personally, first, for allowing the motion and secondly, when you offered help in Guangzhou to deliver a wheelchair. You even forgot your bag because you were helping a Ugandan. I thank you for that.

4.35
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues to support this motion. I would like to state that I worked with BMK at the time when I was in the Ministry of Health, after he came up to support the fight against the sickle cell disease. His NGO was involved in complementing our efforts in the health sector in creating awareness about sickle cell disease. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank his Royal Highness the Kabaka, who thereafter, also joined this campaign and dedicated 2017, 2018 and 2019 of his birthdays to run and collect money for the sickle cell disease.

One thing I would like to say about the late BMK is that when I had lunch with him after officiating at the sickle cell ceremony that he held at Hotel Africana, he said, “Minister, we must help people. People are out there suffering and we must help them.” I would like to thank him for living up to that. 

Madam Speaker, you said that cancer is cancer and we all agree to that. I got to know about his challenge when we were travelling to Cuba and we were trying, with hon. Okello Oryem, to see how to get Cuban medicine to help him. Unfortunately, his cancer was already advanced.

Colleagues, cancer is treatable if diagnosed early. Therefore, it is important to do regular checkups - Madam Speaker, just a second so that I mention this. “Fighting Aggressive Cancer” was the book that he was writing. I would like to request the family to help have this book out so that members of the public and we, politicians, can read and know what exactly he wanted to tell us in this book.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, he dedicated his time to creating awareness about sickle cell. Can each one of us, Members of Parliament, make it a point to go out there and tell our people that before marriage, please, check yourselves and if both have the sickle cell disease or trait, it is advisable for the couple not to get married. 

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Kawooya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to join the rest of my colleagues that have paid tribute to our fallen God-fearing, down-to-earth and nationalist, Dr BMK. On my own behalf and on behalf of the Ngeye Clan that I am married to, I am here mourning my senior brother-in-law.

Those who may not know me, for the sake of relating to why I am here now, I am Hajat Anifa Kawooya Bangirana. I got the “Kawooya” name after the Ngeye Clan found me suitable to be married into this clan. I would like to testify that one of the people that strongly commended me was the late Dr BMK. He mentored and initiated me into Islam and took me over until I went for Hijjah, three times.

I am here on behalf of the family and the Muslim community, as it has been said, that we are mourning one of us that has been our mentor. Many testimonies have been given that Dr BMK not only looked at the Muslim fraternity but he was a nationalist. His contribution to the young, the middle-aged and the old has been all given out.

He was a scandal-free man in his marriage and life and he taught all of us that were married to this clan that we should emulate and become so religious, trusting and respecting of God.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you personally for having participated, contributed and ensured that you stayed with the family during this time of grief. It is a difficult time but for the initiative you took, the family is so grateful. Thank you so much. We do appreciate it as a family; members are there and have been in this. May God bless you and may Allah rest the soul of Dr BMK in eternal peace. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before the minister of Kampala comes, I would like to implore her to pay attention to section 7(2) of the KCCA Act, under paragraph (7)(a) of the third schedule, which says that KCCA has powers to identify the streets and public places for assigning the names. However, what is very important is section 5(3) of the same Act, which says KCCA will act as an agent of the Central Government.

Therefore, whatever we are doing is within the law, based on that Act. That is why we are imploring you to ensure that we have Wampeewo Avenue, as per the prayers, to be renamed to BMK Avenue. Can we have your commitment? We are giving you these seven days, as the House.

4.43
THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Minsa Kabanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a political head, I take this opportunity to thank hon. Nsereko for this motion. I also add my voice to strongly support the motion. I will ensure that the authority renames Wampeewo Avenue to BMK Avenue.  (Applause)

I also extend my heartfelt condolences to the family of the late BMK and I would also like to add my voice to what hon. Opendi has said. We know that cancer is painless in the first stage but how many of us have gone for the test? How many of us have taken our parents for a cancer test? By the time you realise that you have cancer in the second and third stage, however much you try, you will not get rid of it. 

Therefore, Members, let us test for prostate cancer and other types of cancers. We all have insurance. We can contact our doctors and test for it, as Members of Parliament, Cabinet ministers and all categories. Let us test for cancer. Otherwise, it eats you up because you do not get pain in the first stage. By the time you get symptoms, you are already sick. May his soul rest in eternal peace!  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister of Kampala. Hajjati Kabanda, we will give you seven days to report back to the House. 

4.45
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the mover of the motion, hon. Nsereko. I would also like to thank all Members who have contributed to pay tribute to the late Dr Bulaimu Kibirige. 

I would like to say that two days before the death of Dr Kibirige, I was at Africana and I talked to his brother, who I asked, “How is Hajji?” He said, “Alhamdulillah; he is not well but we thank God because earlier we were told that he would die in two years’ time. Since that time it is now seven years.”  We thank the Almighty for all that time He made him survive. We want to pray that the Almighty strengthens the family because it is not easy. 

Dr Kibirige was a polite, religious, generous, innovative man and an entrepreneur. I do not know how we can elaborate all that he had. From that humble beginning, he reached levels, which people could not even imagine for someone who started the way he did.

Dr Kibirige helped the young, the old, the poor and the rich, the Muslims and non-Muslims. He lived in accordance with the Islamic values and norms. I would like to say that we have a mosque at Hotel Africana and in that mosque, many people have been helped; it is not only through the prayers. He was very good at bringing people together. In that mosque, many people’s problems were solved; the sick, the old and he even offered sponsorship. I cannot mention all of them but they would come to that mosque and leave when their problems are solved. 

Mr Speaker, Members have proposed that we rename Wampeewo Avenue after Dr Kibirige so that people can remember him. Right now, if you ask someone why that road is called Wampeewo, nobody knows. However, if we rename it Dr Kibirige or BMK, the present generation will know and so, we shall have something to point to. (Applause) You will say, “That is Dr Kibirige, the man behind all that.” This is because he has done a lot in Uganda and beyond.

I would like to say that we have lost a statesman. We pray for his soul and we also continue to pray that the Almighty forgives his shortcomings and rests his soul in eternal peace. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hajjati. Honourable members, I think we have heard enough debate on this issue. To the widows, Hajjati Sophie Muwanga Kibirige and Hajjati Hawah Muwanga Kibirige, the children and the grandchildren of BMK, we place you in the hands of the Almighty. We would like to strengthen you as you mourn the icon of the world because he invested beyond Uganda. May the good Lord be with you as you keep the family together for the unity and the legacy of BMK.

As Parliament of Uganda, we have moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Dr Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations. I thank the family for coming. I am directing the Clerk to extract today’s proceedings and give it to the family.   

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you and honourable members for supporting this noble motion. I am really blessed and grateful for the deliberations. As a country, we are proud of all of you and let us all try to build a legacy. Thank you very much, honourable members. That was a great debate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To the family of BMK, thank you for coming. We can excuse you. Be blessed.

4.53
MS HARRIET BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the woman MP Hoima District and Vice Chairperson, Bunyoro Parliamentary Caucus. My issue is very brief; I would like to take you back to one month ago when you ruled that tobacco farmers in our areas should be paid. You actually gave a deadline that the minister should come and present here, within two weeks, the criteria they are going to use to pay.

Madam Speaker, we know what it took the 10th Parliament to put the money for the tobacco farmers in a supplementary budget. Money was got and is available with the Ministry of Trade but the farmers are not getting it. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that you preside over the honourable Minister of Trade to ensure that farmers are paid urgently. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government? Okay, additional information. 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give hon. Harriet Businge is that in the last Parliament, we passed a Bill here; The Tobacco (Amendment) Bill, 2020.

In that Bill, we tried as much as possible to protect the farmers. We even said that we should not allow any unprocessed leaf to move out of the country. This was to enable farmers get their money. This money was passed and it was in the budget. 

I wonder why - because we have the same factories in Busoga, another one in Arua - up to date, farmers are still suffering without this payment. I think this is so urgent. Work was done by this Parliament. The ministry should respond and the Minister of Finance should tell us because it was something that was done. I just wanted to add that information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Obama, do you have something?

MR ISINGOMA-MWESIGWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On this matter, if I can also add some information, when we met with the Deputy Attorney-General, the Minister of State for Trade, and representatives of the farmers and their lawyers about two weeks ago, we reached a consensus. What remained was for the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to be drawn by the Deputy Attorney-General and brought to this Parliament for scrutiny and endorsement and then the processes of payment could go forward.

Therefore, what we need to address is to see if the Attorney-General’s Chambers could escalate the speed at which the MoU is being prepared so that it can be brought to this House for endorsement, then the process can proceed, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We have information that the money is available. Honourable minister maybe what we need is the MoU which we ordered that we should have and that is with the Attorney- General’s Chambers. [Hon. Aogon rose]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we first hear from the minister?

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, this matter has been pending for such a long time. I remember in the 10th Parliament, Members from the affected areas kept coming here asking for the same thing. My issue is that your Chair needs to use the authority vested in it to give these people the timeline by which the MoU should be drawn. Without a deadline, we might go through the same issues again.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had actually given that office three weeks, which have expired. The fact is that there is money on the account - Shs 11 billion - which we provided in the last Parliament. What was left was for you to bring the MoU between those people you were giving money and Government because we are lending money to those companies. When do we have the MoU? In addition, Members, we need to agree on one thing; no payment without an MoU. This is taxpayers’ money. (Applause)

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues for raising this important issue. It is true all of us know that we appropriated Shs 11 billion for the farmers in Bunyoro. At payment time, we were guided by Parliament that no payment should be made unless there is an MoU with the companies that were supposed to pay the farmers. Therefore, we have been moving with this process.

Last time I was here, I promised that we were going to conclude this matter and indeed, we moved as honourable member has said on the other side of the House. One company is agreeable to paying farmers of Bunyoro with an MoU. Another company; Continental, became a little bit stubborn and said, we cannot pay only the people of Bunyoro. We cannot enter into an MoU with Government unless you are paying the people of Bunyoro and those of West Nile. 

You recall that the appropriation was actually to pay the people of Bunyoro to begin with because that is where the complaint came from and that is where the promise of the President was premised.

Therefore, we are now concluding with those who are ready; one company and pay those and for those who are not ready, we continue to negotiate with a view of making sure that we finalise. Can I request that we come to this House with an MoU next week then we come to the conclusion of this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Bring the matter next week to the House.

5.01
MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about specialised health services in this country.

Madam Speaker, the country has been grappling with COVID-19 for almost two years. The side effects of COVID-19 are enormous and more harmful for those that have survived it; liver functioning challenges, cardiac challenges, erectile dysfunction, among others.

The only hope for this country in terms of super specialised services is premised on Lubowa Hospital. This Government gave a promissory note, part of the money was given - over 50 per cent - to this project but the hospital is still at foundation level. 

Madam Speaker, the last time we checked, the minister and the permanent secretary were chased at the entrance of the hospital. They had gone to inspect the progress of this facility, which is our biggest hope of specialised services in this country. Now I am wondering how we are preparing, Madam Speaker.

My prayer is –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, the honourable has raised the issue of specialised hospitals to address some of the challenges the country is facing.

One other thing that we really need to get from the Government is that His Excellency the President – I wish I knew that this matter was coming up today, I would have brought the directive to the Uganda Land Commission to give the Uganda Heart Institute land as well as the Uganda Cancer Institute. 

Madam Speaker, what is surprising is that when Uganda Heart Institute and Uganda Cancer Institute were securing a place in Naguru – the Solicitor-General has written to the Uganda Heart Institute to stop the construction yet the President had directed the Uganda Land Commission to award 10 acres of land to the Uganda Heart Institute. 

I really want to know whether Government is really serious. How can the Solicitor-General stop the Uganda Heart Institute from constructing? I remember even Gen. Moses Ali led a team when the Government revoked –(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information to information? Okay.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue that hon. Okupa is talking about touches the report that had been presented to the 10th Parliament and I think it is important that you direct the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to really handle this matter regarding the Naguru land and bring a report to this House. 

Otherwise, a report was presented only that it had gaps and the report was rejected because Members felt that the committee then had edited out certain key and important information from the report. That report would save us on this Nakawa land matter, where the Uganda Heart Institute is.

MR OKUPA: It is a similar case with Lubowa. The President gives directives but someone – Madam Speaker, I would like to tell you that the people who are in that ministry, who are behind stopping Uganda Heart Institute from constructing, were lawyers to OPEC. Others are lawyers to third parties on that land. They are the ones who are writing from that ministry to try to stop construction. How can they disrespect the President’s directive?

Rt Hon. Prime Minister should be given instructions to follow up this matter. We cannot suffer like – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it just a letter from the lawyers or a court order?

MR OKUPA: The court order was issued long time ago by the tenants of that place. The second order that came was after Government had repossessed Naguru land. It was saying the status quo remains, meaning what the Government had repossessed would remain Government property.

Surely, if that was the case, how would the President not know about that when these are the very people who are supposed to advice the President? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kimosho, what are your prayers?

MR KIMOSHO: Madam Speaker, my prayer is that –(Interruption) 

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, liver functioning challenges means the extent at which the liver functions. Renal or kidney functioning challenge implies the extent to which the kidney is functioning, as well as the rectal function. 

These challenges can – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your procedural matter? 

DR MORIKU: When a blood sample is removed to test the function. The procedural matter I am raising is that is it procedurally right for hon. Kimosho to confuse this House by raising the liver function test, which can be done in a simple hospital with a specialised functioning test at Lubowa, which can talk as the Heart Institute, the Liver function, and the brain, those are the specialised health functions?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Moriku, let us not run away from the fact. The fact is that there is a problem. Let us not cover the problem by bringing in medical technicalities. The Member is raising a serious matter. 

Hon. Kimosho, can I have your prayers?

MR KIMOSHO: Madam Speaker, thanks for your guidance. The minister should have utilised the opportunity of being closer to me, for more clarification. My point was that while we can carry out tests, we cannot do liver and kidney transplants from there. 

As a country, our hope was if Lubowa is complete, some of these transplants can be done here without going into medical tourism. That does not need rocket science.

My prayer is that the Ministry of Health gives us a status report on the progress of Lubowa, together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the absorption of the loan and how it is performing, in terms of our target and the goal of achieving Lubowa as a specialised hospital for this country. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, this issue touches the country, especially the medical area. You are all aware that sometime back, people were sent away from that place. I do not think we can just leave it for the Ministry of Health to come and give us only a status report. 

Madam Speaker, would it be procedurally right for you to send a committee to bring for us a report on this issue? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have the minister but at the same time, minister, I do not want these responses of lamentation. What we need is a report. Let us have a report on this. I know you may not have it off head now but take note that we need a report on Lubowa Hospital, we need a report on Naguru, and then Nakawa. Can we have those reports?

We may need all the ministers responsible on this issue to be present on that day. My sister, I do not want you to burn your hands. Just get a report. Otherwise you can say something.

5.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Kawooya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the concern of hon. Dan Kimosho and the information that was given by hon. Elijah Okupa.

However, I would like to reassure you and the Members that the time I have so far been in that ministry, as the Minister of State for Health (General Duties), I have tried my level best to acquaint myself with some of these issues. I want to agree with you and appreciate that as a ministry, we have taken keen note and interest of the issues, especially in the area of specialised hospitals, as far as health services are concerned. 

As you have said, these specialised hospitals were made semi-autonomous from Mulago National Referral Hospital and the aim was to decongest Mulago Hospital. I agree that we shall come here with a comprehensive report touching these three hospitals as you have directed. 

However, I wanted to make a very small clarification – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will give you two weeks to bring the report.

MS KAWOOYA: Yes, however, I wanted to put right the record concerning the information provided by hon. Elijah Okupa. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of Naguru land, Government has so far supported this – to start the initial construction. Matters thereafter raised that some of the tenants who are still encroaching on the land went to court and the case is still before court. 

We had to meet His Excellency, the President because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was ready with the funding for the project to kick off. However, because of the case being in court, we needed guidance so that the Auditor-General comes in. 

Hon. Okupa you are aware that once the case is still before court, there is no way further construction could have continued. 

Madam Speaker, in our report, we shall show you the progress made and the status where this hospital is, plus the funding. The Government is ready with all the funding and we are only going to come here and – (Interjections) - In two weeks’ time, we shall come with the status report over this matter. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has finished, so, you cannot put her to order. 

5.13
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. 

Last month, you directed the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and explain how far they had gone with the grant on two stadia by the Chinese Government: Buhinga Stadium and Lira Stadium. 

In 2018, the President led a delegation of 100 Ugandans to the China-Africa Summit. During this summit, the President of Uganda requested the President of China to give a donation to construct two stadia: Buhinga Stadium in Fort Portal and Lira Stadium in Lira. 

When you directed the ministry of finance, now a month has passed – I do not know whether it is like the tobacco – you gave them two weeks, yet there is no response from the ministry of finance. 

I would like you to note that before going to China, the delegation of Uganda was briefed and told that in China, they do not spend time on lots of paper work, planning seminars, workshops and conferences: the Chinese prefer to concentrate on getting the task done on time. 

This is not money coming from the Consolidated Fund. It is a donation from the Chinese Government. Why should the ministry of finance sit on all this after the Ministry of Education and Sports has already done all that it takes, for this money for the construction of the stadia to come?

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Alex. Finance, I gave you two weeks to present that report. Can I have the report tomorrow?

5.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We shall be ready with the report by tomorrow. Much as the matter might not be of urgent national importance – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is because you have refused to respond – 

MR KASOLO: Tomorrow, we shall be ready with the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kasolo, by the time I allow a matter on the Order Paper as a matter of national importance, it is a matter of national importance. What is not a matter of national importance is something from your constituency alone. This is something affecting the whole country. It is affecting sports. 

MR KASOLO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

5.17
MR PETER MUGEMA (Independent, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I congratulate you upon your being elected as the Deputy Speaker. I thank our colleagues for the support they gave us. We look forward to you entertaining our interests especially us Members of Parliament. 

I am a son of a former police officer. We have a group of the legends from Nsambya Police Barracks and we had a meeting on Saturday. 

What we saw in the barracks, about its state and the matters pertaining the welfare of police officers, is sad. When it clocks 7.00 p.m., you cannot access anything in the barracks. There is total darkness. They have spent three months without power. 

Those people are totally quiet but at the end of the day, when they come out and trample on us, none of us will take it. Three months without power yet these are police officers who are sometimes guarding some of these ministers like hon. Kasolo –(Laughter). They are supposed to iron their uniforms, charge their phones and be on duty by 7.00 a.m. but they do not have power. 

To sum it up, it is the same situation in Bukedea and in Iganga Municipality. This is not a power issue only but the power is very vital. 

Around 400 police officers share one pit latrine. Think of a situation when they are lining up for only one pit latrine. One goes in and when he delays, they disturb the neighbours. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: On the issue of the police in Nsambya Barracks, being a son of a former police officer, I lived in that barracks. Yesterday, I was in that barracks. We need to help. They have taken one month without running water in that place. 

On the issue of the power, for us who use security for bodyguards, they rely on charging their walkie-talkies. If they do not have power to charge the walkie-talkies, how are they able to communicate? This becomes a security risk. It becomes difficult for them to communicate. 

The issue of power and water in the barracks – and not only Nsambya Barracks but also Ntinda and others – should be taken seriously. Thank you. 

5.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable, for raising this very important issue. 

At first when we thought that the issue was about the blackout, I crosschecked and I discovered it is not a blackout out of a misconnection because Nsambya is fed by two lines: Kisugu and Queensway. 

We have found that it is an issue to do with the management of police. I have raised it with the Minister of Internal Affairs. Tomorrow he is meeting police to ensure this issue is handled expeditiously. It is a very bad issue and we cannot condone it in any way. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Government Chief Whip, I know you have bodyguards. Just imagine how your bodyguards and mine are staying in darkness. 

You know what is happening with the panga people now. Assuming they enter the barracks. Therefore, I think we need to help these police officers to have power and water in their places and work on their latrines. Can we at least provide more latrines for them? What is very crucial is power and water. 

I want a report tomorrow on what you have done to have power in the barracks. It is not actually only in Nsambya; it is in all barracks in the country.

I do not think a police officer can comfortably go out in the night to guard and he leaves his family in darkness and without water. Most of us have grown up from the barracks. We must appreciate where we are coming from. We want a report tomorrow. We miss you in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because - Hon. Teddy Nambooze is making a maiden speech so, do not disturb her.  (Applause)

5.23
MS TEDDY NAMBOOZE (NUP, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance affecting the labour workforce in Mpigi District. 

Mpigi District is an upcoming industrial district in the country with various industries sprouting almost at every corner. This would have been an opportunity since industrialisation would ideally stimulate employment rates. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Teddy Nambooze, the Government Chief Whip is whispering to me that you should remove the mask. (Applause)

MS TEDDY NAMBOOZE: It is turning into a curse. 10 factories, which I have visited, underpay their workforce and they delay their payments. They do not even provide safe working gears and they continuously mistreat and brutally torture employees. They also illegally expel their employees without explanation after they sustain severe injuries while on duty.

The management of these factories have failed to implement section 13(1) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2006 and section 3(1) of the Workers’ Compensation Act, Cap. 205. In a period of three months, my constituency office in the district has received more than 15 cases of gross violation of employees’ rights – Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Switch on the microphone again.

MS TEDDY NAMBOOZE: Complaints of abuse of employees’ rights are from the following factories: Evergreen Wood Industries situated in Kiringente Sub-county, Zhong Bang Industries, a plywood factory in Kayabwe Town Council and Sino Plywood Factory in Jeza Villa, Muduuma Sub-county. These are the factories, where workers are ill-treated and expelled without any explanation after sustaining severe injuries and without medical care.

This is evident with the following cases:

    i. Ms Peninah Nantunda lost her hand at the wrist joint;
    ii. Mr Amos Alinda lost his two fingers while on duty in Evergreen in Nakilebe;
    iii. Ms Pauline Namuli lost her ring finger and the middle finger sustained injuries in the process of work in Zhong Bang Industries;
    iv. Mr Geoffrey Muwonge, a resident of Nvuba Village, Jeza Parish in Muduuma Sub-county lost part of his arm while on duty in Sino Plywood Factory.

I pray that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development conducts an inspection of these industries to establish adherence to the legal provisions and safety standards, conducts investigations on the operational status of these factories and causes proper and timely legal compensation of injured employees –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Switch on the microphone back.

MS TEDDY NAMBOOZE: Thirdly, table before Parliament Bills to review or amend the Occupational Safety and Health Act, the Employment Act, the Workers’ Compensation Act and provide updated adequate compensation of the on-duty injured employees.

Lastly, I pray that this House instructs the Uganda Human Rights Commission, through the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, to investigate and report on the abuses of workers’ rights in these factories. I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Teddy Nambooze. Hon. Solomon Silwany, stop disturbing my Member. 

5.28
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Lukia Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is not here but we have noted the matter and we are going to make a follow-up. Your question will be answered. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you but we need a report on that. People are losing their lives and body parts. How much time do we give you? 

MS NAKADAMA: Since the ministers are not here, I request that we give them one week because they have been very busy with the COVID-19 taskforce. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. In one week, we should get a response for hon. Teddy Nambooze. Hon. Gilbert Olanya, what is your problem?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter raised by hon. Teddy Nambooze is very important. The way the owners of the factories mistreat Ugandans is quite terrible. If it is procedurally correct, this is the time we need to discuss matters concerning the minimum wage. This is because when it comes to the payment of these workers - some of them are being paid Shs 40,000 and others are being paid Shs 100,000. The factory owners determine the amount to pay someone –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are discussing what she has brought before we have gotten a response. So, what are you discussing?

MR OLANYA: What I am saying is, if it is procedurally correct, this is the time we need to order the Government to come up with the minimum wage discussion. It is very important and it will help the employees of this country. This is the procedural guidance I am seeking from you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Government, take note of that. 

5.30
MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to congratulate you upon being elected the Deputy Speaker of Parliament of Uganda. I have no doubt that we have the right person in the right office. 

Allow me to rise on a matter of national importance over the issue of floods in Ntoroko District. In 2019, there were rising water levels in our lakes and Lake Albert was not spared. The entire Kanara Sub-county was submerged. Six sub-counties were submerged and now they have been turned into a lake. Two wards in Kanara sub-county were also submerged. As a result, our people are living in a terrible situation.

My prayer is, I would like you to direct the Government to dispatch an inter-ministerial team to go on ground because we have issues of roads, water, education and health. They should go and assess the situation and report back. 

Secondly, I pray that the flood victims are relocated. Our people are suffering. I thank the Office of the Prime Minister because they have been giving some food and non-food relief items. However, the food and non-food relief items do not match the number of people who are suffering.

I would like to ask the Government, through Parliament, to direct the ministries of health and education to commit funds from their current expenditure to provide relief to these affected people in Ntoroko District. Thank you very much.

5.33
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday we discussed the same issues about those areas in need of those services. However, in that place, some food was sent and again food is going to be sent because at least we got the money.

A team is on the ground going to assess the situation and will come back with a report. Therefore, I would like to inform the honourable member that the Office of the Prime Minister is handling. 
I thank you.

MR NAMBESHE: Honourable minister, the issue raised by the honourable member is of urgent public importance. He is talking about those subcounties that have been submerged, meaning that a number of people have been displaced and their normal lives disrupted. 

It is not about the aid in food and non-food items; it is about relocating those people.

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, among these things, there are those which are long-term and some are short-term. As I have said, a team is on the ground to assess the situation and handle those ones which are long-term and those which are short-term.

That is why I said that the honourable member gives us some time, the Office of the Prime Minister is handling. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ibanda, is the team on the ground?

MR RWEMULIKYA: Madam Speaker, you know sometimes we must speak the truth; that is the fact - (Interjection) - always for sure. Since the year 2019, people have been coming. However, as of now - because I left Ntoroko yesterday and there is no team on the ground. Our people are suffering and we need an immediate solution especially relocating those flood victims. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister what you may need to do -

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, first of all, we have a district disaster team and it is there. Secondly, I said that yesterday, we discussed the same and we have just got the money. A team is leaving Kampala to go and –(Interjection) - yes we work as a team. That is what I was talking about. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, what you need to do is to send an inter-ministerial team from the ministries of lands, disaster and others to assess the situation and report.

Also what you may need to do is when the teams are going on the ground, they should go with the Members of Parliament so that next time they do not deny having seen the teams. Hon. Ibanda has not been invited so you need to invite him as you address that issue.

Hon. Tayebwa you had started calling all people affected with disasters, why don’t you call the teams and handle this issue? This is an issue which is urgent and must be handled even before coming to the House.

5.37
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, as the Deputy Prime Minister has said that we are going to do that as you have guided. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For instance, we have hon. Paul Nsubuga. Where is he? He has a broken bridge issue, there is nowhere people are going to pass and you have to look for him. Is he here? 

5.38
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, my maiden standing here is on a matter of national importance concerning an issue of a value addition facility in Busia Municipality.

Whereas we thank the Government of President Yoweri Museveni - honourable ministers, please tell him that we wish him a happy birthday from Busia. During the campaign period, he launched a Shs 24 billion value addition factory; one of its kind in East Africa.

The fact is that it has turned out to be a tourist attraction to the Kenyans who come to trade in Uganda. It was built to dry, store and mill all cereals through the MTEF II programme. 

However, after its commissioning in December by His Excellency the President, the value addition factory has not worked at all yet it is ready because the Ministry of local Government has refused to give the operational guidelines to Busia Municipality leadership because -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not that he has refused; he has instead delayed.

MR MACHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. He has deliberately delayed giving the guidelines to Busia Municipality to operationalise this value addition. We now hear that they want to give this value addition to Kampala-based people. Moreover, when the President was commissioning, he advised that the business people through Busia Produce Dealers’ Cooperative and Savings Association should take over this factory.

Madam Speaker, our first prayer is that the Ministry of Local Government should give guidance and authority to Busia Municipal Council leadership to handover this factory to the business traders who deal in cereals and produce in the name of Busia Produce Dealers’ SACCO and savings credit.

Madam Speaker, I would like to use this opportunity to raise the second important matter. The road from Tororo to Buteba is impassable -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, that is smuggling. Anyway, sorry about that but what we can do - hon. Tayebwa, the issue of roads affects the entire east. Ask the Minister of Works to have a meeting with the Members of Parliament from the eastern region and sort out that issue.

Secondly, the honourable minister is going to respond to the first issue.

MR MACHO: As the Minister responds, I really would like to speak on behalf of my colleagues this way that the minister should pass onto the President a happy birthday message. Thank you. (Laughter)

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, as a person who also comes from the border, we are normally referred to as “cross-border traders”. The term “smugglers” is a step in a very dangerous direction. 

There are some value addition facilities that were installed by the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Local Government. Some are working but others have challenges like the one of Busia.

We have taken a decision, as Government, to look into this matter and make sure that we coordinate and that those which are not functional for some reason or the other start functioning. 

Therefore, I will take up this matter together with my colleagues in the local government to make sure that the guidelines or whatever is stopping that value adding facility from functioning is handled immediately. I will also liaise with hon. Macho to ensure that happens. We will also visit Busia District to give them confidence and support so that this value adding factory starts working.

Concerning the roads, I have been told by the Government Chief Whip that the minister in charge of roads will follow up on this matter and, if need be, come to the House and brief them on the progress. 

5.43
MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo East County, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue of Umeme and police brutality in my district and constituency in Bubulo East and Bugisu Region generally. 

Over time, there is seemingly freedom for the police of Uganda and Umeme to terrorise the east, more so Bugisu Region. Many times, they claim that the Bagisu are power thieves.

I would like to quote a couple of incidents which are, of course, derogatory to a community that is served with less than 10 per cent of all the power of Uganda to flatly say that all of them are thieves; first of all, that is not right. 

Madam Speaker, on 27 August 2021, the police and Umeme unleashed brutality in my constituency, in Bumbo and other places. It is true there could be incidences of illegal connections and that can be seen at police stations. All my police posts in Bumbo, Magala and other places have illegal power but Umeme particularly has a way of either disrupting the metre, which of course our local people cannot - they do not know that technology. However, Umeme tampers with them so that they can mint money from people. 

Secondly, arbitrary arrests are made and in most cases, even those that are under age are arrested. I would like to quote a case of a 13-year old girl called Mary, who was put in the police cells on 17th. The police do not care that this is an underage girl. 

My plea to the Ministry of Internal Affairs is whether they know that this brutality is going on, especially in Bugisu and my constituency –(Interruption)  

MS ABER: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This Parliament is accorded with very high dignity. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for us to discuss this matter. It is even made worse when the honourable member consents to the action on ground; that there might be illegal connections. 

We may not have a say on matters of the law and issues of punishment of the culprits, if the police finds these people guilty of what they are doing and are arrested. Therefore, I do not think it is procedurally right for us to caution and protect the people illegally getting power. I do not know whether that is procedurally right, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not correct. It is illegal. First of all, we should not even discuss an illegality in this House.  Members, when you talk about such things, you should have evidence to that effect because if you do not, then it is just based on hearsay. We are relying on what you are saying and maybe, like you said, you are making a maiden speech and you want your people to see you talk. Otherwise, you must have evidence to that effect. We should not condone any aspect of illegality. 

MR MUSILA: Madam Speaker, for clarity purposes, I would like to say that I cannot protect or condone any illegality. The honourable member may theorise this but the truth is that people are faced with brutality in my constituency, and this even extends to those that have clearly paid all their power bills.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we task the ministers of Internal Affairs and Energy to give us the Government position on this?

5.49 
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, we have taken note of what the honourable is raising but I thought we could also get some information and some evidence so that the ministers of Internal Affairs and – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Musila, can you provide more information? 

MS NAKADAMA: This is in order for them to base on that. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please go to the Prime Minister’s Office and give her the information and all that is required for the issue to be sorted out. 

MR MUSILA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I will provide all the information including names of the under age children who were arrested. 

5.50
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. It is almost 42 years since a Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women was held. Uganda did ratify that treaty in 1980. 

In support of that treaty, however, we enacted the Constitution. Article 21 of our Constitution is very clear that all persons are equal before the law. Nonetheless, it is also clearly stated that the state shall ensure that there is gender balance and fair representation of all marginalised groups on all constitutional and other bodies. 

Madam Speaker, you must have read some story in the media about the new board of the National Social Security Fund, which was inaugurated by the Minister of Finance appointing Mr Peter Kimbowa as the chairperson and nine other members. Of these 10 people, only one is a woman called Penninah Tukamwesiga. 

I am glad that the Third Deputy Prime Minister is here. She was a minister of gender for 10 years and knows that what men can do, women can do. There is no reason why, in this era and time, men should occupy all positions on boards and only one woman is appointed. I am surprised that this could have even passed through Cabinet where there are women. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that you direct the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister here to rectify this and ensure that at least one-third or more should be women on this board and this should be handled –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, hon. Sarah Opendi is my very good friend; so, when I stand here, I stand to support her. These kinds of imbalances are not only happening in that area. Look at the appointment of ministers. For instance, in Cabinet, all the Prime Ministers are women. That is where we are now. (Laughter)

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, my friend hon. Aogon was just making a joke and he knows that at least this time round, we have more than 30 per cent of women in Cabinet.

My prayer is that you direct the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, together with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to rectify this anomaly and it is urgent as this has been happening even in other boards. Now that I have time, I am going to closely scrutinise and ensure that the one-third is actually implemented.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is not a joking matter, it is a matter for women. The 30 per cent in an institution – Well, we appreciate that we have more than 30 per cent in Cabinet but in an institution like NSSF, as she said - What a man can do, a woman can do even better. So, can we have a response on how that can be rectified?

5.54
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know when you want work to be done, you give it to a man but when you want work to be done better, you give it to a woman. Madam Speaker, this is an issue that has been emphasised in Cabinet; that the percentage of women should be realised. 

We need to emphasise issues of gender imbalances, religion and region - Those are issues that we emphasise in Cabinet. Now that we have the honourable minister in charge of finance who presented that board, let him come and clarify. However, as he comes to clarify, we are going to take it up so that such issues do not continue. Let me call the honourable minister to come and give clarification why such a board was passed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, we do not want clarification; we want it rectified. It is our right to have 30 per cent in every institution. We do not mind even if you had given us 30 per cent in Cabinet so long as we have the 30 per cent.

5.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and Third Deputy Prime Minister. Personally, as Kasolo, I respect women very much and I love them. (Laughter)

Let me go back, Madam Speaker, and consult with my senior colleague, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We shall get back to Parliament, possibly tomorrow because this is a very serious matter. It should be resolved as soon as possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a constitutional matter. Look at Articles 32 and 33 on affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups and the rights of women. It is our right, it is not a privilege. You are not doing us a favour. Next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

BUDGET PROPOSAL OF THE SPORTS SUB-SECTOR, MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, before we went for recess, we asked the minister to give us a paper on financial implications plus the 80 proposed donors - corporate bodies - that can help us in our sports industry. That is the paper that the minister is laying and it will be sent to the Committee on Education and Sports for consideration.

5.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the budget proposal of the Sports Sub-Sector, Ministry of Education and Sports. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is it together with the lists of the institutions?

DR MORIKU: Yes, Madam Speaker. They are attached. 

PRESENTATION OF REPORTS ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EMYOOGA PROGRAMME IN VARIOUS REGIONS OF THE COUNTRY

    I. Acholi sub-region 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have one or two reports and we shall continue tomorrow. Acholi sub-region, give us a summary.

5.59
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I beg to lay the working documents because we shall not have time to have the detailed report signed but the Members are here. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I would like to report the status report on Emyooga implementation in Acholi sub-region by the Acholi Parliamentary Group. Because you said there is no time, I will not go into the details. Allow me to jump the introduction, the methodology that we used and the objectives, which are clear. Let me start with the findings.

Madam Speaker, the following are the group’s findings on the progress of Emyooga in the Acholi Sub-region.

The criteria used for distribution of Emyooga funds:

    i) Each SACCO group should have a certificate from the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives after being trained by the Microfinance Support Centre.

    ii) Each mother Emyooga group bank account receives funds and then disburses to smaller or subsidiary groups.

    iii) On the legibility, a person must be a Ugandan citizen who is above 18 years and operating under a SACCO group. The SACCO should be fully registered with the District Community Development Office. 

    iv) The person has to be trained by the Micro Finance Support Centre, where a certificate from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is awarded.

Madam Speaker, let me start with Gulu District. There are 18 Emyooga SACCOS, with 285 verified groups that have been formed and registered in Gulu District.

These SACCOS have collectively raised initial deposit of 15,460,000. The Microfinance Support Centre has disbursed Shs 560 million in the accounts of the SACCOs, which money has never been given to the different association members by the time we visited.

Lamwo District 

Lamwo District has two constituencies namely, Palabek and Lamwo County. Thirty four SACCOs were formed and 665 associations were registered from the 11 subcounties in the district. 

Each of the 34 Emyooga specific SACCOs categories received Shs 30 million as seed capital except the elected leader’s constituency SACCO, who received Shs 50million per constituency per SACCO. In total, Lamwo District Local Government received Shs 1.060 billion, as summarised below. I will not go into the details.
 
Also, we have to note that in Lamwo, at the time of monitoring the programme, two SACCOs were not yet formed and the district officials were not cooperating with the honourable members as to why the SACCOs were not formed and as to where the money for the two SACCOs was paid.

Omoro District

Omoro District has two constituencies; Omoro and Tochi counties. A total of 499 associations were formed and registered with the Community Services Department. From the associations, 24 Emyooga SACCOs were formed, l0 in Tochi and l4 in Omoro County. Out of the 19 Emyooga formed, only 10 were formed following the required guidelines and nine were not formed correctly according to the guidelines put in place.

Madam Speaker, eight failed to access the funding. Of the eight, two did not have their accounts ready at the time of disbursement. A total of five SACCOs received funding totalling to Shs 150 million. In Omoro County, 11 SACCOs received funding amounting to Shs 330 million.

Gulu City

Gulu City has two constituencies; Gulu East, Laroo-Pece Division and Gulu West Bardege-Layibi Division. A total of 439 groups from both divisions applied and got registered and validated as part of the process for accessing this fund. The city received a total of Shs 1.120 billion, that is Shs 560 million per constituency. This money was released on 26th January 2021.

Only a total of Shs 32,420,000 had been collected from beneficiaries of this group as part of the requirements from the member’s contribution. The rest of the members were hesitant to pay when they were expected too. Yet, only Shs 97 million has so far been released to the groups over eight months. You must to note that Shs 4 million has been released to someone whose identity has not been disclosed by the City Commercial Officer. The circumstance under which the money was released is not yet clear. This individual, who received the money, does not belong to any SACCO group.

Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament requested the police to investigate the matter and recover the Shs 4 million given out fraudulently. 

Amuru District

Amuru District has two constituencies namely; Kilak North and Kilak South. They also qualified for 36 Emyooga SACCO excluding teacher’s SACCO, as guided by the implementation modalities. In total, the district registered 650 associations to form up the Emyooga SACCO. 

Amuru received Emyooga/Enterprise Fund worth Shs 900 million for 30 individual SACCOs channelled directly to their accounts with commercial banks. Unfortunately, the money has not been accessed by the Emyooga SACCOs. However, six Emyooga SACCOs of 36 groups are yet to receive money due to technical error as explained that it happened from Microfinance Support Centre. 

Pader District

The district received Shs 1.120 billion for the Emyooga project except for some four Emyooga groups. The elected leaders received their Shs 50 million while the other groups got their Shs 30 million each as the majority of the population were unaware of the operation of Emyooga guidelines issued. The issues raised include, the long bureaucratic process in accessing the funds and charges on the administrative work.

Kitgum District

Kitgum District has Kitgum Municipality, Chua East and Chua West. The district received Shs 1.6 billion on Emyooga programme and Kitgum Municipality received about Shs 540 million. Members discovered that instead of Shs 30 million going to the account, only Shs 29 million was reaching the accounts of the SACCOs.

Agago District

Madam Speaker, Agago District has three constituencies comprising Agago West, Agago North and Agago County. A total of 646 associations were mobilised across 26 local governments under Emyooga and 54 SACCOs were registered at constituency level, which received seed capital of Shs 1.068 billion. Each constituency received Shs 560 million, directly into the respective SACCOs' accounts. 

On the day of monitoring, 18 SACCOs have disbursed loans worth Shs 289,035 million with savings totalling to about 100,376,000 to 46 Emyooga associations.

Madam Speaker, we ranked Agago District as the best in Emyooga implementation in Acholi Subregion. 

Nwoya District

Nwoya District has two constituencies comprising Nwoya East and Nwoya County. It received Emyooga fund worth Shs 1 billion, that is Shs 440 million of which were for SACCO from Nwoya East, a list of 10 from the Microfinance Support Centre is hereby attached in our working document. 

A total of 32 SACCOs were successfully registered, out of the 568 associations mobilised and four potential SACCOs have not yet satisfied the requirement, which comprises local artists, the wielders, the journalists, and the mechanics – and that means they have not yet got their certificates and they have not even got the money. 

Madam Speaker, the last report for Acholi Subregion is looking at people with disability but fortunately, you told me that they have a separate report. Therefore, I will not go into that.

We looked at the achievements that we saw on the ground. These include:

    1. Strong mobilisation drive exhibited by both technical and political wings. 

    2. A proactive technical team, who were really self-driven and were on the ground. 

    3. The support from media houses in disseminating the relevant and positive information. We also have the political will and support from the district and lower local Government that we really saw on the ground.

    4. Disabled administration or groups of specialised categories were registered and trained. We also registered achievement in area mobilisation of the community to participate in the programme and that was successfully done. 

    5. A good working relationship between the district and Emyooga stakeholders.

    6. We realised that there is training of SACCO members and SACCO management operation, which was ongoing by Microfinance Support Centre at the time that we visited.

The following are the observations that we saw on the ground and Members collected it from the different districts.

There was lack of credible information. This was complicated by the fact that even the Emyooga Taskforce at the district did not have sufficient information about the programme. For some of their approved SACCOs, members were not aware of the preconditions for the funds and members thought it was a grant and not a revolving fund.

We also observed that the programme did not have implementation manual or comprehensive guidelines that was given to them. In fact, what they showed us was actually a draft. They still do not have the real guidelines and they told us that it is changing on regular basis.

We also observed that the delay by Microfinance Support Centre (MFSCL) to issue out the certificates even to approved SACCOs to access the funds remains one of the last bottlenecks to take off; many of the SACCOs were not accessing money. They were still waiting for their certificates from the Microfinance Support Centre.

We also observed that the members’ expectations were too high; what they expected is not what exactly they are receiving. 

There was no facilitation for implementing the programme. The promised facilitation was not delivered and no clear response was received by the district and, therefore, some of them did not want to monitor what was going on, on the ground. 

There was poor coordination of stakeholders in implementation. MFSCL did not provide timely feedback to steer the programme, and the status of unfunded SACCOs was worrying. Some people do not know why their money is not on the accounts. The explanation is that there were technical errors from MFSCL and they do not know what “technical errors” the MFSCL is talking about. 

There were also delays to register the SACCOs and deliver certificates. That was delaying the implementation of programmes in the districts. 

COVID-19 is one of the challenges on the ground because members said they could not organise for the trainings; they could also not gather together as the numbers required are limited. 

The Government never covered the administrative costs like the office rent, furniture, transport, stationery and bank charges. These have either led to the extortion of money from the intended beneficiary or reduction of the would-be beneficiaries’ fund. For example out of the Shs 30 million that was supposed to go to the account, some accounts had only Shs 29 million. 

We also realised that the civil servants also suffered the challenge of inadequate funding to enable them sensitise, implement and follow up on the different SACCOs where they were allocated.

There was a lot of impersonation, forgery and bad practices in registering the groups. For example, some groups registered as journalists yet they were not and they blocked the real beneficiaries who fall under this category.

There is also a mismatch in the initial deposits meant to be paid by the beneficiaries. This has also been due to the poor empowerment in terms of knowledge and sensitisation, hence leading to either extortion or undermining the real objective of the funds. 

Some categories of the would-be beneficiaries find it hard to get these funds due to the initial deposits of a certain ratio which they cannot afford. For example, some of the PWD groups have been forced to give up on these funds by the initial deposit factors. 

The process of getting the money by all members, groups or SACCOs proved to be hectic due to its bureaucratic nature. The process has a lot of steps that are unmanageable by the very disadvantaged persons who end up giving up in the process.

There is a lot of contradictions in the messages about Emyooga and many people take it as a grant provided as a political reward by the President of the Republic of Uganda.

We decided to give some recommendations that we think could help the Government to improve:

    1. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Microfinance Support Centre Limited should waive the l0 per cent or one-third requirement for groups to access the money or harmonise because the information is not straight. 

    2. The processes and requirements should be reviewed as a way of creating effectiveness in the implementation of this programme. The long and tedious processes discourage the community from taking this programme as a useful tool for poverty eradication. 

    3. The Microfinance Support Centre Limited should revise the Emyooga policy guidelines on disbursement to ensure that monies are disbursed directly into group accounts as opposed to the SACCO and the groups struggle to get the money – a lot of processes that are not clear.

    4. The leaders of the subcounty – the GISOs and LCs III - should be availed with Emyooga project documents and other information for their easy follow-up. 

    5. Furthermore, local government leaders should become more involved in the implementation of Emyooga. They were complaining that the process started and they were not aware. Some of them were not even sensitised; so they do not know what is going on. It is top-bottom instead of bottom-top approach. They complained about the payment of allowances to the district team to enhance the training. We realised that some district officials became corrupt to the extent that some people do not know they are in the groups but their names are there. We were wondering how that came about. So it is better for the district people to be facilitated well. 

    6. The SACCOs should be given operational funds to run their day-to-day activities or a better method of how those activities should be run should be provided by the Government.

    7. We realised there is no proper training; so we recommended that there should be proper training of the SACCO members on financial literacy and record management. 

    8. Each group has to use their own membership contribution to run offices as one of the requirement to access the funds. Government should issue a clear guideline on regulation framework to guide the implementation, with clear roles and responsibility for the stakeholders. 

    9. The guidelines should also have a clear provision of the role of both the technical and political leaderships. 

    10. There should be a budgetary provision for operation, monitoring and supervision for both political and technical staff. 

    11. There should be additional funds to cater for categories that require a lot more access capital. For example, many groups under produce buyers may need much more than the others. The boda bodas too. We realised from the ground that the money is Shs 30 million. Performing artists might be only five people in the SACCO and yet the requirement is that there should be at least 30 people in the SACCO. That means the Shs 30 million for the boda boda SACCO is the same as Shs 30 million for the performing artists who might be less than 30. 

    12. The loan repayment period needs to be revised. Four months is too short considering the effect of COVID-19 on the businesses. It should preferably be given a period of one year to 18 months as loan repayment period. 

    13. There is need for Government to investigate why funds have remained for long with the banks and with the MFSCL, and how much charges have been levied on the money. As we spend about six months, there are monthly charges and some expenses and we feel the bank will have taken a lot of money from this money on the bank account. 

    14. The MFSCL should open more regional offices to serve the nearby districts. To our surprise, Acholi and Lango subregions have only one MFSCL office based in Lira. Even their operations became a problem. How will they go to Agago, Amuru, Lamwo and so on? We recommend that they should have offices in Acholi subregion. 

    15. Government should plan to increase the seed capital since the communities have expressed much interest in the programme. I am happy that Government is working to bring this in the next budget. 

    16. Training of the SACCOs on financial literacy and group dynamics and relevant operational guidelines – I think this came before. 

    17. There is also need to strengthen knowledge in accountability by the members of the groups, and also tighten the safeguards to ensure paying back of the funds that have been disbursed so as to enable other members benefit from the programme. 

    18. We realised that there is also need to curb down or reduce on the bureaucracy involved in the process of accessing these funds by the beneficiaries, especially for people with disability. 

    19. We thought that for PWDs, we should also reduce the interest or there should be no interest for accessing the funds. 

    20. Lastly, there is need to increase on the funds lent to the beneficiaries given the fact that most of them are using this as an opportunity to start their first businesses after businesses collapsed during COVID-19. 

As such, the amount of money being given is not enough for the group or SACCOs of more than 20 or 30 members to share so that each of them makes payment for rent and furniture in some cases.

In our conclusion – you know this is a conclusion for the whole subregion - we are grateful to the Government of Uganda and specifically to the President of the Republic of Uganda and the private sector who have taken this programme. 

The real motive and intention of the Emyooga programme and related programmes was and is to help transform the communities. However, it needed a little more planning and sensitisation before reaching the financial stage of its implementation. This would help address the question of bureaucracy, extortion, worries of recovery of administrative costs and unfairness of the initial deposits, among others. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope I tried to meet the timeframe.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Akol. Honourable members, we are going to have all the reports presented tomorrow before we get a report from the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Microfinance) tomorrow. We will debate, come up with conclusions and finish Emyooga tomorrow. 

I thank you for your patience. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.23 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16 September 2021 at 2 p.m.)

