Tuesday, 24 September 2013

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. On your behalf, I would like to send sincere condolences and messages of sympathy to the President of Kenya, H.E Uhuru Kenyatta, the Speaker of the National Assembly of Kenya, the Rt Hon. Muturi, the Speaker of the Senate of Kenya, Rt Hon. Ethuro, Members of Parliament and citizens on the tragedy that occurred in Nairobi during the weekend.

In relation to that, I want to assure the Members that the Commission is making efforts to enhance security in this facility because Parliament is a high value target. But in the meantime, I would like to request that you co-operate with the security people including allowing your visitors to be checked because I understand there are some members who don’t want their visitors to be checked when they  are coming here. But now the situation is such that everybody should subject themselves to checking. That is our appeal.

I also want to announce that the Parliamentarians for Global Action and the Parliament of Uganda will host the International Common Justice Seminar on Challenges for Domestic Persecution and Programmes for Victims’ Access to Justice and Operation. It will take place here on Thursday, 25th September in the Conference Hall, starting at 9.00 a.m. 

The guest speaker will be Justice Daniel NtandaNsereko, former Judge in the Field Chamber of the International Criminal Court. He was my lecturer for International Law at Makerere University and I know he lectured a number of members here. So, let us use the morning to attend the seminar by Parliamentarians for Global Action. You are all invited to that seminar. Thank you very much.

2.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Opposition, I send deep condolences to the President of Kenya, H.E. Uhuru Kenyatta, the Vice President, H.E, William Ruto and the people of Kenya on that tragedy that took place in that country by people of bad hearts, which brought a lot of deaths to the people of Kenya. It is unfortunate that we have lost our people and so, Madam Speaker, I would like to request that we stand to observe a moment of silence in memory of the deceased.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let the Government Chief Whip deliver the Government message and we stand to observe a moment of silence.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you so much. At that we shall move our commitment as a people of Uganda.

2.43
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The Government of Uganda has already sent a condolence message to the people of Kenya on behalf of all Ugandans. That notwithstanding, let me take this opportunity to pass on our condolences to all the bereaved families and the Government of Kenya. But at the same time we condemn terrorism activities. 

So, we request all Ugandans to be vigilant because security begins with the individual. I also request all people to co-operate with our security agencies for the good of all of us.

I want to thank the Commission for the steps taken as you communicated, Madam Speaker. Let us all be security alert because anybody can be a victim. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me invite you to have a minute of silence in honour of the victims.

(Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

2.44
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, thank you. I appreciate your communication to Kenya on our behalf as the Parliament of Uganda. However, my concern locally here is, I feel so sympathetic with our Police because of the way they check cars. First of all, these people are checking for tomatoes and so forth; they are checking for bombs, which can be timely, but they do so with bear hands and chests. They don’t even have helmets. Can’t the Uganda Police Force provide bullet proof jacket and helmets to save the lives of these policemen because they are likely to be the first victims? Terrorists don’t mind. They can blow up anybody; and for them that would be the best. So, to leave our policemen in a vulnerable state – the way they are checking the cars all over the places is unacceptable!

2.45
MR STEPHEN BIRAAHWA (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, condolences once again and we really sympathise but with security alertness, I don’t think that with our congestion at Parliament we should encourage anybody who is not a staff or an MP, even to drive in. People should be dropped outside the check point, find parking and pick visitors to Parliament when they are done with their business. But you find us in a very long queue for checking when there is no space for parking. What is the purpose of having 50 vehicles queuing when they will not get parking? You are just delaying people; and assuming a terrorist was in the queue, you will be making people vulnerable.

So, I would like to suggest that for this period, people should be dropped along the road before the check points and be picked after getting done with business here. Otherwise, we are at risk by allowing these vehicles to continue coming in here aware that we don’t even have the equipment it requires to check the people into the already congested parking.

2.47
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to – in view of your statement –propose that Sergeant-At-Arms in conjunction with other security services that support him, develop a comprehensive security plan, which can address areas of strength but also observe areas of weaknesses or vulnerabilities; and also develop an emergency rescue plan in case of either fire or any other forms of emergencies including and not limited to terrorism attacks. 

Madam Speaker, we don’t have it and we need it and it can be developed – a very comprehensive one, in which even Members of Parliament can be informed on how to respond in case of an emergency. I beg to propose.

2.48
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as we may step up security at the important installations especially Government installations, we haven’t done much at the entry points. Take an example of Buvuma where we have a lake; there is free crossing of people from Kenya and Tanzania to Uganda. So, we don’t know whether we are living with the same people because every other day we get complaints from the lake over sea piracy; passenger boats being hijacked on the way, money taken; so something should be done at these entry points, especially the lake because there is no security on a landing site and people are free to cross from Kenya but not to cross from Uganda to those same countries. Can Government step up security especially on the lake because it is a free gateway to Uganda.

2.49
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of people of Ayivu I bring condolences to the people of Kenya. This Parliament as an institution should be worried; the day we went to bury our late Vice President, we were surprised to have a stranger on the bus that you gave to us, Members of Parliament, to escort the body.

We only discovered that this person was a stranger when we were returning and it was honourable member who raised the alarm. We thought that he was part of the parliamentary staff; when we crosschecked with Police, only to find he was a masquerader. I am bringing this forth because at the moment we do not know who is a police officer, a security agent or a soldier around Parliament here.

It would be proper as Parliament to demand from the IGP in a formal meeting to tell us who exactly has been deployed to give security otherwise a terrorist can also disguise himself as one of the security personnel deployed here in Parliament and in the end you will find some of us being blown up. It is a matter of national importance more especially for this Parliament as we converge to represent our people. 

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My condolences as well, although Government has sent condolences on behalf of this country. What happened to Kenya is very unfortunate but following what hon. Reagan has raised, it is a very big matter of national importance because security at public places also leaves a lot to be desired especially security provided by private security companies. 

What you find at the entrance of a shopping mall or a market or a supermarket leaves a lot to be answered. Most of these people are barehanded; they check the cars, in most cases they even just wave. When they know you as a regular client at market place or supermarket they simply wave you on; even at Parliament here. So, it is very important that our Police Force make sure that the other auxiliary forces they use for provision of security, especially the private security guards, should be provided with all the equipments that are required.

2.53
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We feel for our brothers and sisters in Kenya because we know there could be some Ugandans who are victims of the attack in Kenya and Uganda we are also not secure from this. All we need to do as a country, and I have said it before, we need to know who Ugandans are? We do not know our people; how can we protect people we do not know; even if you ask the Minister of Foreign Affairs, he does not know how many Ugandans are out there who have travelled to Nairobi and are caught up in that kind of circus. We need to install systems that can work. We cannot count heads of people; we need systems and we need ICT in this country. We have been talking about e-governance.

Look at this Parliament, there are no CCTV cameras; you do not know who comes in, who goes where, who takes what but this is a small application that this country can afford to protect its people.

Madam Speaker, I will emphasise the issue of technology because that is the only way. I have been to other countries. In Rwanda, before you land, they know who is landing there, before you reach immigration; they know who is coming to their country. Here we do not know. The government should get serious, we will not sing this song, and we will not send condolences and whatever unless we put systems in place; unless we put institutions to work and to protect Ugandans. We are at a big risk, at least Kenya they had CCTV they could tell who came in where and how but if it happens here we will not even tell who it is.

I want to emphasise that this Government has the potential because we have the money. The National Identity Card project has failed completely. You cannot tell who has died where because you do not know your own people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of CCTV cameras, I just want to confirm that the Parliamentary Commission has taken steps to procure technology to support this facility, but of course, if we are supported alone and our neighbours are not, it is also a problem. Certainly, we have taken some steps.

2.56
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, KITGUM): Thank you, Madam Speaker, we send our condolences to our brothers and sisters in Kenya. We are also worried as a country if we start with our own Parliament we have so many visitors coming in and other people we cannot account for. But what is now worrying is that even the Parliament itself has become garage, a parking yard, there are vehicles which are perpetually stationed here which somebody can use and blow off this whole institution. 

I would request that the issue of stickers which we had in the previous Parliament that an MP or staff be given a sticker and those are the vehicles which can come drop and go, those which are supposed to be parked for one month or so should have somewhere else to park. Otherwise, that is also another area which we should consider. 

Secondly, I think this is the only country where people just come in and go and do whatever they do, even become more Ugandans than others. We should take precautions from what has happened to our neighbours. I do recall that we had many incidences here, for instance, the Kibwetere issue; bad things happen in a country and they go unnoticed. People were digging graves and burying people and nobody could recognise it; even people making bombs in houses. Foreigners can come here with their dollars, buy houses and then do whatever they want and then blow up the whole of this country. I think we must style up. Whenever we have our visitors come, we should take this as a serious issue and I want to ask the security personnel to go into reviewing this settlement for our foreigners because they come with their relatives and they can do anything within. Even us as Ugandans can connive for a penny to blow up our own country. I think as a country it is high time that we took this seriously and put it in practice. Otherwise, I am also looking at institutions like schools, hospitals, how are they being protected. 

Above all, I think for these personnel to do a very good job for us, they must be motivated. They do not have the motivation or morale to do their work. You can go to an institution where they have put guards at the entrance but in the morning you see them checking, towards lunch or slightly at 2.00 O’ clock they are hungry and thirsty and they just wave, “You go.” So, I think that you also have to look at how you are motivating these people to do a good job for us otherwise as we keep them like teachers, they are not going to do a good job for us. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am glad that Members appreciate that we do need to improve security so that when more serious measures are installed, you will know why they are being installed. For instance, if you go to the Rajya Sabha of India, you cannot get anywhere near Parliament in a radius of two kilometres. You cannot drive anywhere near Parliament - even in the US. So if we do that - I hope you will understand. 

I do not know whether the minister wants to say something as there were issues raised about your ministry.
HON. MEMBERS: Maiden speech. 

3.00
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. ArondaNyakairima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Certainly it is not my maiden speech. 

Madam Speaker, I join you in condoling our brothers and sisters in Kenya who departed and we pray for those who are in hospital to recover quickly, and as partners with Kenya in Somalia since this despicable incident occurred, we have been talking to them and we are informed hourly and we have kept informed on what is going on.  

Our country is safe. It is not that we have not been attacked because they have been sympathetic with us. All along since we are the beginners of the operation in Somalia, they have wanted to attack us from time to time. We have information but because of our enduring vigilance, they have not done it but at the same time, we are not relaxing and we are stepping up measures to ensure that the country remains safe.  

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to put my General here to order but very important is that a few years ago, we lost people in Kyadondo Rugby Club here in Kampala and the General was in this House and by then, he was Chief of Defence Forces and some of the suspects are still in Luzira. Kibwetere burnt people. In Makindye, a house was discovered with decomposing bodies under concrete meaning they put bodies down before the concrete was put. All these are terrorist acts which have happened in this country. So for the General to tell us that we have not been attacked is under serving to this country in terms of the docket he is holding. Is he, therefore, in order to misinform this House and yet we are equally vulnerable to these terrorist attacks?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The minister was saying, because we were the first to go to Somalia, we have always been a target but that because of vigilance, they have not done as much as they could have done. I think that is what he was saying.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. And as Uganda, I may inform honourable colleagues, terrorism did not begin with Al-Shabaab. We were with LRA who committed heinous atrocities when they killed people in the Northern part. So for us when it comes to terrorism, we have come a long way and we have learnt our lessons – of course when we were attacked, we learnt lessons. 

For now, Madam Speaker, we have stepped up our measures; all security agencies, the police and intelligence have had additional information and re-organised themselves to ensure that measures are up to it to ensure that we keep enduring the alert. 

Now, Madam Speaker, a honourable colleague has concern about the ID – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Clarification, thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank the Minister for Internal Affairs. We ply trailers along Busia-Kampala, Rwanda-Sudan-Congo and Malaba road, but along the way, there are trailer parks which are very insecure and these trailers are carrying petrol products, gas and so forth.  Even in Malaba itself, there are trailers parked all over places which do not have fire extinguishers. 

What measures do you have to stop a terrorist from just using a match stick to cause serious deaths with all the trailers and goods along the routes plying along the country?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is answering my communication and the comments made but now you are going to specific issues. We may want to get a statement from him about the measures he is taking generally because at this rate, we are going to remain here with defence. So please conclude.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Thank you. We have intelligence that at times they operate at two levels - there is covert intelligence and overt intelligence and at times there would be some measures quite invisible but they will be there and they will secure our country and all those high ways. 

But I particularly want to comment on the IDs. It is a question of time. We will undertake to produce IDs. Measures are advanced - there was some delay on our part and I admit at the time I inherited the ministry but the progress is now advanced. We are operating at two levels: I have a committee I lead at the Internal Affairs to quicken the process and put infrastructure to give an ID and then the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister is leading another committee for mass enrolment. I just want to assure honourable colleagues that time will come and we will know who is a Ugandan and who is not.  

We are aware of the refugees who are coming in. Uganda is hospitable, it is welcoming but the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Ministry of Internal Affairs were working together to ensure that the refugees who come in this country are registered. It is not true that we do not know who comes in and who goes out. We know but we could do better and we are aware of that and we are going to do that. 

So on the question of IDs, we are going to work our hardest and produce an ID and it is the question of time. Parliament will be informed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, there was the question of the protective gear for the personnel who are on duty checking for guns and others.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: There is in terms of a kit to have a state of art equipment; they may not have all of it but within the budget available, we have plans to re-equip police and we will do that. But for the time being, they have reasonable equipment to do the work and plans are under way to re-equip them, Madam Speaker. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Namayanja had something. She had a matter. Now we are closed on security. There was something hon. Namayanja wanted to raise.

3.08
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Today there was an item in TheDaily Monitor about the minister’s statement that women and girls should be raped by men for indecent dressing. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister for Youth, hon. Kibuule issued that statement and I feel concerned as a woman that I do not know what is tantamount to indecent dressing. I think the minister is responsible for the youths and counselling - (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you very much honourable colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I want to give to my colleague is that what indeed was published today - and it is unfortunate the youth minister is not here - it happened in Ntungamo District where I hail from, which is part of my constituency and these are youth matters. These may seem to be joking matters but when a minister of Government promotes rape for those who are indecently dressed, I think it is a very serious matter and the youths are actually demanding an apology from this minister.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, today at the entrance of Parliament a lady was stopped. She came with the mother to go and see hon. Reagan Okumu and she was stopped at the gate because she was wearing a short skirt. So-

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: I thank you for that information. And, Madam Speaker, I think this is not a -

THE SPEAKER: Order Members.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: This is not a matter we can take lightly because we have had cases of rape where people have even been killed. Women and mothers have been killed. 

MS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I rise to condemn the manner in which the minister –(Interjections)– brought out casually the matter of rape. It is a criminal matter. As a parent I am even bleeding internally (Interjections) - yes.

On the 3rd of this month there is a child of nine years who was raped and strangled to death. A child of nine years - and the minister casually says, “When they rape, see whether they were putting on tight jeans, bikinis and then just send off the perpetrators.” I wish to lay on Table the picture of the nine year old girl from Kyebando- Nisha- who was raped and killed. I beg to lay. It is from TheDailyMonitor of 9 September 2013. The baby is here. You are all parents; the baby is wearing jeans.

Still the papers reported another young girl who was raped and impregnated by the father. The father of the child - not an ordinary person; and then Kibuule says, “Check whether she was in bikinis, tight jeans or a miniskirt.” 

Madam Speaker, the women of this country deserve an apology from the hon. Minister to the minimum. Otherwise, the minister should even actually resign for making such a big statement. Rape is not an ordinary matter and it is just not a matter you should laugh off. I do not really support indecent dressing but in this circumstance what is indecent dressing in Kibuule’s case? The way I am dressed currently, if the Moslems looked at me they would think I am not properly dressed. 

But, Madam Speaker, we are sad and the minister should have told the youths better things than what he said. He deserves to see the disciplinary committee for proper action.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: I thank you for that useful information. Madam Speaker, as an issue of national importance, if the minister does not come out clearly to clarify this statement, I am calling upon all women to come out and condemn the minister’s statement and even call for his resignation. Madam Speaker, that is my prayer: that the minister should come and explain to the nation.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not see the minister; I do not see his senior minister either but maybe the Government Chief Whip can say something about it - let us hear from the host. I understand hon. Tashobya was present.

3.15
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to throw light on what appeared in the papers and the statements attributed to the hon. Ronald Kibuule. The hon. Ronald Kibuule was in my constituency. I invited him to preside over a function of the youths which was also in my constituency. I want to say that I personally condemn - and of course I condemn anybody uttering or associating him or herself to acts of rape and also mistreating or defiling children. But I want to say - because I was in that meeting and really what was reported in the papersleft the crux of what hon. Kibuule said and addressed the youth about. He was talking about the programme of the youths –(Interruption) 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you very much hon. Member for giving way. The information I would like to give the honourable colleague is that the minister was called while they were writing this article and this is what he said: “I have talked to the Inspector-General of Police and the Police in Kampala to see that if a woman is raped they look at how she was dressed. Most women currently dress poorly especially the youths. If she is dressed poorly and is raped, no one should be arrested.” Those were his statements. He is quoted and there are even quotations. So it is not necessarily only what he said in Ntungamo but he was called by the writer of this article and this is what he said. 

MR TASHOBYA: I would like to thank the hon. Member for the youths for the information he has given. I am only reporting about the statements attributed to him in the meeting in my constituency -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the person to explain this matter is hon. Kibuule. So can we require hon. Kibuule to come and explain to the country what he said on this issue of miniskirts and rape. Thank you. Let us go to the next item. 

Before we go to the next item, join me in welcoming teachers and pupils of Mulubya Mixed Day and Boarding Primary school, Hoima, represented by hon. Kajura and hon. Kaahwa. I think they are here. You are welcome. (Applause) I think they are not on strike. 

On this side, we have pupils and teachers of St Aloysius Senior Secondary School Nabbingo represented by hon. Sseggona and hon. Seninde. You are welcome.(Applause)  Next item.

MR NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, the issue –

MR OKUPA: Point of procedure -

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, he has not said anything. (Laughter)

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, the issue of the court award to Severino was raised – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure, pursuant to Rule 44 (2) of our Rules of Procedure. The Attorney-General, I suppose is responding to an issue which is a matter of public concern touching the life line of people in connection with the defense of Shs 13 billion. Madam Speaker, in the absence of an explanation written in documentation, is it procedurally proper for him to proceed when he knows that the matter will be debated? We need reference when debating the matter.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Attorney-General should produce 300 copies, supply them and will answer tomorrow. Next item.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, they may not be enough because shortly before lunch, I learnt that the Office of the Clerk hadn’t made enough copies.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you will answer tomorrow when there are enough copies. Next item.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I have just heard the Attorney-General say that the Office of the Clerk has failed to produce the 300 copies. The budget of the Parliamentary Commission does not cater for printing of papers of the ministry. We passed budgets for respective ministries for production of all their stationery. We do not want our budget to be strained because when we start printing for others, we lose money. So, the Attorney-General’s Office must produce the copies and not the Parliamentary Commission.

THE SPEAKER: I think I have instructed the Attorney-General to produce 300 copies and distribute them for tomorrow, using his budget and not our budget.

3.22
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Last week when adjourning the House, the Minister of Education and Sports, hon. Jessica Alupo, informed this House and the country that she was going to meet the head of the teachers – UNATU - so that the teachers can go back to the classroom and we can have the children taught. Madam Speaker, through your indulgence, may I beg that the minister – (Interruption)

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, according to our rules, you had already said, “Next item on the Order Paper” and the hon. Member is raising what is outside the Order Paper. Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had expected the minister to bring a statement but I haven’t seen it, but we are told they are going to meet on Monday and update us on Tuesday. So, please arrange. In the meantime, let us go to item 3 while the minister organises herself.  

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, yesterday we had a meeting with the Committee on National Economy and we agreed that we would continue with the meeting in regard to status of loans in the country and we will be able to finalise this meeting on Thursday this week. So, we are praying that we be given time until we finish with the Committee on National Economy and then we will be able to look at these six loans. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that items 4,5,6,7 and 8 be deferred until after you have had the meeting?

MR OMACH: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let it be recorded as such. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a procedural issue. I read in the papers today that the Ministry of Finance procured money without parliamentary approval, which is against our Constitution. I want to find out, is it procedurally right for the minister to say we wait until Thursday and yet they have already procured money without parliamentary approval?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Committee on Finance gave us that report last week; they had established that the Auditor-General did confirm that and I think that is what they are discussing. We are aware because it was in the report of the finance committee. Next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON THE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL AND ADVISORY SERVICES

THE SPEAKER: Wait, all the work is important. Honourable members, you have been complaining that I have not been putting your work on the Order Paper. Now I have put it there. 

3.27
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concern of Members about our earlier commitment that we will come and pronounce ourselves here over what has transpired between Government and the teachers in the dialogue which is currently ongoing in light of the strike of teachers. What I would like colleagues here to note is that consultations between teachers and Government are still ongoing and we are in charge. We shall come with a written statement when we have finished the dialogue with the teachers. Thank you. 

3.28
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Odo Tayebwa): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me present the report on the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the value for money audit reports of the Auditor-General for:
    1. National Agricultural and Advisory Services (NAADS).
    2. Management on National Agricultural and Advisory Services in the districts of Kabarole, Kasese, Lira and Mubende.

Madam Speaker, the Local Government Accounts Committee, on behalf of Parliament, under Article 164(3) of the Constitution of Uganda and Rule 170 – (Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising up on a point of procedure. The honourable colleague is continuing to read a document that is alien to us as Members of Parliament because we do not have copies and therefore cannot follow him. Is it procedurally right, Madam Speaker, to continue with a report when the Members cannot follow?

THE SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR TAYEEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Local Government Accounts Committee, on behalf of Parliament, under Article 164(3) of the Constitution of Uganda and Rule 170(1) of the Rules of Procedure, is mandated to monitor expenditure of all public funds, whether transferred from the centre or locally generated by the local government. The committee assesses and evaluates levels of compliance to established laws of Uganda; the performance, adherence and compliance to set performance standards and regulations governing public expenditure.

Madam Speaker, because of time, with the 45 minutes given to us, this is a big report; I will just start from page 1 –(Laughter)– because, as you can see the membership is well written on page (i), page (ii) has the table of contents – I am leaving all of those out and go to page 1.

National Agricultural and Advisory Services (NAADS) Programme: Advisory and Information Services Component

Introduction

National Agricultural and Advisory Services (NAADS) is a programme designed to be a decentralised, farmer-owned and private sector service extension system contribution to the realisation of the agricultural sector objective. It was established by the NAADS Act (2001), specifically to address constraints of lack of access to the agricultural information, knowledge and improvement technology among rural farmers in the country.

The programme begun in six districts and 24 sub-counties in 2001 but has since expanded to cover the entire country. This value-for-money audit covered the advisory services component of the programme, which focused on extending advisory services to the farmers. The overall purpose of the audit was to assess the economy, efficiency and effectiveness of the operations of the component.

At the district and community levels, the relevance of the programme is justified on the ground that there was limited information and capacity to provide extension support to farmers and the need for diversification. This was found logical. However, due to the poor quality of services offered by the private advisory service providers, the objective was not fully achieved. 

The programme was implemented under the local government system and NGOs, which contracted out services, supervised and monitored the formation of farmer groups. Discussions with the programme secretariat and local government staff revealed that they were experienced in their respective fields, had the capacity to implement the programme, played pivotal role in promoting the programme and ensure that the objectives are achieved and sustained.

However, weaknesses were in the nature of the private service providers contracted and the lack of co-funding by farmers and sub-counties. The programme adopted a bottom-up planning approach, where farmers, through groups within their respective villages, prioritised issues that were prioritised at the sub-county and consolidated into the district work plan.

At the national level, the programme carries out annual joint planning to guide the implementation programme activities and after approval. It releases funds to local governments on a quarterly basis. Discussions with key stakeholders reveal that the planning was participatory and comprehensive but the release of funds is always delayed, thereby greatly affecting the training of farmers and sometimes arising at the time the planting had almost ended.

Uganda’s population is predominantly rural-based, with the majority of the rural populace engaged in subsistence farming for livelihood. Over 70 percent of Uganda’s working population is employed in the agricultural sector. In order to increase productivity and commercialisation of the agricultural sector, Government of Uganda, with the assistance of development partners, started the National Agricultural and Advisory Services (NAADS) programme geared towards increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of agricultural extension services.

The programme has evolved to include the distribution of agricultural technologies to farmers; these are geared towards increasing household incomes and rural livelihoods. However, the programme has raised public concern and is yielding less tangible benefits to participating farmers despite the substantial amounts spent on the programme.

It is against this background that an independent assessment of the performance of the NAADS programme was undertaken by the Office of the Auditor-General, focusing on the implementation of agricultural technologies, development of market linkages and monitoring and evaluation of programmes; ascertain the challenges and suggest recommendation for improvement. 

The committee examined the impact of the campaign with the overall objective ascertaining whether value for money has been achieved under this programme.

Summary of findings

The hearings revealed that the advisory services have not been as effective as it was set out to be. This has been mainly attributed to two reasons – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, read the subject and the recommendation; you do not have to go into what was reported and so forth. Just read the subject and recommendation. 

MR TAYEBWA: Okay, one, delayed release of funds to the districts and sub counties. 
    1. The committee recommends that the project should speed up the process of disbursing funds from the central government to the local government and the sub counties to the implementers to avoid any further delay. Efforts should be made by the secretariat to ensure that approved work plans are financed during the planning period.

    2. Central Government should ensure that the local government budget for co-funding should be reflected in their budget. Districts that are reluctant to co-fund should be penalised. Government should also come up with a programme of assisting the poor and vulnerable farmers who cannot afford to co-fund programme activities. 

    3. Identification of prioritisation of enterprises. The committee recommends that the secretariat provides farmers with well researched information to guide them in selecting enterprises that have ready market.

    4. Technology Development. The committee recommends the secretariat together with the local government should identify lead farmers who should house technology development sites and are responsible for their maintenance and the benefits accruing from them.

    5. Quality of Advisory Services. The committee recommends that the secretariat makes experience and condition for one to provide advisory services. A system to identify good service providers and blacklist those who are poor performers should be put in place. The programme should also provide some training in extension services. 

    6. Reporting. The committee recommends that the secretariat comes up with a standard format of writing advisory services progress reports to ensure uniformity.

    7. Poor farmers’ Attendance at Training. The committee recommends that the secretariat identifies a time acceptable to the farmers for each area where training should be carried out. It should also come up with a training manual that emphasises practical training and less of theoretical classroom teaching. 

    8. Monitoring and Supervision. The committee recommends that the secretariat comes up with a standard monitoring checklist to improve the implementation of the programme. 

    9. Achievements. Some achievements were noted, especially in Kaliro District and to some extent Kasese District. The bottom-up planning process which involved farmers is commendable. The regular monitoring by district officials and staff is also commendable. 

We took a case study of the districts of Kabalore, Kasese, Lira and Mubende. I will not go into the summary of findings; you can read that on your own. I now take you to page 10 on National Advisory Services Programme. Let us look at the conclusions and recommendations.

    1. Delayed disbursements has in some instances resulted into planned activities not being implemented in time. The committee recommends that:
    a) The process of disbursing funds to the implementers be revised to avoid any delay and funds should be directly channelled to the sub counties. 
    b) The programme should consider the possibility of releasing funds according to the seasons rather than a quarterly basis of the financial year. This would ensure that funds are received just in time for the activities to take place.

    2. Local Governments not providing co-funding. The committee recommends that:-
    a) there is a need to ensure that local governments meet their obligations for co-funding of NAADS activities and that they should be reflected in their annual budget;
    b) the districts that are reluctant to co-fund should be penalised;
    c) farmers through their existing farmers groups should be encouraged to form savings and cooperative societies, SAACOs, that can assist them save and are at hand to provide credit to the farmers where they need funding.

    3. Poor identification and prioritisation of enterprises. The committee recommends that the NAADS Secretariat should carry out commodity and market studies and avail all the districts with market information, which farmers can use in determining where and at what price to sell their produce. 

    4. Technology development sites are not well maintained. The committee recommends that the programme comes up with lead farmers to house technology development sites and be responsible for their maintenance and the benefits. These will act as role models and change agents. 

    5. Poor quality of advisory services and end-user certification. The committee recommends that the programme should make experience a mandatory condition for one to provide advisory services. Identify good service providers and blacklist poor performers. Provide some training in extension services and put youth into district extension services staff.

District extension workers who are more qualified and experienced should be empowered and incorporated in the NAADS programme and where there is shortage, the committee recommends further recruitment.

6. 	Reports produced by service providers were not addressing the terms of reference. The committee recommends that the programme should come up with a standard format of writing advisory service progress reports. A well written report should beavailed to the sub county programme coordinator before the service providers are paid and that they should strictly be enforced.

7. 	Poor farmer attendance rate for training. The committee recommends that the programme should ensure that all training is carried out at the same time that is acceptable to farmers. It should also come up with a training manual that emphasises practical training and less of theoretical classroom teaching.

	Training should also be carried out when the planting is just about to start so that farmers can practice what they have learnt, and can get clarifications from the service providers when they are still available.

There should be provision for follow up after the training by the service providers.

Madam Speaker, I would want now to go to page 16 for the conclusions. I was advised by the Speaker to raise the recommendations mostly, and when you go to pages 16, 17 and 18, they are almost the same recommendations. 

At this juncture, I want to lay on Table the report in summary as you have seen it since all of you have the copies. I also want to lay the following:

    • Minutes of the Local Government Accounts Committee meeting held on 28 September 2012 in Lira district on NAADS programme.
    • Minutes of the Local Government Accounts Committee meeting held on 18 October 2012 in Kasese District on NAADS programme. 
    • Minutes of the Local Government Accounts Committee meeting held on 19 October 2012 in Kabarole on NAADS programme. 
    • Minutes of the Local Government Accounts Committee meeting on NAADS programme in Mubende District held on 25 October 2012. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the chairperson and members of the committee, I find myself in some difficulty because I notice this is the first value-for-money report, but I am afraid it has not met the standard of the value-for-money audit. I think you need to go and actually do a value-for-money audit because what is happening is just a narration of what has been going on. Was it effective? Is it efficient? What is the impact on the economy? I am sorry but I cannot allow Members to debate this. There is nothing to discuss. No, what are your augments now? I have said there is no report.

3.55
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for your guidance and in a situation where we have been guided that there is no value-for-money report, I would request that the chairperson and members of the committee take it in good faith because NAADS is a programme that is so dear to everyone and which we feel we should correct. A lot of money has been put in this project and we want to know whether we are receiving the worth of our money. 

I wish to advise the chairperson and the committee members to re-do the work and go for value-for-money instead of making a general report. Thank you.

3.56
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Rt Hon. Speaker, I stand here to support the idea moved by the Opposition Chief Whip, but I want to add that since we have not dealt with this before, I would suggest that the Parliamentary Commission comes up with some capacity building for our committee and a standard way of reporting because this report is different from the way we have been reporting, and we expect this report to come up with ideas of how best Government can improve. I beg to support.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the lacuna has been noted. I think we need to organise some more training for all committees; not just for this committee but for all the other committees to do value-for-money audits. This is the first one, so let us appreciate that it is the first one and we shall do better next time. We shall organise some training. Next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE LOCAL AUTHORITIES ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2008/2009

3.58
MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Ms Florence Namayanja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As you are aware, this report was circulated. I was about to present the report+ and I was stopped half way. So, I hope Members have copies of this report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we distributed these copies. In fact she had commenced and then you said they were not enough and she went out of her way and distributed others. You have them. Please listen, I know you have the reports.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the report of the Auditor General for the local authorities for the year ended 30 June 2009.

Madam Speaker, the report of the Local Government Accounts Committee is presented to this august House in accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution and Rules 170 (2) and (3) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

The report is structured in two parts: One is about the general observations, recommendations and conclusion on prominent policy matters related to financial management in the local governments. And two, the detailed analysis of the queries raised by the Office of the Auditor-General.

The report covers 36 district local governments in the financial year 2008/09. It highlights funds that should be recovered, from who, those to be written off and those to be cleared or dropped, among other, recommendations.

Madam Speaker, there is a background and the mandate of the committee. We adopted a methodology where the committee received and examined the Auditor-General’s Report on local governments, submitted under Article 163 (4) of the Constitution together with reports of the district public accounts committee as raised before Parliament under Section 89 (7)of the Local Governments Act.

The committee also got support from the technical officers of Parliament, the Auditor- General’s Office, Ministry of Local Government, consultancies and CIID Local Governments Accounts Squad attached to the committee.

In examining the accounts, the committee interfaced with the accounting officers and their technical teams to respond to queries raised in the Auditor-General’s Report and the recommendations of the respective district public accounts committees.

The committee makes acknowledgements: I would like to thank all the members of the committee for travelling upcountry and also being at work during the recess. 

As earlier indicated and observed, the committee made general observations as we dealt with audit queries. The committee noted that most of the accounting officers who appeared before were in acting capacities, that is, they did not hold substantive positions.

The committee further observed that some accounting officers who had been assigned other places of work did not cooperate with the incoming ones in responding to issues raised by the Auditor-General. The committee, therefore, decided to hold the accounting officers who generated the queries responsible. As a result of the committee’s work, the number of queries reduced from financial year 2000/2001 to financial year 2005/2006.

Compliancy with accounting regulations
The committee observed that the following are some of the financial laws and regulation frequently abused:
    • The Local Governments Financial and Accounting Regulations of 2007; and
    • The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets;

The committee also noted with great concern that accounting regulations are still not adhered to in most cases. 

Accountabilities are not submitted in accordance with the regulations and they enter into other financial years. This is a major weakness on the part of accounting officers and chief finance officers.

Personal advances are not usually recovered within three months as stipulated in the financial regulations.

The committee therefore recommends that financial regulations should be strictly adhered to and any deviation by the accounting officers and chief finance officers should be held personally liable.

The committee also recommends that accounting officers should adhere to the financial regulations as per the relevant laws.

The committee observed, on embezzlement of public funds, that there are some cases of outright theft of funds by officers. The committee noted that much as such cases are reported to police, prosecution and witnesses are always not there to defend the cases. The end result is that the culprits are released and government funds lost. These cases were evident in Mbarara, Arua, Amolatar and so forth.

The committee recommends that in such instances, the relevant authorities should be brought on board to handle the matter.

Administrative and Personal Advances

The committee found out that this is the most abused financial regulations as evidenced from the growing queries on this particular item. Financial regulations require interest or advances to be retired within three months. But it was observed that advances and interests remain unaccounted for by end of the accounting period. Subsequently these advances are sometimes irregularly written off as bad debts without following the requisite procedures.

In some cases staff die before accounting for advances within the stipulated time. The situation is further compounded by the lack of appropriate documents and advanced ledgers in most cases are not properly maintained, which makes follow up completely impossible.

From the districts reviewed, a total sum of over Shs 3,649,723,490 remained outstanding at the end of the year both as administrative and personal advances unrecovered.
Incompletely unvouched expenditure:

The above item is either deliberately done to defraud public funds or done due to incompetence in some districts that are understaffed during the submissions. It was noted and reported that most of the vouchers were actually available but that they could not be traced due to incompetence and negligence. Some of such evidences were traced and verified by the committee and the Office of the Auditor-General. Some cleared while others reduced in figures as reported in the detailed part of this report.

The committee recommends that such irregularities and negligence should be addressed by the districts through disciplinary actions and retooling staff to adhere and follow financial transactions to the logical conclusions. Persistence of the above should be perceived as failure on the part of the accounting officer.

A total sum of over Shs 3,963,588,347 is reflected in this report as expenditure with either unvouched or incomplete vouchers out of which Shs 2,346,550,250 was cleared by the committee and the Auditor-General, leaving a balance of Shs 1,617,038,096 to be recovered.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chair, I propose that you read the subject and the recommendation because ultimately we shall reflect the report in the Hansard.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, these were general observations. We have specific districts with specific recommendations.

THE SPEAKER: The entire report will be placed in the Hansard. Recommendations -

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, to begin with non-remission of statutory deductions. The committee recommends that since these are deductions not meant for districts, they should be remitted as soon as they are collected.

Diversion of UPE funds

The committee recommends that this practice should be stopped and disciplinary action be taken against accounting officers who divert UPE funds.

Irregular Procurement Process

The committee strongly recommends that money be recovered for the goods not received; the improvements in store records; adherence to Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act and the Regulations thereof.

Capacity and competence of some local government staff

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Local Government and Ministry of Public Service as a matter of urgency work together to fill the posts in the districts with competent and professional staff. 

Unauthorised Expenditure

The committee recommends that authority should always be sought before public funds are committed at the end of the financial year; any accounting officer who violates the provision should be disciplined and the Secretary to Treasury should respond in time.

Poor revenue performance

The committee recommends that professionalism in budgeting should be upheld and all departments should be involved. It is further recommended that the allowances for councillors be a function of what has been realised in implementing the budget. 

On budgeted figures as an advice, the council should scrutinise the activity reports before approving excess expenditure and revising budget because this is source of abuse of public resources.

District public accounts committee sittings

The committee recommends that district public accounts committees that draw allowances yet they have not sat should refund the funds and the accounting officers should report the matter to council.

Board of Survey Report 

The committee recommends that districts which do not put in place the board of survey report should be penalised for incompetence and the accounting officer specifically be warned.

In conclusion, the decisions and recommendations in most of the omissions raised by the Auditor General have been highlighted in the body of this report. 

The committee requests the House to consider this report taking into consideration these concerns raised above. 

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as required by law should reply to this report by issue of treasury memoranda. The committee expects all its recommendations to be appropriately addressed.

Lastly, I wish to appreciate and recognise the dedication and sound capability of my colleagues who worked together with me in the committee and on whose behalf I present this report. Find attached the list of Members of the Committee on Local Government Accounts. I beg to move that this report be debated together with the minutes attached. 

I would like to lay on Table the minutes of this committee as discussed. Part B is the specific district by district and these are 36 districts that have been considered. I would like to be advised on how to proceed.

THE SPEAKER: In the same way like you have been doing.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Adjumani District, Excess expenditure: The committee recommends that the accounting officer should strictly follow the local Government Finance Act; management should ensure that voted amounts are closely monitored and reconciled to avoid over expenditure because this was verified. The committee recommended for the query to be dropped.

Outstanding commitments 

The committee recommends that management should liaise with the MFPED and Ministry of Education and Sports to settle SFG liabilities. The commitment should be made when funds are available to avoid accumulating liabilities.

The committee cautioned the accounting officer and the chief finance officer against spending public funds in anticipation.

Unaccounted for funds 

The committee recommends that deductions should be made from officials who are still working with the districts; officers who left service with the district should be followed and money recovered from them. The accounting officer should own up these losses.

Unspent balances 

The committee recommends disciplinary action to be taken against the accounting officer for Adjumani.

Missing vouchers 

The committee recommends in case of companies, money should be recovered in one month and for staff recoveries from their salaries should start with effect from January 2012.

Revenue shortfall

The committee recommended outstanding revenue to be in accordance with Local Government Finance and Accounting Regulations of 2007, Regulation 101. The query was dropped.

Expired drugs

Observation

There was mismanagement of drugs disbursement; the accounting officer did not follow up the refund of the money for expired drugs. It was also noted by the committee that drugs were taken back when they are about to expire.

The committee recommended that management should determine an average rate of utilisation of drugs and make appropriate orders so as to minimise expiry. That query was dropped.

Nugatory expenditure

The committee recommended that the district deducts and submit to URA all taxes as an obligation. The Accounting officer to be cautioned against delayed payment of the tax obligations.  

Non- remittance of Local Service Tax 

The committee recommends that the district liaises with the Ministry of Finance to recover the funds.

Incompletely vouched expenditure

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should follow up former district chairpersons and ensure that they submit office reports. That query still stands.

Lack of updated inventory list

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should strengthen the internal audit and for management to report the matter to Police, disciplinary action to be taken against officer found responsible, proper security controls to be put in place to avoid future losses. 

Amuria District Local Government

Non-remittance of unspent balances of conditional grants to the Consolidated Fund

The committee observed that by the time of audit, the letter of authority was not yet given. However, it was presented and verified. And so this query was dropped by the committee because it was cleared.

Lost expenditure vouchers

The committee recommended that the Police should expedite the investigation process

Unaccounted for funds

The committee recommended that the accounting officer recovers Shs 760,000 from Mr Richard Adungo within one month or make good the loss. Accountability should be submitted on time and late submissions should not be accepted.

Payment under false account
The committee recommended that the accounting officer recovers the funds or makes good the loss. The officers concerned should be disciplined accordingly for abuse of office and the query still stands.

Travel abroad

The committee recommended that the accounting officer should recover all the funds within two months or make good the loss and the query still stands.

Delays in delivery of drugs from NMS to health centres

The committee recommended that the district health officer should closely liaise with NMS through preparation and placing of timely orders before stock outs and the query is dropped.

Amuru District Local Government 

Unaccounted for funds

The committee observed that accountability was not done in time and there were no activity reports as required by the accountability regulations.
There was no evidence that some documents were taken by the IGG for investigations 

The tabled documents were forwarded to auditors for verification and were accepted and so the query was dropped.

Excess expenditure on council emoluments and allowances

The committee recommended that the issue of graduated tax being a local revenue or not should be urgently addressed.

The accounting officer should implement only lawful decisions and not yield to the pressures from the councillors.

Salary advance  

The committee observed that the tabled evidence of recovery of the advances showed that funds are recovered. He also tabled bank statements and evidence of recovery. The documents were made for verification and the query was dropped.

Missing vouchers  

The committee recommended for the query be dropped because it was verified.

Incompletely vouched expenditure
The committee recommended for the query to be dropped because it was verified.

Apac District Local Government

Outstanding administrative advances

The committee forwarded the documents to the Auditor-General and the Parliamentary Criminal Investigation Department for further scrutiny before a final decision can be made. It has not been done up to now.

Irregular expenditure on council emoluments and allowances
The committee recommended that the accounting officer avoids acting outside the law. The query was dropped with caution to the accounting officer.

Non-remittance of unexpended balances of conditional grant to the Consolidated Fund

The committee recommended that the accounting officer be cautioned for flouting financial regulations and the query was dropped.

Unaccounted for funds

The committee recommended that the balance of Shs 1,195,000 due to Mr Ego Lawrence be written off following the right procedure and the accounting officer should recover Shs 3,487,700 from Dr Ococh within two months or make good the loss.

Arua District Local Government

Violation of procurement procedures

The committee recommended that the accounting officer be cautioned and asked to adhere to the procurement regulations to obtain value for money and to avoid loss of public funds. 

Loss of motorcycles and computers

The committee recommended a case of loss of property be reported to Police and proper investigation be carried out and the report be issued. 

Unaccounted for funds

The committee recommended that funds should be recovered from officers responsible within two months or the accounting officer and personnel officer make good the loss – (Interjections) - it is in the body but if you ask how much, it is Shs 2,928,000. I thought you had the report and you were following. That is what I was requested, Madam Speaker. 

Missing vouchers

The committee recommended that the accounting officer should recover the funds or make good the loss within two months and be cautioned against lying to the committee.

Bugiri District Local Government

Irregular variation of contracts

Madam Speaker, the committee recommended that the accounting officer should recover the funds worth Shs 9,159,160 from the responsible persons within three months and that the accounting officer be cautioned to always adhere to the accounting regulations. 

Irregular payment of allowances

The committee recommended that the accounting officer should recover the money from the beneficiaries and refund it to the district account within three months with effect from 10 March 2012.

Failure to recover the funds, the accounting officer should make good the loss.

Bugiri Hospital vacant posts

The committee recommended that Government should seriously take up the challenge of staffing of health centres in rural areas.  

Lack of title for hospital land

The committee recommended that the hospital management should expedite, where possible, the process of acquiring land titles for all its land including the Bugiri Hospital land and should reclaim the lost pieces because encroachers had encroached on the hospital land.

Waste management

The committee observed that Bugiri General Hospital now has an incinerator which was not there by the time of the audit and this was donated by USAID/EC. This query was dropped because the incinerator was provided.

Bushenyi District Local Government 

Cash fund not accounted for and that was Shs 30 million. It was reported that about Shs 111,790,000 was withdrawn on EFT and the committee observed and recommended that Mr Byaruhanga David should be investigated and prosecuted or make good the loss. The query stands.

Non-deduction of Pay as You Earn from transport and sitting allowance

The committee made the observation that the accounting officer had not made positive steps in addressing the query although he created it in the first place. Non-remittance of these deductions may cause nugatory expenditure in terms of fines and penalties. The committee asked the accounting officer to submit the schedule to the Auditor-General for verification and report to the committee. The query still stands.

Lack of land titles

The committee recommended to the accounting officer to expedite the process of acquiring titles for the hospital and other district land before it is encroached on as was noted in other districts.

Other Collection of Local Revenue  

The committee observed and recommended that both political and technical leadership in the district should combine effort and sensitise the population on taxes to boost the local revenue. All contracted out resources should be followed up and recovered within six months.

Procurement of drugs

The committee recommended that all funds less of what was supplied to health centres should be recovered from the National Medical Stores. National Medical Stores should adhere to the supply requirements from the health centres and such anomalies should be handled expeditiously.

Dokolo District Local Government 

Revenue shortfall

The Auditor-General reported that contrary to regulation 32 that requires all budgeted revenue to be collected, out of the budgeted local revenue of Shs 6 million, 11 percent, there was a shortfall on service delivery. Besides, there was no documentary proof that the arrears of revenue were submitted to the district.

The committee recommended the accounting officer to recover funds from contractors who have underperformed in their revenue collection; the accounting officer to take corrective measures by revising the budget; the government to investigate real revenue management in local governments.

Incomplete vote expenditure 

The committee recommended the accounting officer to recover Shs 2 million from the responsible officer or make good the loss. 
Unaccounted for funds 
The committee recommended that the accounting officer should ensure that funds advanced to officers are always accounted for before the next advance is given to any officer. 

Lack of primary school teachers 

Personal Files

The committee observed that auditors verified the documents and signed them satisfactorily and the query was dropped.

Gulu District Local Government

Unrecovered personal advances

The committee recommended the accounting officer to recover the balance of Shs 1 million within two months or make good the loss. 

Unvouched expenditure 

The committee recommended that the accounting officer – these documents were tabled and verified and the query was dropped. 

Iganga District Local Government

Under collection of Local Revenue

The committee recommended the accounting officer to look at the weakness in revenue collection and ensure that they are corrected and to identify the loopholes and find a way of avoiding them in future. That query was dropped.

Inadequate staffing

The committee recommended local government to strictly follow performance - 

Inadequate funding

The committee recommended vital positions to be considered as a priority and be filled; this issue should be raised in Parliament as a matter of public concern. 

Lack of performance bonds

The committee recommended that local government should strictly follow performance bond regulations. 

Disbursement of Drugs from National Medical Stores
The committee observed that the accounting officer is trying to rectify the situation and the query was dropped.

Isingiro District

Unaccounted for administrative advances 

The committee recommended the accounting officer to recover the outstanding balance of Shs3,536,000 and late accountabilities should not be entertained in order to ensure compliance with the law.

Understaffing

The committee recommended the District Service Commission to carry out its duties and confirm the acting officers or recruit qualified personnel to fill the vacancies substantively.

Jinja District Local Government 

Local tax consultancy costs

The committee was satisfied with the accounting officer’s explanation and the query was dropped. 

Kabale District Local Government 

Unaccounted for funds

The committee recommended the accounting officer to be available at the time of the audit; advance accounts to be properly managed and promptly accounted for in accordance with the regulations. 

Pension and Gratuity Reliability of Shs 51,088,000

The committee recommended that the law to pay local government pension should be worked on expeditiously so that a clear line and item is identified in the national budget so that there is no accumulation of pensions and gratuity claims.

Human resources inadequacies

The committee recommended that Government should provide the local governments with funds to feel the vacant posts in the districts.

Weaknesses in the Internal Audit Function 

The committee recommended the accounting officer to ensure recruitment of more staff especially in the finance department.

Kalangala District Local Government 

Staff loans

The committee recommended that staff loans should be backed by the regulation and the query was dropped.

Loss of cash

Accounting Officers

The committee recommended - after observing that the loss was written off by the District Executive Committee. The query was dropped.

Budget performance

The committee recommended that management should ensure that the budget shortfalls are minimised as budget underperformance undermines the district ability to fulfil its activities.

Kaliro District Local Government 

Irregular allowance

After explanation, the query was dropped.

Kamuli District

Personal advances

The committee recommended that the accounting officer recovers all funds within one month, failure of which he should make good the loss. Advances from staff that passed away should be recovered from their estates and gratuity.

Excess Expenditure on Salary Account 

The committee recommendedthat the accounting officer refunds the money within one month. 

Non-delivery of drugs

The committee recommended that the CID Local Government Accounts Committee investigates the matter further as the committee waits for the IGG’s report. 

Delayed disbursement of UPE funds

The committee recommended that UPE funds should be disbursed in time to enable programme implementation. 

Understaffing

The committee recommended that district local governments should continue trying to attract the necessary staff with some incentives. 

Katakwi District Local Government

Non-acknowledgement of receipt of health funds

The committee observed that at the time of audit, the relevant documents were not availed for verification. However, the documents in that respect were verified and cleared. The committee recommended for the query to be dropped.

Irregular transfers

The committee recommended that this query be dropped after explanation and verification. 

Unaccounted-for funds

The committee observed that at the time of audit, the relevant documents were not availed for verification but they were tabled and verified. The query was dropped. 

Accounting irregularities 

The committee recommended for the procedures of approving supplementary expenditure to be followed. The accounting officer is to recover Shs15,785,469 or make good the loss.

Kayunga District Local Government

Administrative advances

The committee observed that the accounting officer’s response was inadequate. The committee recommended that the accounting officer recovers the funds from the beneficiaries within three months; after which, the query will be dropped. 

Uncertified works

The committee recommended, after verification, that the query be dropped. 

Double remittance of withholding tax

The committee recommended that the accounting officer remits Shs1,664,000 to URA within two months.

Kiboga District Local Government

Land on Plot 288,Single Block 634 

The committee recommended that the accounting officer be cautioned against misuse of office by carrying out duties out of his jurisdiction. The committee further recommends that the accounting officer recovers all the funds, which were not paid for during the period 2005 to 2011 when the lease offer was given, or make good the loss.The query still stands.

Expired fire extinguishers at Kiboga hospital

The committee received and accepted the explanation given. The committee therefore recommended for the query to be dropped. 

Teachers’ personal files

The committee recommended that all files of public servants in the district should be regularly updated and properly maintained.

Kiruhura District Local Government 

Payment of teachers’ salaries on wrong bank accounts

The committee recommended that the accounting officer should ensure that all funds are recovered from the respective teachers who were wrongly paid. The accounting officer should follow up and update the list. The Local Government Accounts CID squad should follow up the matter. 

Council allowances not subjected to Pay as You Earn deductions

The committee observed that councillors’ allowances had earlier not been subjected to PAYE but this was later recovered and paid to URA. The documents were tabled and verified and the query dropped.

Fraudulent payment of teachers’ salaries 

The committee recommended that the accounting officer should reopen the case and recover the money.

Understaffing

The committee recommended that critical vacancies should be re-advertised and filled to enhance public service delivery. Members of Parliament should review the policy in local governments.

Kisoro District Local Government

Register of vehicles and heavy plants 

The committee recommended that an assets register be maintained as required by Section 85 of the Local Government Finance and Accounting Regulations, 2007 and in the format laid down in the regulations. 

The district should insure its assets to avoid losses in case of accidents, theft or fire.Obsolete assets should be disposed of as recommended by the board of survey. The query was dropped. 

Land and buildings register

THE SPEAKER: Can someone give the honourable member some water. (Laughter)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
Land and buildings register 

The committee recommended that the accounting officer should expedite the exercise of opening up boundaries and acquisition of land titles of the district land. The land register should be maintained in accordance with the regulations. The committee, after these observations and recommendations, dropped the query.

Administrative advances not accounted for

The committee observed that a distribution list was provided and beneficiaries acknowledged receipt of the piglets. The query was dropped.

Over commitment of the district, Shs16,341,489

The committee recommended that the hospital management should be more vigilant by insisting on obtaining monthly bills from Umeme to ensure realistic budgeting and prompt payment of utilities bills. The query was dropped.

Kumi District Local Government

Incompletely vouched expenditure of Shs90,321,907 

The committee recommended that the accounting officer should recover the outstanding balance of Shs24,915,663 or make good the loss. The committee recommended that no more accountability should be accepted after the audit has taken place.

Overdue personal advances

The committee recommended that the accounting officer should recover the full amount of Shs 55,362,988 or make good the loss.The accounting officer should be reprimanded for mismanagement of public funds.

Outstanding administrative advances

Regulation 43 of the Local Government Finance and Accounting Regulations requires that all disbursement in form of official advances be accounted for within one month. The committee recommended that the accounting officer recovers the total balance of Shs 16,523,209 from the officers who did not account for the funds within three months or make good the loss.

Nugatory expenditure

The committee recommendedthat the Chief Administrative Officer and council should ensure that this nature of expenditure is avoided in future by putting in place effective conflict resolution mechanisms. The query was dropped.

Lira District Local Government

Outstanding administrative advances

The committee recommendedthat funds owed by officers who were transferred from the district should be recovered. Further investigations should be carried out to ascertain the number of people who died.

Madam Speaker, we found out that in some districts, some people were hiding behind death. In one district, the person who was said to be dead was attending the meeting we were holding. (Laughter) In Pader, there was an individual who attended the meeting but on the list he was said to be dead. The committee therefore recommended that further investigations should be carried out to ascertain the number of people who died.

Non-remittance of conditional grants to the consolidated fund

The committee observed that the accounting officer tabled the original letter from the Minister of Finance, authorising him to retain the funds in question. The committee accepted the submission and the query was dropped. 

Unaccounted-for funds

The committee recommended that the accounting officer recovers all funds or makes good the loss.

Double payment at workshops

The committee recommended that the accounting officer recovers all funds or makes good the loss within three months. The accounting officer has been made to take personal responsibility because these accounting officers fail to adhere to regulations as stipulated.

Unavailability of personal records

The committee recommended that the accounting officer be reprimanded for not submitting the accountability documents to the auditor at the time of audit.

Lyantonde District Local Government

Cash and cash equivalent

After observing that the accounting officer presented a letter from the bank acknowledging that it had indeed made errors and therefore corrections had been made, the committee recommended that the query be dropped.

Query on roads

The committee recommended that the query be dropped with a warning to the management of the district to ensure that more supervision and monitoring be done.The committee also recommendedthat Government should give more money to the local governments.The accounting officer was also cautioned on late submission of accountability, which limits the Auditor-General’s work.

Proper maintenance and continued monitoring of roads was recommended by the committee and the query was dropped.

Masaka District Local Government

Nugatory expenditure 

The committee recommended that laws governing the payment of local government pensions should be revisited, else encroachment on districts’ meagre resources will continue and yet it affects service delivery.

Diversion of UPE funds

The committee recommended that the money to be recovered. The query was upheld.

Teachers’ payroll

The committee recommended that the query be dropped after satisfactory submission.

Trial balance

The committee observed that the causes of the errors should be established and the IFMS streamlined in order to generate reliable data.

Mbarara District Local Government

Under-collection of local revenue

The committee recommendedthat the district should endeavour to collect all the budgeted-for resources. The accounting officer should ensure that the budget is revised by the council. All contractors who failed in their obligations should be held responsible in compliance with the contract entered into.

Salary payment

The committee directed the accounting officer to recover all the money and always make a follow-up, even if it means going to the ministry, so as to avoid such queries. Payrolls should be updated in time and regularly.The accounting officer should carryout the mandatory role of supervising all public servants in the district. The query still stands.

Encroachment on the district headquarters land at Kamukuzi hill

The committee recommended that the matter be investigated further in order to clarify who the true owner of the land is. They should write to the land commission and get proper clarification and details on the ownership of this land.

On this issue, the committee wrote to the Ministry of Lands and there are a number of issues regarding this land, which need a lot of investigation.

Audit inspection - district medical department

The committee recommended that procurement of drugs should be carefully planned to ensure that there is long shelflife and that fast-moving drugs are supplied. Drugs should be regularly inspected and cases of near expiration brought to the knowledge of the concerned authority for possible relocation or destruction in time. The query was dropped.

Land without land titles

The committee observed that the Auditor-General explained that Plot 4, Western Bypass Link, has a title and it belongs to the district. It is in the same line with Plot 4, which was allocated by Uganda Land Commission to the Office of the Auditor-General.

The committee noted that there was acquisition of land through non-conventional means with the help of some district officials. The committee agreed that this will be part of the response from Uganda Land Commission. 

The committee has written to Uganda Land Commission twice, requesting for clarification on the said plots of land but no response has been received. The committee’s recommendation is awaiting the response from Uganda Land Commission. However, the CID was requested to investigate this issue further.

Sub-lease of Plot 5, Kitunzi road

The committee recommended that the accounting officer be held responsible for flouting procurement regulations, which led to the loss of funds in the district. The court case should be followed up to its logical conclusion. 

Electricity and water bills 

The committee recommended that all district dues should be collected in time and in full, and the query be dropped. 

Weaknesses in vehicle management

The committee recommended that this query be dropped because this issue was administrative. 

Mityana District Local Government 

Diversion of UPE funds 

The committee recommended for this query to be dropped after verification. 

Teachers’ personal files 

The committee recommended that all public servants’ files in the districts should be properly maintained and updated regularly. 

Mayuge District

Outstanding commitments

The committee recommended that the accounting officer of the year under review should clear the outstanding commitments or make good the loss. 

Under-remittance of funds to sub-counties

The committee recommended for this query to be dropped after verification. 

Vacant posts 

The committee recommended that the accounting officer takes corrective measures so that this contract can be renewed to avoid future litigation problems. 

Mubende District Local Government

Unaccounted-for funds - Shs 71,898,918 

The committee recommended that the accounting officer be warned for flouting financial regulations and for violating the Audit Act. The accounting officer should recover Shs 6,675,900 within six months or makegood the loss. 

Unauthorised allowances to counsellors 

The committee recommended that the accounting officer should recover all funds within two months or make good the loss. 

Doubtful Expenditure 
The committee recommends for this query to be dropped after the documents were tabled. 

Loss of Cheque No.006593 worth Shs 1,638,000

The committee observed that there was negligence by the accounting officer in not reporting the matter to the Police. The committee also noted that the communication from the bank revealed that there were enough measures to guard against cashing the cheque. 

Namutumba District Local Government

Understaffing 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer and the district service commission continue to attract staff to the district by putting in place some incentive schemes which are attractive like top-up allowance. Members of Parliament should review the policy on local government. 

Ntungamo District Local Government

Creditors 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer avails more documents. These ledgers should be produced within one month for verification or else the accounting officer be held responsible. This query stands. 

Irregular procurements

The committee recommends that the district management should always adhere to the procurement guidelines. 

Expenditure on toner 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should always ensure compliance with procurement guidelines. The accounting officer should be reprimanded. 

Unauthorised uncollected personal advances 

The committee recommends that Shs 12,687,000 should be recovered from the responsible officers or the accounting officer makes good the loss. 

Unaccounted-for barbed wire 

The committee recommends for this query to be dropped after verification. 

Incomplete register of vehicle and heavy plants

The committee recommends the query be dropped after verification. 

Internal audit reports

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should urge council to consider and debate the internal audit reports as they are an important internal control mechanism that helps to improve systems. The query was dropped. 

Pader District Local Government

Non-remittance of Unexpended Balances of Conditional Grants to the Consolidated Fund 
The committee recommends that all unexpended balances in respect of conditional grants should be returned to the Consolidated Fund or authority to retain it be sought from the Secretary to the Treasury.

Unaccounted-for administrative advances 

The committee recommends and directs that the money must be recovered from officers who got advances. The Auditor-General reported that a sum of Shs 250 million in respect of administrative advances - Shs 139 million for the current year and Shs 110 million relating to the previous years - was not accounted for. So the committee recommends and directs that the money be recovered from officers who got the advances and failed to account for them. Officers found to be criminally liable should be investigated by CID and prosecuted. 

Missing payment of vouchers 

The committee recommends for this query to be dropped after it was verified. 

Depreciation 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should ensure that only qualified accountants are employed, given that peace had returned to the region. 

Local revenue shortfall 

The committee recommends that the query be dropped as the matter involved was slightly outside the control of the accounting officer. 

Abandoned contract
 
The committee recommends that the accounting officer takes appropriate action, both legal and administrative, to ensure that the district engineer and the company in question make good the loss suffered when they abandoned the construction work. 

Madam Speaker, there are some contractors who after receiving money abandon the work and leave the district to suffer. It was observed that the Ministry of Works gives out contracts without even informing the district. Such contracts are questionable and there is a lot of money involved. 

Irregular transfer of funds 

The committee recommends that the matter be referred to CID for further investigation. 

Non-preparation of other financial statements 

The committee notes that the auditors verify the documents – the statements were not produced and therefore the query stands. 

Over payments 

The committee observed that the accounting officer was instructed to recover the excess payment from the contractor and the district engineer, Mr Omona, who supervised the contract and recommended the over payment to be recovered. The query was stood over pending a report of recovery of excess payment by the accounting officer from the contractor.

The committee recommends that a letter be written to the Auditor-General for a special audit to be conducted; I think it was done.

Rakai District Local Government

Unsettled salary pension arrears of Shs 615 million 

The Auditor-General verified the liability as existent and supported. The query was dropped.

Teachers’ Personal Files 
The committee recommended that teachers’ personal files be properly maintained and updated to enable proper payroll management. The district should recruit qualified personnel to handle the filing system.

Rukungiri District Local Government

The committee recommends that the accounting officer liaises with the Ministry of Public Service to get data on the status of payment to ensure that the liability is accurately reported in the financial year statements. The accounting officer was advised to keep records of all people whose names are sent to the Ministry of Public Service as they retire.

Under-collection of local revenue 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should put in more effort in revenue mobilisation and collection and make realistic budgets. The management should sensitise the public especially on the newly introduced taxes. Management should also try to identify other new sources of income.

Salaries paid to former officers

The committee recommends that this query be dropped.

Irregular payment of salary arrears

The committee recommends that Shs 5,325,000, as outstanding balance, be recovered within six months by the accounting officer.

Uncollected accumulated rent from Resident District Commissioner 

The committee recommended that management should continue to pursue recovery of the amount and where necessary, institute legal proceedings to ensure collection or evict the Resident District Commissioner. 

The accounting officer can use the building for other purposes in order to generate revenue.If the Resident District Commissioner is still interested in occupying the building, he should pay up all arrears or else vacate the building.

Sembabule District

Unauthorised excess expenditure 

The committee recommended for this query to be dropped. 

Administrative advances

The committee recommended for the query to be dropped. 

Un-appropriated Construction of Variation Costs of Shs 25,591,000 
The committee recommended that the query be dropped. 

Stores not taken in charge 

This was about Shs 23 million. The committee recommended for the query to be dropped.Honourable members, the committee may make a recommendation to drop a query after verification of documents and after the committee has interfaced with the relevant officers.

Un-deducted statutory taxes 

The committee recommended that the accounting officer recovers and remits to URA Shs 2,550,449 in respect to the un-deducted six percent withholding tax within a period of two months. 

Diversion of funds 

The committee recommended for the query to be dropped. 

Late submission of financial statements 

The committee recommended that the Ministry of Public Service should expedite the recruitment process in local governments to ensure better service delivery. It was also recommended that the Ministry of Finance adjusts the budget ceiling to allow for staff recruitment in key positions in local governments to take place.

Non-compliance of established regulations and guidelines

The committee observed that the assets register is now in place and the query was dropped.

Soroti District Local Government

Withholding tax not remitted to Uganda Revenue Authority 

The committee recommended that the accounting officer abides by the regulations governing tax collection and ensures that taxes are deducted and remitted to URA to avoid diversion and penalties. The accounting officer should get the missing receipt and give it to the Auditor-General for verification.

Administrative advances unaccounted for 

The committee recommended this query to be dropped. 

Weaknesses in drugs procurement and delivery delays by National Medical Stores (NMS)

The committee observed that this was a weakness of NMS. Drugs are now packaged per health unit and they are delivered directly to the health centres.

Confirmation of receipt of drugs 

The committee recommended for this query to be dropped.

Madam Speaker, I beg that this report be adopted by the House. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

(Full report to appear in the bound volume of September 2013)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the Committee on Local Government Accounts for the very comprehensive report for the financial year ended 30 June 2009. The Clerk is directed to reflect the full text of the report in the Hansard.

Before we get your comments, I want you to join me in welcoming students and teachers of Kololo High School. I think they are up there. They are represented by hon. Nsereko and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome.

Honourable members of the committee, do not tempt me by standing up.

5.17
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to contribute to this motion. 

Two issues of a general nature have been raised.One isthe failure to avail documents to auditors by the accounting officers. Under normal circumstances, the Treasury Accounting Instructions and the Public Finance and Accountability Act and the regulations made thereunder actually make it an offence not to provide documents to auditors when they come to audit.I think that as committees of Parliament, we need to reject documents, which accounting officers bring to Parliament after having failed to give them to the auditors. 

When the Member was presenting this report, it was clear that the auditors were not given the documents and they were given to us instead and we dropped the queries.Under normal circumstances, I do not think we have the competence to look at documents, which were not given to auditors, and say that now we have accepted these documents –(Interruption)

MR PETER LOKII: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that it is not the members of the committee who scrutinise these documents. It is the Auditor-General’s officers who sit on the committeeand who always ask the accounting officers to produce documents that have not been produced before to be produced at the next level. That is the level at which the committee is involved.Therefore, at that point the committee asks for their recommendation on what should be done and when they say, “drop the query”, the committee proceeds.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I happen to have attended the Anti-Corruption Agency meeting involving the IGG, DPP and the Auditor-General. In the auditing process, once an auditor appears in a ministry, you cannot send them back to verify a document. It is very insecure for the auditor. 

The Auditor-General has requested Parliament, actually even Government, that we should prepare a circular to all accounting officers to inform them that when auditors go to those ministries, they should be availed with documents. Now even the accounting officers prefer coming to Parliament to say they have brought the documents because the process looks very simple. They fail to give such documents to the auditors but bring them to Parliament and a recommendation is made to drop the query. This poses a very big challenge.

Two, when it comes to accountability, under Article 164 of the Constitution it is the responsibility of the accounting officer in charge of a department to show that advances were recovered from his officers. The law provides that within 30 days, staff must account to him. In case they donot, the law further provides that he can proceed to recover the money from their salaries. But here we are saying an accounting officer is supposed to recover advances from staff – he does not recover –(Member timed out.)

5.21
MR ISAIAS SASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on two issues. 

One, I am a bit disturbed that as Parliament, we always come up with very good reports and recommendations to be implemented, but the status of implementation is lacking. I wish we had a clear system that for the recommendations we pass here, at an appropriate time there would be a reporting mechanism which gives the recommendations that where passed in a particular committee report on a particular day, the status of the implementation of the recommendations and what is pending. That could bring us on board because year in, year out, we almost make the same recommendations and they keep hanging somewhere. We need to be guided well in order to perfect our system.

Madam Speaker, my second comment is about the districts. I am privileged to be part of the Committee on Equal Opportunities and we didsimilar work. In each district we went to, we realised that there were very many vacant posts and even the accounting officers were in acting positions. The heads of department were also acting.In that respect, to enforce accountability in those districts and to ensure proper evaluation and monitoringposes a very big challenge.

The district councillorsalso keep crying for their allowances. The little Shs 100,000 they are entitled to does not come on time and sometimes they donot even get it. I think we need to help them because those are the grassroots areas where good monitoring can be done. They can even scrutinize; asMembers of Parliament, we need to attend some of those budgeting conferences in our districts – (Member is timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the question of implementation, I think we have been relaxed in not enforcing the production of the Treasury Memorandum. The Government is supposed to respond by Treasury Memorandum to our recommendations.So, now that we have finished the budget process, the Clerk needs to elicit the recommendations and demand for a Treasury Memorandum from Government for all those ministries.

5.23
MS ATIM JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for presenting the report. However, I have some issues to comment on. 

First, according to the report, most of the accounting officers were found to be in acting capacities. This is worrying and yet it is the common situation in most of these districts. You will find the CAO in an acting capacity, the deputy CAO is acting and also the chief finance officer and the accountant are acting. This situation sometimes contributes to the CAO, for example, failing to supervise junior officers. It also makes the officers in acting positions lose confidence because they donot know whether they will be confirmed or not. When it comes to accountability, you realise that some of these messes are done at a time when they are not in office. So, they fail to respond to them because it was done while they were out of office. 

These officers should be confirmed in their positions, especially the CAOs, so that they can have the confidence to supervise the junior staff.

There is the case of accounting officers who are advancing money to themselves, to the tune of Shs 3.9billion. This is a lot of money. How dare one who knows the accounting procedures and ethics advance themselves money to that tune without any voucher! You donot do write a voucher as if you are taking money from your pocket! This is public money. I want to suggest that if there are any recommendations for them to make good the loss of such money, they should be closely followed. We shouldnot just say it and it is not followed. What do those internal auditors in the districts do and yet – (Member timed out.)

5.26
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (INDEPENDENT, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the report although I would like to get clarification on some issues. 

On the unspent balances, I would like to get clarification from the committee about the underlying factors to this. Beyond the capacity to absorb, there are other issues that we need to look at. There are late releases, for example, and also the amount of money that is usually sent to the districts may affectits usage. We knowthat the procurement is too long and when money is released late, districts will fail to absorb it and it will be returned. I think we need to address what causes that.

On the issue of staff working in acting capacity, I would like to suggest that we recommendthat where civil servants have been found to be capable, with all the experience they gained in the districts, such civil servants should be confirmed. The Budget Committee came up with this kind of recommendation but I am not sure we have the budget line to operationalize the confirmation of officers who have acted in their positions for long.

On the issue of collection of revenue, I am very concerned because in many of the districts,it is the markets that are viable. Apart from the markets, there is nothing. Many of the reliable sources of local revenue have been centralised. That is why most districts find it so difficult to raise even the 20 percent to support the district councillors.I want to link that to the issue of advances, which was raised by the chair of the committee.She said that many of the councillors have failed to pay back such advances. This is because the local revenue is too meagre yet many of the reliable revenue sources have been centralised.

The issue of land titles cuts across. When you look at the construction of local government administration blocks, even at the sub-county level people who used to give free land for such construction have now changed their minds to –(Member timed out.)

5.29
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, BukooliCounty Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the elaborate report, but these audits that we do are more or less rituals. Lots of money is stolen in the districts and we seem to have decentralised corruption. The argument of creating districts is that we are moving services nearer to the people but my analysis or study in the districts is that actually, what is important to staff is to get money and not to deliver a service. I do not know whether when honourable members visit their districts – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUGABA: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of order. We have new districts and the major point of decentralisation is to take services nearer to the people and those districts have developed and changed completely. People are getting services and roads are well made and supervised.In many of the districts, they are well off and people appreciate these services and Government is moving on well. Is hon. WafulaOguttu in order to allege that we decentralised corruption, that we decentralised to just pay people but not to take services to the people? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wafula, unless you can substantiate that nothing has been done under decentralisation, I think you will have to withdraw.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.There are many audits which have been done - we can bring them here – which show that lots of money is lost in the districts, and almost 20 percent of the money is lost through corruption. The report we have just heard shows that money is lost. I do not know what the honourable member will want me to do but money is lost. We know that in most hospitals, there is no service delivered.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wafula, the way you brought it out was as if it is a government policy to decentralise corruption.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: No; it is not a government policy to decentralise corruption but unfortunately, it is what has happened.

The issue of absenteeism is the biggest problem that we have in districts; people do not work. Whenever I am in the district, I try to go there and I never see heads of department in the districts on Mondays and Fridays except if there is money. Most of our senior staff in Bugiri have homes in Kampala and their kids go to school in the city, so they do not work. I think these audits that we do should also lookat this - the money we have lost through absenteeism. A lot of money is lost in the districts because of that.

We also have heads of department who are not transferable. You go to a district and you find a CFO who has served in the district forever and he cannot go anywhere; he is holding that one job until he retires at 60. I think it is inadvisable and it is not a good way of working. Maybe what we should be doing is to make these jobs contractual so that if you serve for two terms –(Member timed out.)

5.33
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today, we have received a report about 36 districts and this report is for 2008/2009. We still have 76 districts to go through, and of course Kampala by 2008 was still a district. It is very clear that from Abim to Zombo, the story seems to be the same but my worry is that by the time we receive these reports here most of the issues have been overtaken by events.

This report was written last year. According to Article 163(4) of the Constitution, reports are supposed to be submitted to this Parliament annually and according to Article 163(5), Parliament is supposed to deal with these reports within six months and take action. The concern I am trying to raise is that by the time we receive these reports or we go out to investigate, things have greatly changed; people have been transferred, some have died and even some have joined Parliament and sit on the same committees which are supposed to go to the districts and investigate. My question is: how will we be able to rectify these issues when we act so late? You know that justice delayed is justice denied.

At one time, I accompanied this committee to Masaka and an old man came to testify as a secretary for youth, because the report we were handling was about the time when he was a secretary for youth.Now he had become an old man and it looked absurd questioning him about things which happened when he was still a young man. Is it possible for this Parliament to write off some of these reports and we deal with reports that have come up within the time of this Ninth Parliament, so that we can be able to apprehend the thieves? When you go to collect this money, you will find that people have left the country, they are living in the UK and USA and you cannot find them there. What is the essence of making these reports if we cannot handle them within a certain time? 

When you look at page 8, bullet 162, you will find that prosecution has always failed these cases. When these officials are apprehended at the districts, they connive with the prosecutors, the Police, and they fail these cases. I wonder what we can do to cause people who investigate cases on behalf of Government to be accountable for losses we make –(Member timed out.)

5.37
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on a few things which we listened to in the report. 

You said that in most of the districts where you went, most of the hospitals or health centres did not have land titles.Most of the administrative units of Government do not have titles. So, I think that you should have recommended that Government fast-tracks that because encroachers are very serious these days. 

I listened very well and you said that in a certain district, people received advances to a tune of Shs 250,000,000. I think we had district auditors that time; how can you continue giving money to a sector which is not showing performance but people are just claiming that money? I think you would have come up with a recommendation that people should not draw money, and in fact such districts should be stopped from receiving money unless the money given as administrative costs is remitted.

It is good that these days we have EFT, but you are giving us a report of 2008/2009 and maybe by that time it was not applicable. I also wonder because nobody was made to leave their jobs for some time and every query was dropped. I do not know about the districts that you did not go to for fieldwork, but I feel that other serious measures would have been taken especially for people who misappropriated over Shs 250 million. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition has a procedural issue to raise and then hon. Musasizi will come in. 

5.39
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, my colleague, hon. Betty Nambooze, said that the reports should be written off. We have an opinion of the Attorney-General here, which says that Parliament must examine all reports of the Auditor-General, however old they are. The issues that we are raising here were brought up in Parliament, I think it was the Seventh Parliament, and they were repeated in the Eighth Parliament. So, all reports of the Auditor-General must be disposed of by Parliament.

The second issue, which we should not lose focus of, is the issue of advances. I would want to help Members understand that if there is a committee that acknowledges or accepts receipts on advances, then it is a mistake. Why? The financial year ends on 30th June and the Auditor-General comes in after three months, goes through the processes and finishes auditing before 31st March of the following year. That means there are nine months, and then there are also management letters and others documents. 

If an officer has not produced a document within nine months and then he comes before the committee and produces it, then be sure that –(Interjections)- You will give me the information later. I am talking from past experience and from a professional view in order to help us understand - that is a forged document. As a committee, you are not supposed to entertain any issue of advances. 

The moment again you direct the Auditor-General to go and audit, the staff will go there and collude with the accounting officers and they will say, “drop the query because they have verified”, because they have seen Parliament. So, that is not considered right. It is a criminal act and even Parliament should not deal with it.

Finally, on another procedural issue, saying that we should get –

THE SPEAKER: Which law prevents them from presenting the documents later? We want to be clear so that our committees do not make mistakes. Which law says that they are not supposed to produce anything after the Auditor-General has audited? I want to know the law.

MR MWIRU: I thank you. Actually, Madam Speaker, according to the Public Finance and Accountability Act, it is an offence for you not to avail documents to auditors. Also, the Treasury Accounting Instructions, section 420, makes it mandatory for an accounting officer to keep documents in secure rooms and the documents can only leave those rooms with the approval of the accounting officer. 

The officials do not give documents to the auditors and yet they do not produce a Police report showing that the secure room was broken into and the documents were taken. For you to bring those documents later, this must definitely be referred to the Police. Immediately there are no documents –

THE SPEAKER: What I want is to see how we can protect our committee because hon. Nandala-Mafabi said that if they were not given to the auditors, they should not produce them at all, even before the committee. That is the area that I want clarification on.

MR KABAJO: I thank you, Rt. Hon. Speaker, and I thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. I want to give some information. 

I worked with a local government, KCC in this case. I submitted accountability but because of the poor record keeping in many of our organisations, they misplaced the accountability and about two years after I had left the organisation, they wrote to me asking for the accountability. I had to go there and request the people who were working there at that time to help me look for the voucher, which had been misplaced. I was just lucky that somehow the missing document was found and I photocopied it and accounted.  

We cannot, therefore, assume that in all cases the accountability has not been provided. There are cases where the accountability has been provided but because of poor record keeping in this country, it goes missing. The auditors may recall that you did not account when you had actually accounted. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I want to state this from a professional point of view. Every organisation, depending on the law, is supposed to produce final accounts. These final accounts are prepared by the management of that organisation and they are audited first by the internal auditor of that organisation. It is on the basis of those primary records that the organisation produces results. After they produce results and the external auditor comes in, it is the same document they have used to prepare the accounts that they give the external auditor to look at. That is the procedure.

What happens now is that the Government is supposed to produce its accounts within nine months, by 31st of March. So, the final accounts of the ministry or local government are supposed to be ready by 30th of September of the year preceding the end of the financial year. 

Now, when you have been given an advance, like my brother was talking about, and then you account, the accounting officer is supposed to give you a clearance document, which is clear. This document states that you have been cleared because you have accounted. Even for you who has retired, you made a mistake if you never got clearance. Every advance that you get is supposed to be accounted for within 60 days and if you have not accounted within 16 days, the law says that the money should be debited on your account. 

Those who were saying that the records were missing for two years, that was a mistake. I think you were lucky otherwise you would have gone to prison – definitely, after two years.

Why are we saying this? There is what we call a management letter, which specifies what you have done and the documents that are missing and they can be produced. You may produce some and the list on the management letter goes on reducing. The balance on the management letter – what you have not certified - are the queries which we see in the Auditor-General’s report. 

Now, there is an exit meeting, which is the final meeting, in which you sign that you have failed to certify the remaining documents. The moment you sign that document, it shows that you were defeated in satisfying the auditors as far as the audit is concerned. Now you are acknowledging responsibility that whatever decision is made about those queries, you are bound by that decision, even though you are taken to prison. 

Finally, on advances-

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am about to finish. This reason has come up – I was in my office and I heard what was said, and then I saw that the committee raised it and they said that they were certified. That was wrong. The people who had taken that money should by now have replaced it or they should be in prison, but not just come and say that they have done it. 

There is a tendency in this country that when people are about to retire, maybe at 55 or 56 years old, they gets advances, for example of Shs 200 million, to do work. The law says that you can only take a third of your salary per month. Assuming his salary is Shs 900,000 and he has taken Shs 200 million, one third of Shs 200 million means that every year you will only deduct Shs 3.6 million. So, it will take 60 years to refund Shs 200 million and yet the man is already 56 years old and he is left with four years to retire. This is an indirect way of stealing. If you say that you are going to deduct, you will deduct and even deduct on the grave and you will never finish. (Laughter) So, I want to plead with our committees that when we are doing this work, those are the issues to consider. 

I have seen the report and I think 36 districts are too many; we cannot really consider them well. I would plead again that maybe we lump them in segments of five. That friend of mine will escape because it is omnibus, and we are tired. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think when we clear the backlog, we can look at other ways. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I apologise; I just have a small issue to comment on. I got a note from my brother and he was asking about something.

THE SPEAKER: Ok.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am going to reply –(Mr Ogwang rose_) – Okay, give it to me and then I will answer officially.

MR OGWANG: First of all, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition. The information I would like to give him is that I am a member of the committee. There was an issue raised by hon. Mwiru, and he quoted some laws. We all know these laws. However, our challenge as members of the committee has been with the leadership. Even when you quote the law, sometimes the chair overrides that Member. These are things that we know as members of this committee. We want to request you, honourable Leader of the Opposition, to put right your troops. 

You mentioned a civil servant who is almost retiring; I want to give you an example of Bukedea District. In Bukedea, the District Education Officer, who is almost retired, had accumulated advances of Shs 260 million –(Interjections)– Bukedea. It is on record. Madam Speaker, if Members could tell you how some of us got problems with the chair of the committee in Bukedea, it was so embarrassing. How do you tell a member in the open, “Please, can you come and chair this meeting.” and you are there and Members are there. So, Leader of the Opposition, please help us and organise your troops. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, during the recess, we are organising a refresher course for the chairpersons and the vice-chairpersons. I think we shall address these issues. (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali rose_) Oh, the General wants to say something.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, they have pinned my neck. Yes, I want to agree - (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali rose_) Mr Prime Minister, I will give way. (Interruption) - Just one minute. (Laughter) Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are my big brother. 

Madam Speaker, the problem is that when we come to Parliament, we are all not competent in all these fields. That is where we come from. Let me give that simple background first. It is up to us to try and do refresher courses, internally and externally, so that we can see how best to handle this. If we do not do that, this cannot work out. 

Madam Speaker, you remember when I was the PAC chairperson, in East Africa all the public accounts committees were closed but ours here was open. I was authorised by Parliament to assist East Africa and at that time we pleaded with those Speakers of Parliament. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, because when they had a meeting in Rwanda - you were the Deputy Speaker by that time - you commended me and one Speaker, who was still hesitant, accepted that public accounts committees should conduct meetings in public. So, this is a learning process. The benefits have now gone far. 

I will deal with the issue you are talking about internally. I thank you. (Applause) 

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity. I have been following these reports, including the one that has been presented today, with keen interest. I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition; truth is truth, it does not matter who said it. (Laughter) If you heard what he said, he has really stated the fact. So, I want to acknowledge that. 

I would also like to re-echo what some honourable members said; for a committee to drop queries, they should have a legal basis to do that. Otherwise, in our circumstances here, they will say perhaps they have been compromised in the process. These allegations are hanging. They are not many; in the evening, they can be taken to a hotel and – (Laughter)– We do not want to deal with such allegations, so they must have a basis. They must have a basis –(Interjections)– I am also stating facts, actually. I am not -

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. I think this is the first time we are debating a motion from the Local Government Accounts Committee. Let us hear the views of Members so that we can improve our work. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, - (Interjections) - That is what I have just said; it does not matter who said the truth –(Interruption)

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, if only Members would listen to this report carefully; when we are interfacing with accounting officers, we are accompanied by competent auditors. It is not the members of this committee who look at the documents and verify them but the auditors. Is it in order for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to come here and say that people of my calibre, who are incorruptible, are taken to hotels? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is not fair to make unsubstantiated allegations. Unless you can prove that they were taken to a hotel, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think you should leave that subject. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, to be honest, they should listen to me also. I did not mention anybody’s name. I said if they have nothing on which to base their decision in terms of law, then people may suspect. (Laughter) I just said that. I never said it and God is my witness. If all of you cannot be my witnesses, I think God has heard what I have said. So, I am sorry if I was misunderstood. (Interjections) Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, allow the General to speak.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I want to ask for an apology from the committee members who misunderstood me. I never said you are corrupt. 

Secondly, based on her explanation, if they are asked to accept these documents by these auditors, it is wrong because those queries were raised due to lack of documents. It is even wrong not to submit these documents on time. To accept them now is just to prop up illegalities because then, tomorrow these people may think it is normal not to submit documents on time. They are flouting and twisting the law, which is wrong. These auditors have even misled our committee members.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to end by saying that next time, perhaps our committee members should come and simply say how many of the CAOs are in acting positions. I think these CAOs are not difficult to count. You can say, “In such a place, there is an acting CAO. In so many districts, they are acting.” This is incomplete information now. How many are in acting positions? We do not know – (Interjections)– No, that is the truth. I said the truth. The truth has no sides but if you want to twist people – So next time, madam, if you are still a member of the committee, let us know how many CAOs are in acting positions and what we should do.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information so that we move clearly. When presenting this report, I said the committee made general observations, which cut across, but after that we have been handling specific districts. So, it is not that we are lumping up everything; we have been specific on certain situations and we want Government to come out and address those issues. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Finally, Madam Speaker, these two reports have shown clearly that if you do not know how to swim, then do not make a mistake of going to the swimming pool just because you have seen others swimming; you may find it a very difficult experience because then, you will be galloping water. When in the swimming pool, our colleagues are watching us and they think we do not know how to swim; let them now come and show us. People will drown because the two committees have shown clearly that it is difficult to manage things. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.01
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I would like to make some observations.

Madam Speaker, when an audit report is presented, normally there is an important matter called the “auditor’s opinion”. In all the reports on the 36 districts that were presented together with the general report, I never heard any comment about the opinion that was given by the auditors. 

There are three audit opinions: the unqualified opinion, the qualified opinion and the disclaimer. As a professional accountant, when the report was being presented, I noted matters of these three kinds of opinions. Why do I say this? We have observed that most queries were dropped. It is unfortunate that when you get deeper into the report, you will realise that most of the affected queries that were dropped were the basis of qualification. A case in point is the excess expenditures beyond budget. This is a matter that affects many districts and lower local governments. In most cases, their accounts are qualified because they spend beyond budget. 

You find that a committee has studied and investigated the report and has dropped the query where an excess expenditure has been observed. Others include unaccounted-for balances and unreturned remittances to the Consolidated Fund. So, Madam Speaker, before we adopt the idea of dropping these queries, we need to first understand –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to tell Members that none of us has the Auditor-General’s report here. Whoever has it, can you put up your hand? We do not have the Auditor-General’s report and we are debating from an uninformed point of view. That is why I want to agree with my brother, hon. Musasizi, that if we do not have the original query, then we have no capacity to drop it. 

If you do it, it will be like the case where Government wanted to write off Shs 108 billion yet and it should not have been written off. So, what hon. Musasizi has brought up is very important. At an appropriate time, I will propose that we stay this report until when we look at the original report.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, that was my conclusion and since hon. Nandala-Mafabi has made the conclusion for me, I rest my case. 

MR ODOO TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural point I would like to raise here is from the Constitution, Article 163 (4), which says, “The Auditor-General shall submit to Parliament annually a report of the accounts audited by him or her under clause (3) of this article for the financial year immediately preceding”. It goes on to say in Clause (5) that, “Parliament shall, within six months after the submission of the report referred to in clause (4) of this article, debate and consider the report and take appropriate action.” 

I would like to be advised on this report of 2008/2009, which was submitted about four years ago and which was supposed to be debated, according to this Constitution, within six months from that time. Is it procedurally right for us to debate and consider this report now? I want you to advise the committee or even the other accountability committees on what should be done in such circumstances because we are getting a problem. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Business Committee will have to discuss that issue and take a position. For now, since we have spent time and energy on this report, let Members debate. 

6.07
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the report. 

The committee recommended a review of the local government policy and Act, and I want to agree with the committee on that. Basing on the funding during the formulation of this Act and policy, graduated tax was still being collected but as of now, having phased out G-Tax collection, funding is a challenge. Graduated tax compensation is not forthcoming, which is paralysing the operations of local governments.

I have a sub-county where parish councillors earn Shs 20,000 as sitting allowance every two months. These people have children and have demands from the voters. At wedding meetings, they forward budgets to them and yet they get only Shs 20,000. In Iganga District Local Government, councillors earn Shs 100,000 and yet Shs 35,000 is deducted from them as Pay As You Earn (PAYE) and the take home is Shs 65,000 earned in two months. This is a real challenge, which has to be addressed by reviewing this policy on local governments. 

Honourable members, the other issue I would like to comment about are the returned resources to the Consolidated Fund. This system is being abused. It is good the Leader of Government Business; this system is being abused. Whereas we are talking of the Treasury Memorandum, it does not capture this very well. We would like to know how much money is received from Kamuli or from Lira and banked. Here, they come with receipts but we have never got a report detailing how much money has been brought back and yet we appropriate here –(Member timed out.)

6.09
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

Although the number of districts captured in the report is 36, the issues that are raised are representative of what is taking place in the rest of the country. (Applause) There is the issue of embezzlement, for example; a lot of money is being embezzled in the districts. Sometimes, when concerned Ugandans raise issues about those officers who embezzled the money and even report to the line ministries, those ministries either delay to respond or they do not get interested at all. These people continue dipping their fingers deeper into public funds. So, I call upon the line ministries to always get interested when whistle-blowers go to their officers on issues of embezzlement.

The issue of vacant posts is very serious. In Amudat District, for example, you find that one officer handles several offices – one can be a CDO and at the same time a procurement officer. You can imagine that; what kind of work do we expect from this officer. Such an officer becomes overworked and sometimes tends to prefer the office that has more money and the other one with little funding is left unattended to.

On the issue of the loss of motorcycles and bicycles, it is indeed sad because this is government property entrusted to the concerned officers. For them to just look at these properties getting lost without even reporting – I would like to concur with the committee when they say that this money should be recovered from these officers in order to –(Member timed out.)

6.12
MS NAKATO KYABANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support the committee’s recommendation concerning the districts acquiring land titles for their land. In most of our districts, specifically Gomba, most of the land has been grabbed by individuals and even the sub county leaders. When the chairperson of a sub county takes office, he first looks for the remaining district land and grabs it or sells it off. 

Today in Gomba, it is not easy to find any land where government can put up projects because most of the land has been grabbed. I am in court with some vendors from my district, trying to rescue market land that was grabbed by some two individuals who had acquired a tender to develop the market for the benefit of the people but instead put up their own houses and apartments. Surprisingly, some of the leaders support them. So, Madam Speaker, I would recommend that the districts first recover all the grabbed land and also get titles for that land.

Another issue is that some of the district buildings, like health centres quarters, have been taken over by the relatives of some deceased doctors or nurses and no one cares to evict them. So, I really support the committee’s recommendation but I want to add that let the districts recover all the grabbed land before getting titles for it. Thank you.

6.14
MS FLAVIA RWABUHORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

I would like to support the committee’s recommendation on UPE releases being made regular to allow for planning and appropriate accountability. Most public primary schools do not have bursars, so when the money for UPE comes to accounts, the head teacher gets the signature of the chairperson of the school management committee, and they are inadequate in most cases. So, he is the one who withdraws the money, expends this money and is expected to account even when they do not have any orientation in accounts. 

In the event that this money comes late, the school finance committee is only called when money has come and the head teacher just wants them to sanction money, which he says is already spent and he just wants to pay for debts. This then leaves gaps for manipulation, corruption, embezzlement and diversion. Therefore, when it comes to accountability, at most we have found these head teachers fidgeting; some of them cannot even remember how they spent the money and when and where they spent it. So, it becomes a problem in the education sector for head teachers to account for this money.

It is at this point that that I would like to recommend that the Ministry of Finance and the Auditor-General ensure that this money, which is public money, be handled according to the Public Finance and Accounting Regulations. That it does not start and end in only –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to buttress what hon. Kabahenda has said. On Sunday, I was in Igara and I went to a school called Nyabubale. The report we got was that the bulk of the teachers were not on the Government payroll and yet it is a Government school. Thirty of them were not on the payroll while 18 were. Worse still, there was no librarian, no matron, no bursar and many others; they gave us a list. So, I think we need to do something about the personnel that we put in the schools to ensure that the schools really ran well.

6.17
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the elaborate report. I know the work is tedious and they have done their best.

Madam Speaker, the issues of audit queries could be minimized if the structures in the district worked very well. Where the district Public Accounts Committees are very active, you find few audit queries but where they are inactive, the audit queries are many. The district Public Accounts Committees look into the affairs of the district accounts but the council does not give them money so they do not sit quite often. As a result, they cannot do their work and they cannot correct the situation before our Public Accounts Committee comes in.   

Secondly, I am sure all these problems are caused by the CAOs. If the CAOs were active and crosschecked the money that they have given out to the heads of department and got the vouchers and receipts in time, the receipts would be there when the time for auditing comes. However, if the CAO relaxes, then the other staff will also relax and that is why the advances increase. 

We have seen some CAOs who really misbehave and they are transferred from one place to another. If they have been appointed as CAOs by the Central Government here, is there no way of dismissing them? What is the procedure for cancelling the appointments of CAOs? This is a big problem. Even MPs tried; I remember I was on the accounts committee and we would go and arrest a CAO and put him in the police cells for a while and then release him and that would be the end. So, what do we do with these stubborn CAOs who are eating our money and they do not do their work very well?

Madam Speaker, I would also like to comment on the issue of backdating; with this issue of auditing, actually we are just doing a post-mortem which cannot help us much. I remember when I was in the accounts committee we started from 1996 and brought them up to 2008. I, therefore, urge the committee to hurry up so that we get close and we avoid having a burden of work from the auditors. By now we should be auditing accounts of 2012 so that we can catch up with those who have misused our funds. I urge you to work harder so that we catch up and do a better job. Thank you very much. 

6.20
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative, Workers): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have about three issues to talk about. 

One is about the land titles for government land. This is a cry from almost all local councils and hospitals. I was watching the news on my sickbed and I saw a report about a health centre IV in Iganga District; I have forgotten the name. They were crying out that Government does not help them clean up the hospital; cows and goats freely enter the wards from the surrounding communities and they urinate there. They do not even have enough beddings and other facilities for the sick, so the patients sleep on the floor. So, this is a big problem. We need to demarcate Government land. Wherever we go, we find a complaint that they do not have land titles for government properties. 

The other issue is on payment of pension. This too is a general outcry. I do not know what is wrong with the Ministry of Public Service. In this era of ICT, things that can be accomplished by tapping two fingers, but up to now, getting pension is a very big deal. People are misusing our people’s money and many of them die without getting their pension. Why should this continue to happen? We have always been talking about this matter on the Floor of the House. It is high time we got a proper report from the Minister of Public Service in regard to payment of pension. So many people are dying without getting their money.

Thirdly, I would like to comment on the issue of hard-to-reach allowances. As I carry out my activities as a workers’ representative, I have found out that hard-to-reach allowances are being paid on a discriminatory basis. In the –(Member timed out.)

6.22
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also thank the committee for the report. 

The issue of releasing insufficient funds to the districts is a big challenge. Even when we have just passed the budget, in the last quarter of the year districts normally do not get money yet they have already signed contracts by then. Very many districts are indebted. Some are losing vehicles and other such assets. Contractors are in court and sometimes, even contractors have lost property due to the loans they take. In future, Government should give guarantees. If the money will not reach the districts, they should inform them early so that they avoid making commitments. Otherwise, it has become a big challenge. 

Secondly, on the issue of withholding tax not being remitted, it is true that some districts deduct the money but do not pay it to URA. However, withholding tax is tax credit - it is an advance, which at the end reduces on the liability. So, if it is not paid, then the person or the contractor losses that money. So, in future, districts should come up with better ways of handling this issue. Uganda Revenue Authority could design a plan on handling withholding taxes. They can pay me and then I pay direct to URA as the case is with VAT and other taxes. 

The report mentions missing documents like vouchers and so on. We have internal audit departments which –(Member timed out.)

6.25
MR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three observations to make. 

One, the report of the Auditor-General and that of the committee are very good reports; they mention important issues. However, there is the issue of follow up. As you earlier guided, Madam Speaker, it is important that Parliament follows up these issues. It is important for the Executive and particularly, the responsible ministers to follow these issues up to ensure that these recommendations are implemented. 

Secondly, the office of the Auditor-General and PAC are very important; if they are not meticulous and clean in their performance, then all these things we are talking about cannot be effected. I heard in the report that members of the Public Accounts Committee chose to pay themselves and yet they did not sit. This is corruption - (Interjections) - Members of the district Public Accounts Committee. They chose to pay themselves - it is in the report - and it can happen at any level, even at your level; if our PAC is not free, then we cannot be effective. 

Lastly, I would have wanted to hear – I am aware of this - that failure to account for advances at any level, particularly the district level, affects the capacity of districts to absorb funds and to get releases. The committee should have told us how these 36 districts have been –(Member timed out.)

6.27
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. 

Madam Speaker, when considering these reports, first we look at effective and efficient performance of the public officers who are managing these public institutions. We also consider service delivery - how efficiently services are being delivered and the effectiveness of these services at that level. 

Time and again, the Government side, and particularly the Executive, have been talking about the implementation of performance contracts at all levels. Surprisingly, the nature of those so-called performance contracts we implement compared with other performance contracts within our region leaves a lot to be desired. I do not think what we are doing in that regard is right.

So, I call upon the Executive to come up and understudy other countries. In Kenya, for example, they have a whole department. Before their new Constitution came into force, the department was under the Prime Minister’s Office and currently, it is under the President’s office. The department deals with issues of performance and service delivery - monitoring and supervising what these people do at all levels to ensure better and effective service delivery. 

We may come up with many reports and consider them in Parliament, but if we do not strengthen our capacity to monitor the delivery of services at all levels, we shall continue getting such reports from local governments –(Member timed out.)

6.29
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will continue from where hon. Ssimbwa stopped. Apart from increasing the capacity to monitor performance, we have a problem of understaffing in many local governments, which has been talked about. We have districts, which have 40 per cent staffing levels in some of the departments. 

I call upon the Executive to increase the staff capacity or staffing levels in the local governments to at least 70 per cent. A lot of money is being sent to the local governments and in order for them to properly utilise this money in proper service delivery, they need to have the right staff in the right numbers with the right qualifications.

The other issue, which I want to comment about, is that of the local leaders, especially the councillors. Some weeks ago, councillors from my district, from Mwanga Sub County, were here. Madam Speaker, you gave them permission to come and visit this House and they brought along a petition to Parliament to request for more allowances.

I propose that if the districts do not have enough local revenue to pay the councillors enough money or something reasonable, then the Government should come up with a special grant to the districts for the purpose of increasing the councillors’ allowances. Situations like the one hon. Muwuma talked about of councillors sitting and being paid Shs 20,000 as sitting allowance is one which - (Member timed out.)

6.30
DR SAMUEL LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the report, and I know that there are many issues. I will comment on the scope of analysis of the activities. We note that by the time queries come to Parliament, they are the most serious ones; most of them are dropped along the wayside. Therefore, I would think that there is need to expand the scope of analysis.

I can give you an example of an issue, which I am very familiar with, concerning overpayment of salaries; I think it was in Kiruhura. The committee’s recommendation was about recovery the money, but we know that this matter is more than just recovering the money. Workers are paid through EFT and by the time there is overpayment, sometimes it is not the fault of the accounting officers but it is because of some conspiracy in the Ministry of Public Service. 

This matter started coming up when we were handling the issue of ghosts. At one point it was as if somewhere, some people were trying to create an unnecessary situation to divert the investigation. So, I would suggest that when the committee is handling such matters, they should be able to look at the various angles of reference. On that matter of deductions, for example, they should bring in the officers responsible for the payroll at Ministry of Public Service to find out why they gave workers more money when we are experiencing shortfalls. You cannot start talking about overpayment in certain districts when we are having shortfalls. So, I think the committee, when handling matters of – (Member timed out.)

6.33
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee. As this is their first report, they have really tried their best. This is their first report and they have really tried to make it very comprehensive. I appreciate your work. I know the next one will be better than this.

I would like to comment on the issue of misuse of government property at the district level, especially the cars that are given to staff. You will realise that the technical staff use these cars to transport charcoal and also use them at their farms and yet these vehicles are supposed to be used for district programmes. I do not know how we can address this issue. To me, it is a very serious issue that the committee should investigate.

Another concern that I think the committee must really take up is the issue of contractors. All these contractors at district level connive with the district contract committees and that is why we have shoddy work at all levels. These contractors give big amounts of money to the CAO, the contracts committee and in fact, the line technical staff at the district level. If they do not give them that money, they do not get the contracts. 

In the end, part of the money meant for a contract is eaten by all these people. Moreover, these contractors also want to get something because they are businessmen and they want a bit of profit. In the end, they do very shoddy work. You can see a contractor working on a road and in less than three months the road is impassable. This is another issue that the committee must get interested in. (Member timed out.)

6.36
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good and well detailed report. Being the first report, it was very good.

My concern is on the pensioners, and I want to thank the committee for mentioning them. These are people who served this country and worked tirelessly and indeed, they persevered up to the age of retirement. Some of us could not go up to that age. There are two categories of pensioners; there are those that are paid by Central Government and those that are paid by the local government revenue collection. 

I would like to talk mainly about those that are attached to local governments. It is very hard and it has become a nightmare for these people to get their pension. These are retired chiefs, sub county chiefs, parish chiefs and county chiefs. The arrears have accumulated and right now, the local governments cannot meet this load as the money is too much.

There was a suggestion that all pensioners be transferred to central Government. I support that idea because right now, the local governments cannot pay the pension arrears for these people yet they are dying, they are very weak and old, and they need to get good service.

Secondly, I want to talk about diverting UPE funds. I thank hon. Kabahenda who really explained it very well. I have first-hand experience as I have headed a school before. Sometimes, these head teachers are forced to divert funds because of the amounts of money they get. Remember, these funds are determined by the involvement of the learners. If the children are very few at your school, you will get little money. Some UPE schools get Shs 600,000 for the entire term; so, the head teacher is forced to divert the money to priority areas like buying chalk and other things instead of spending it on games and sports and buying balls –(Member timed out.)

6.38
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the report. 

I would like to differ from the Leader of the Opposition; I agree that it is important to look at the Auditor-General’s report but it is very possible that Parliament can re-examine the Auditor-General’s report and drop some queries after public officials present accountability. Sometimes, auditors make omissions and Parliament should act as some kind of appeals system. I would like to put it to you, honourable members, that if this was not the case, there would be no need for the Auditor-General’s report to come to Parliament. Government would act on the Auditor-General’s report and prosecute the culprits. 

It is possible that sometimes, public officers have been transferred and so the documents become difficult to get. Sometimes, the accounts staff misplace documents and yet it is those accounting officers or those to whom monies were advanced to that will be held responsible. So, it is possible for Parliament to drop queries.

I would like to encourage the committee to continue looking at the queries for 2009 and 2010 because it is very important for us to close the gap. The individuals are still in the system and monies can still be recovered. If we do not do this, we will have created a very dangerous precedent for people to think that after sometime, they can get away with it. So, we could get people conniving with some of us not to look at these reports or delay the reports so that after some time, the culprits get away with the cases.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that as a nation, we need –(Member timed out.)

6.40
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by clarifying on the issues raised by my colleagues on why the committee dropped some queries. 

Some queries arise because of missing documents to support the accountability. Automatically, when the documents are brought before the committee, the committee has the right to drop the query. There are situations where officials in a district are advanced some money and that money was refunded. Those are some of the situations where the committee had a right to drop the queries.

Another issue I would like to comment on is the sitting of councillors. The regulations say that the district councillors are supposed to be paid by the 20 per cent of locally raised revenue. As we moved through the districts, we noticed that some districts do not even have any sources of revenue. Most of such districts survive on revenue from the local markets, where the collection of revenue is done by people who signed tenders with the districts. So, you find that the district does not have any money at all.

As we moved, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please sit down. I told you – I really should punish you. Hon. Olanya, you are a member of the committee. Honourable members, I think I am going to start punishing you; why have you been standing? I told you members of this committee should not stand to contribute. Let us close with hon. Kiiza. Next time, I will do something serious to you.

6.43
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to thank the committee for presenting this report. You realise that the report covers the financial year 2008/2009. However, the issues covered are still vivid and we can still trace them.

Let me just highlight the issue concerning the expiry of drugs in the health centres. Last month, some districts in Uganda, including Kasese, received deliveries from the National Medical Stores but when they opened the boxes, they were empty. I can imagine a situation where drugs are expiring at National Medical Stores, they are delivered to health units, and returned to the stores when actually at some point instead of delivering the drugs they deliver empty boxes.

At the moment, there is a calamity of malaria outbreaks in the countryside because of this kind of negligence. I call it negligence because the people who did this should have known the consequences. I would imagine that the people responsible should take responsibility.

Madam Speaker, many people have talked about the UPE releases. When this programme started, each pupil was allotted Shs 90,000. However, as we talk, each pupil is allotted Shs 150. If you calculated basing on the number of children in our mountainous areas of Kasese, for example, you will realise that a school with a total of 500 pupils will receive only Shs 75,000 per term for those children. When you deduct the transport that the head teacher is supposed to use to come and teach these pupils, you will remain with Shs 40,000. This means that the money that remains to run the activities under UPE is just Shs 35,000 – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Minister for Local Government has any final comments to make.

6.46 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Alex Onzima): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I appreciate the concerns raised by the committee in their report. 

As the hon. Winfred Kiiza said, though this is a report on the 2008/2009 financial year, what transpired then in the local governments is what we are still confronted with. The issues remain the same.

I also take note of the issue that was raised by hon. Nambooze, that we need to do more work on these parliamentary reports so that we are in line with the provisions of the Constitution.

Having said that, as the line ministry, we will find time to accommodate the recommendations of this report in our top management committee, if we think those issues can make local governments perform better. We must all work together for the common good of the country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do adopt the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to 2 O’clock, tomorrow afternoon.

(The House rose at 6.48 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 September 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
