PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPOR TSECOND SESSION - FIRST MEETING TUESDA Y, 13 SEPTEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA5670STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTuesday, 13 September 2022 Her Majesty the Queen cultivated a close relationship with the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and visited almost every Parliament in the Commonwealth during her reign. Queen Elizabeth specifically visited Uganda on 28 to 30 April 1954 and 21 to 24 November 2007. As I watched the tributes on ITV , her Head of Security said she has never seen crowds like the crowds that welcomed her from Entebbe to Kampala when she visited Uganda. This time, she had come to attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting 2007 that was hosted in Kampala. On 22 November 2007, Her Majesty the Queen addressed this Parliament and amongst other things stated that: “I expect that what helped to sustain modern Uganda is the attribute that was so evident in 1954. And again today, in a generous manner, we have been welcomed by the great warmth and friendliness of its people.” As a country, we have profound memories of the Queen as exemplified by the renaming of the Kazinga National Park in Western Uganda as Queen Elizabeth National Park in 1954 to commemorate her visit. As leaders, I urge you to draw vital leadership lessons from the illustrious reign of Her Majesty the Queen. Notably; 1. Exercising purposeful leadership.2.  Be the change that you want to see. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 28TH SITTING - FIRST MEETINGParliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, KampalaPRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleagues. I welcome you to today’s sitting. I would like to commend you for the tremendous work you have been doing. You have passed most of the Bills that the Government has given us and the Private Member’s Bills, which have been brought to us. We are just remaining with around two Bills, which I would call on Members to handle expeditiously so that we have a clean slate. That is very important because our performance has a lot to do with Bills.  So, we have to give it very serious attention.Honourable colleagues, as you are aware, on Thursday, 8 September 2022, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, UK’s longest serving Monarch died aged 96, after reigning for 70 years. Besides being the Head of the Commonwealth, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth had since 1989 been the Patron of the Commonwealth Association of which the Parliament of Uganda is a member.  5671THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 20223. Never underestimate the power of fashion.And you know, a leader, our Speaker here, is leading in the fashion industry. So, that is the power of fashion; most of you, colleagues are very fashionable. In this Parliament, people say you have very young and smart people and I think that is very important. We should be proud of it. Dr Baryomunsi, you have not clapped. I do not know whether you are not young and smart. (Laughter) You saw the British High Commissioner on TV yesterday, when she was appreciating our Speaker; that was very commendable. Then, give generously and keep calm and always carry on. I hope you have heard that. Keep calm and always carry on. While I expect a tribute motion for which the Chief Whip will be updating us, because as the leadership, we would like to have the full session of paying tribute to Her Majesty so that all of you colleagues can be given a chance to pay your tribute to our Patron. I request that we rise for now to observe a minute of silence in her honour.(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, today, our neighbours to the east, the Republic of Kenya have sworn in the fifth President, His Excellency Dr William Samoei Ruto. (Applause) This follows the confirmation of his victory of the general elections on 9 August 2022 by the Supreme Court on Monday, 5th September. I would like to take this honour and opportunity to congratulate His Excellency William Ruto and the people of Kenya for exercising their democratic right through the ballot, and urge the rest of the East African Community to draw lessons for the future of the Community that we so cherish. (Applause) Now, colleagues, there are issues that I rarely comment on. I usually leave issues that pass. However, sometimes, there are issues you address in a light manner, which you can clarify to the public. However, I have seen people I respect; I saw some of them on TV yesterday, spelling doom for this House, announcing a divided House. A House maybe that they speak about out of their fertile imagination, where the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker are about to kill each other.  I saw it and wondered; you mean the devil can have such power?I do not know whether in Uganda, people will get used to the culture of working together. In the minds of some people, they focus on – Hon. Kivumbi not working with the LOP; Dr Baryomunsi not working with Hon. Ecwelu, Hon. Tayebwa - it seems to sell even in your constituencies. That is what they say.So, I read it and I just wanted to comment a little on it. What was very funny was that when they were circulating most of these things on Sunday evening, I had just returned from London and I was seated with the Speaker exchanging messages. I told her; “See what so and so has forwarded; see what this one has forwarded.”On Monday, when the analysts were doing their programme, I was with the Speaker planning for this House, on how I will Chair it. I am a Deputy Speaker and not a Speaker. Therefore, why should I go into the lubimbi of the Speaker? And I was brought up in a very humble manner. I would like to assure you colleagues that the Speaker- I want it to go on record- the Speaker has given me all the necessary support I need as a Deputy Speaker.  (Applause) The Speaker has gone beyond her call for duty to treat me as a brother and I treat her as a sister. (Applause)Whoever feels they want us to have issues should know that we have known each other since 2005 and we shall support each other.  (Laughter)  Hon. Francis Mwijukye was the best man to that relationship. (Laughter)5672STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTherefore, I just want to touch on this a little and to say that all is good. No one should feel that there are any divisions in the House. We are supporting each other and delivering on the mandate of this House. This House has broken the record, in terms of Government business, we are demanding business from Government because whatever you have given us has been processed. That is what you need to know; the House is performing very well. With that, colleagues, I hope that is not a matter upon which you need to comment. Otherwise, you will be entering into our relationship. (Laughter)I have one issue: ministers for finance and agriculture, two weeks ago, you were supposed to bring to the House a statement on financing seedlings for tea and coffee, specifically. The Speaker has briefed me that the Third Deputy Prime Minister said the statement is ready and that you are only waiting for space on the Order Paper. Government Chief Whip, please, coordinate. If it is ready tomorrow, it will be first priority but if they are not ready tomorrow, then I need that statement by Thursday. On the issue of maize seeds, which people are talking about, the Chairperson the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is on record here saying that we never budgeted money for seeds. You can only talk about money, which you budgeted. . However, we can go back and administratively handle those issues with the relevant ministers. (Members rose_)Reaction? But what have I communicated? On the issue of Her Majesty the Queen, I would like to say that the House is going to have a whole day to discuss it and on that, I will not entertain comments. On the rest, I will, and I will allow only four people.2.23MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity and thank you for the Communication from the Chair. I am only going to comment on what is going on in Kenya and there is nothing as good as it being a good example. If you cannot learn from it, then you cannot learn from anything. What is going on in Kenya is not only a big lesson, but also a challenge to Uganda. We watched President Moi peacefully hand over power to President Mwai Kibaki (RIP). After, we watched the late President Mwai Kibaki peacefully handing over power to President Uhuru Kenyatta. On our watch today, we have witnessed President Uhuru Kenyatta peacefully hand over to President Samoei Ruto. (Applause) Of course, in that audience, there were presidents you know, but whose names I will not mention. However, for good measure, here, we have homework to do. To me, the process of handing over is very critical. The Hon. Dr Lulume Bayiga attempted to move an amendment here - a transitional amendment for us to legally streamline how one president can hand over to another, which should be procedural and statutory and not on goodwill.Honourable colleagues, handing over to another president does not mean that one has to go. As you know, even nature can take its course and you have to hand over to another president. You may think it is only through an election. Anyhow, we cannot afford a chaotic situation. Therefore, clearly, we need to fast-track the spirit of the Hon. Dr Lulume’s amendment so that in the event that there is a handover for example, from Hon. Tayebwa to Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, it is elaborate on what happens. Who does what? Not on the basis of goodwill. That is the lesson that I invite people in Uganda to learn.The other –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kivumbi, we do not have enough time. [The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5673THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: The other thing that I would like the people of Uganda to draw a lesson on, from Kenya is that above all else, there is a country. I have seen the behaviour of Rt Hon. Raila Odinga conceding defeat. You have seen the outgoing President of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta support one candidate, but with that candidate gracefully losing. I have seen the military completely staying out of politics. I have seen the security apparatus completely staying out of politics. I have seen army generals peacefully salute a candidate that was not supported by an incumbent President. That is what we must learn. I beg you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I hope this is not going to generate into a debate.  I had also expected Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi to say that he saw the Opposition graciously accept defeat after going to court. – No, I mean, on the side of Uganda because the message he was sending to do with the military – in politics, it takes two to tangle. The obligations on the part of the Opposition are the obligations on the part of the ruling side, and vice versa.However, colleagues, as you know, the frontbench has promised to soon create a Constitutional Review Commission, which I believe will handle most of these issues deeply. They are not issues of Hon. Kivumbi coming to talk about them from here and then, another person comes to respond to him because that way, we end up not having any clear way forward. Chief Whip, do you want to say something?2.28THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your precise Communication from the Chair. On the question of the motion to pay tribute to the late, Her Majesty the Queen of England, we undertake as Government - subject to confirmation - to move a formal motion tomorrow, which will be spearheaded by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, on the Floor of Parliament. So, that is answered in the affirmative. On the question of the recent Kenyan elections, I would like to join you, Rt Hon. Speaker, to salute the people of Kenya for expressing their aspirations through an election. Even when the electoral process was petitioned in court, court decided and all parties agreed to its decision. I believe, in the context of Uganda, we are seemingly not learning. We have had elections, whose results have gone to court. Court took decisions and we are here through a regular free and fair election that is conducted every five years. We are all products of elections in Uganda, whether on the side of NRM, Independent, UPDF or Opposition. We are all products of the electoral process of the Republic of Uganda. Therefore, we salute the people of Kenya on electing a new President. As East African brothers and sisters, we will commit to definitely continue working together in the spirit of widening, deepening and entrenching the East African integration process. I thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, since the Chief Whip has confirmed what I had requested him to do, tomorrow, I want us to be different. I would request that we put on black and white - yes, I am requesting. If you do not want, leave it. I am not going to check what you will have put on. (Laughter) So, if you find it prudent, please, put it on. I am not directing. Yes, Commissioner?2.30MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank, Mr Speaker. Whereas you have guided very well that the Minister for education and that of agriculture will come to this House -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I guided the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Agriculture.MR SILWANY: Yes. Mr Speaker, when you look at the timing, we are getting late. Last 5674STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTweek, I was on the Floor talking about the same issue. The planting season is getting done. The rains are coming to an end. We should have handled this matter yesterday. Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be better if we make the minister come earlier than the date that you said? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You mean for him to come earlier than tomorrow? MR SILWANY: Yes. This is because we have been waiting since last week. Farmers are stuck and they are calling us, Mr Speaker. This is urgent. I am just seeking your guidance.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, they should have even come yesterday. However, since we have not had this – honourable colleague, I think one night will not change a lot. What is important is to ensure that Government takes this seriously. (Dr Baryomunsi rose_) Hon. Baryomunsi, is it on the same?2.32THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is to give further assurance that this matter was discussed in Cabinet and clearance was given to the minister for finance and that of agriculture. I think the ministries are making arrangements to ensure that the farmers are reached. Therefore, we could still wait for tomorrow. However, I know that work is being done to implement that decision – on tea and coffee seedlings. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what we would want to hear. So, kindly, coordinate to ensure that, indeed, we have them on time. Hon. Solomon, they have given you some “Panadol” to relieve the headache. 2.33MS SANTA OKOT (PPP, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on the issue of presiding over the House. There are times when one cannot know which presiding officer is going to be in the House. Therefore, on the matters of national importance, sometimes you take your request to another office, yet, it is another person who is going to preside over the House. For example, today, I took my request for a matter of national importance to the Office of the Speaker. The officer received it, but did not tell me that it was not the Rt Hon. Speaker who was going to preside. (Laughter)Therefore, I would like to request that you streamline and inform these officers. My request is that you include me on your list because I took mine to the wrong direction. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, we do not have the Office of the Speaker and the Office of the Deputy Speaker. We have the office of the Speaker. The Office of the Deputy Speaker is not a stand-alone office. When you take a matter to the Office of the Speaker - that is why I usually tell you that when you are writing, do not write to the Deputy Speaker; write to the Speaker and copy in the Deputy Speaker. When the Speaker is not around, I will act on the matter. When she is around, she will act on the matter. Sometimes, she will send the documents to me, as the Deputy Speaker, to handle as part of the assignments that I have. So, for all the matters you take to the Speaker – whether you have taken them to the Speaker or to the Deputy Speaker – we have a coordination mechanism. Hon. Santa, your matter is among those I received and you are among the people I would like to give a chance to speak. (Applause) Hon. Angura, you are the final person.[Mr Silwany] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5675THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 20222.35MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join you and the rest of the House, as the immediate neighbour to Kenya, to congratulate the people of Kenya for the decision they took. I also congratulate their judiciary for affirming that decision. Congratulations to you, especially Your Excellency William Samoei  Ruto. Mr Speaker, you have talked about the ministry for agriculture and that of finance having been cleared by Cabinet to come and present a report concerning the seedlings. We have been having discussions here - we have a challenge, especially with the supply of maize seeds. You will recall that the supply of seeds was transferred to the Parish Development Model. However, currently, famine is looming. Our people are calling for food seedlings for planting, especially maize seeds. If this was not budgeted for, as it has been said, let us consider this as one of the unforeseen items that should come on the supplementary. If we do not respond with seeds for our people to plant and ensure food security, we shall not be in a good situation. My prayer, Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, no.  You do not have prayers on this because you are just reacting to my communication. So, honourable, today I am not God. I am not accepting prayers. (Laughter)MR ANGURA: I conclude by saying that as the minister for finance and that of agriculture come here tomorrow, let them have seeds as part of what they will be presenting for us to take to our farmers. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, if you remember, about two weeks ago, we had a comprehensive discussion on the hunger situation and the mechanisms for addressing it. The Prime Minister, the minister for agriculture and that of finance were here. We addressed all these issues. - Frontbench, what is going on? Now, I am asking myself: if I refer you people to the rules committee, I do not know who will even preside because all of you would go. (Laughter) So, colleagues, we discussed this issue extensively. However, let us be patient and wait for the minister. I was going to matters of national importance. However, one of our colleagues, whom we congratulated in this House, has made a very rare request for which I will allow her two minutes. Hon. Kanushu would want to update the House on her election at the Commonwealth. So, honourable, use two minutes to update the House.2.39MS LAURA KANUSHU (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I take this opportunity to inform the House that while in Halifax, Canada, I was elected the Chairperson of the Network for Persons with Disabilities in the Commonwealth. (Applause) This is a very big position. I would like to thank the Office of the Speaker for giving me the opportunity to participate in this very historical event, without which I would not have been able to attain this position. I also thank the colleagues that I travelled with. First, the head of delegation, Hon. Enosi Asiimwe, for leading the delegation very well.I thank Hon. Okupa Elijah. That is the man who did the kakuyege for me because he is an experienced man in this space. He did all the kakuyege  and mine was just to come and address the people. I thank Hon. Kalwanga Daudi for the support they rendered to me while in Canada – for Daudi, we sit on opposite directions – for the level of political maturity that he exercised and realised that we are representing a country 5676STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTand not parties, because when we go for international spaces, we are talking about a country, not parties. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Hon. Kanushu, even Hon. Okupa sits on the other side. (Laughter)MS KANUSHU: Yes. Those two honourable members, Mr Speaker, exercised the highest level of political maturity because they realised that, that is an international space, and we are talking about Uganda, not parties or Kanushu. So, thank you very much, and the staff that gave me all the support that I needed. I thank you very much and I pledge that I will do what I promised to do. (Applause) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, in the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have two staff from the National Assembly of Zambia. They include Mr Leslie Moono Chikuta, Assistant Director Library and Ms Honester Tembo, Library Officer. They are here on an attachment with the Department of Library Services. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)Matters of national importance. Hon. Kaberuka? (Hon. Kibalya rose_) Procedure Hon. Kibalya?MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. When Kenya elections ended, we presented a request to have a small debate about those elections and you promised that you would consult whether it is right for us to debate issues that happened in a neighbouring country. Mr Speaker, Kenya has gone through this exercise up to today- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, I promised to consult and give feedback. So, I consulted and found it was not appropriate. (Applause) Hon. Katusabe, you also had a procedural matter. MR KATUSABE: Thank you very, Mr Speaker. My procedural matter is something very brief. Mr Speaker, leadership is about the ability to identify a problem and provide a solution to that problem before it becomes a crisis-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, please, if you cannot get him properly, you can hire services of Hon. Sarah Opendi. (Laughter) Go on, Hon. Katusabe. MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, I appreciate your generosity. Since the last sitting that we had on Thursday, my spirit has been struggling. You, together with the Speaker, are the heads of this institution. Anything that bothers you, should bother me as well. That seat is a constitutional seat. Your word or any word that you say while in that seat is final and that is the reason why we keep saying, “The Speaker has ruled and nobody else should have a say.”On Thursday, our mother - the head of this institution - expressed a threat to her life and as a follower, I am bothered because if something was to happen, I will be confronted by one question: “What did you do?” Mr Speaker, my procedural issue is to respond to, “What did I do?” There was a pledge and promise from the Prime Minister that Government was going to do all it takes to ensure that the safety and security of the Speaker will be guaranteed. We have seen our fellow citizens all over the streets, especially from Teso. One of my daughters is a niece to the Speaker, and she called me, “Daddy, is my aunt safe?” and I had no answer. Mr Speaker, my procedural issue is simple: Is Government in a position to assure the citizens of this country and those that hold the Speaker dear – all of us here that made that decision to elect you, two distinguished individuals, to those seats – can we be assured that, first of all, the Speaker is safe and secure?Everything else can wait on the Order Paper, but not your life, not the Speaker’s life and [Ms Kanushu] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5677THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022not the lives of our fellow citizens. We cannot cover everything else. We live in a country where assassination are occuring. I remember before he ceased to serve as DPC of our community in Kasese, Afande  Kirumira Muhammed made it a song, “People are after my life,” and everybody turned a deaf ear. May God and the Almighty Allah rest his soul in eternal peace. Mr Speaker, in conclusion, if it pleases you - and I pray it should - this country called Uganda needs assurance from Government, that the Speaker’s life is safe and secure and the lives of other citizens are all safe because an attack on one of us is an attack on all of us. We have lost many and we are not ready to again lose even one single soul. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. The issue of the Speaker’s security - I first of all, thank you for standing with her because it can be such a stressful issue. I had discussed with her over a month ago. I discussed this matter with the Speaker because one senior official told her, and she called me and we discussed the issue and raised it with the authorities. Of course, recently, again, it came up, but the Speaker mainly raised it in relation to people who were complaining about the security situation. I can assure you that since that happened, we have held meetings with security chiefs of this country. We have held meetings at the highest level in this country and all is very fine. I might not be the right person, maybe, to come and assure you, but I am sure when the Speaker comes here and you raise it, she will also assure you. Of course, when you occupy the positions we occupy - including you colleagues - you attract enemies both from within and from without. You attract enemies who you know and who you do not know. All these things happen, but our security has not been taken lightly by Government. Also, your security as colleagues; that is why many of you have been coming, who have been having security issues. When you come, we do not take them lightly.We thank you for standing with the Speaker. That same evening, I was not in the country, but she called me immediately; we again discussed and we have been sharing as brother and sister. And on top of you having security from Government, we always give each other security advice, beyond what Government can. We have managed to consolidate that. The Speaker is very safe. She is even the one who made today’s Order Paper. She is the one who assigned me to be here. We have been communicating. I am very sure, she will also be chairing soon, according to the way we usually do it. This week, I am the one chairing. Then next week, she will be the one chairing. There isn’t anything to fear. All is well.2.51MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter I am raising is a national concern because the constituency I represent, represents the only gorillas and the only climbing lions, which feed this national economy by 65 per cent of the tourism revenue. The issue I am raising is about the breakdown of the infrastructure, especially access roads leading to tourist areas and to factories in Kanungu. Those roads are; Ikumba, Ifasha, Ruhisha, Mpungu, Butogota, Kanyantorogo, Buhoma, Kabalanga, Rujeyo and –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The whole of Kanungu.MR KABERUKA: Mr Speaker, currently, tourists are stuck. This morning, they were stuck at Kitawulira in Mpungu. They cannot cross. People are dropping tea leaves on the road. That is a loss to the farmers and the investors. Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister of this country, Rt Hon. Nabbanja, after getting the concerns, sent a team to go and see what they could do; that was two months ago. It is my humble 5678STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTappeal - I thought maybe somebody from the Prime Minister’s Office would be here, but since the Chief Whip is here, I request Mr Speaker, through you, that the report that was got from Kanungu be discussed in the national interest, not in the interest of the individuals of Kanungu; then we harmonise and get a solution for that infrastructure that is feeding this country. Mr Speaker, the emergency demand that we require is that the Ministry of Works and Transport, through UNRA, gets a special allocation for that place so that we can see the evacuation of tea and also mobility of tourists who are giving us money. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. MR KABERUKA: I pray, Mr Speaker.2.53THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Francis Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, first of all, I thank the colleague for raising this very critical matter. I would like on the onset, to let this august House know that the challenge associated with the floods that have ravaged the country has compounded and spoilt the roads in the entire country. I am sure of this honourable colleagues. If each one of them was asked to raise the challenge, including you yourself, Mr Speaker, I did visit your district and we have a plan.Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, and to all the colleagues, the release that came in the first quarter of this financial year could not allow work to start. My hope now is that having consulted with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, they have promised to release some resources -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are pointing at Dr Baryonmunsi. (Laughter)MR ECWERU: I thought - Finance, they always sit this side. Having consulted the minister for finance, they have assured us that in the second phase, they will do something. I can assure you that the Uganda National Roads Authority has a comprehensive report of all the roads that have been damaged. We are going to sequence the intervention, depending on the resources, but also critically to make sure that those critical areas are made passable. (Interruption)MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad the works minister, in his response, is pointing back to the finance ministry. We have talked in this House; it bothers me that we talk and leave things hanging. You cannot do anything in this country without having passable roads. The Members of Parliament then spent their time processing a Bill. The President assented to the Uganda Road Fund Act. This Act was supposed to create a fund where 100 shillings - we all take fuel every day. Out of the 6500 or 6700 that you consume every litre, Shs 100 would go to the Road Fund, but the ministry of finance has decided not to operationalise the Road Fund. All these problems would not be there; we would be having money readily available to attend to these emergencies. The rains are on; many more Members are going to come here over road issues. Can we deal with the challenge of the Road Fund? Have the Road Fund operationalised; these are members of the Cabinet. Why can’t we operationalise the Road Fund and deal with this challenge once and for all? Thank you, Mr Speaker. MS AMEEDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give the Minister more information that the situation of the roads across the country during the rain session is worrying. Even around our city, the flooding is terrible. Yesterday, I was driving from Nsambya to Lumumba Avenue; you could not comprehend the amount of the runoff water. Where are the engineers? What is Government planning to do about this? A month ago, I was coming from the east. I could not comprehend the amount of runoff water in Mbiko Township. It was unbelievable. I would, therefore, like the Minister, also draw your attention to the flooding in urban centres and give Parliament a comprehensive report. Thank you.[Mr Kaberuka] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5679THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: After, I will allow Hon. Mwijukye. I had many issues today regarding this sector and that is why I wanted to pick a few. 2.59MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo):  Mr Speaker, I would like to remind Members that Government procured equipment for all the districts and they were distributed to all the districts. It is very unfortunate that - like for Dokolo, we have the equipment. However, the money that is given to districts is deplorable. It is terrible; it is like we do not have a GovernmentTherefore, Mr Speaker, as Parliament, we have powers. We need to exercise our powers. We have powers to direct that the Shs 100 that is contributed to the Uganda Road Fund should directly be sent to their account; it should not go to the ministry of finance because while that money collected, the finance ministry does not give it to the rightful the owner. Therefore, we need to take a stand on this matter. Finance ministry is disrespecting Parliament. They are allocating money and nothing is happening, yet, money is being stolen. So, honourable members, let us exercise our rights. Otherwise - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Felix Okot. 3.00MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My matter is also connected to what is being discussed. The situation in Buhweju is worrying. Currently, Buhweju is now landlocked. One cannot connect to Ibanda from Buhweju and neither to Sheema or Mbarara. The bridge at Nyakambwe that connects Mbarara, Buhweju and Sheema - and Hon. Itungo would bear me witness - was washed away and it had even cracked a few months ago. The bridge at Kabera was washed. We have bridges in Bisha Subcounty at Mushasha, schools have been destroyed. We grow food crops in the hills; the millet and beans gardens, and the banana plantations were washed away. Therefore, whereas we are talking about waiting to see how to deal with the law, there is an emergency that needs immediate attention in respect to the crops and the bridges that have been washed away, and now, how we connect - I had whispered to the minister and I said that as he plans to visit the districts, people can’t move from Buhweju to other districts. What do we do? The UNRA roads are now impassable, the district roads - first of all, the district has no money, but now, the roads are impassable. How do we move, Mr Speaker? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, please. This issue is hitting all of us including ministers on the frontbench. I am sure even the ministers for works must be going through the same.MR MWIJUKYE: They are not affected. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to guide this way: I am going to call on a team - tomorrow, the Prime Minister will call a meeting with the minister for finance, the minister for works and the Attorney-General; and I will appoint a few MPs to attend that meeting so that we can report back to Parliament on Thursday. The MPs are: Hon. Sarah Opendi, Hon. Nathan Byanyima, the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, Hon. Kivumbi, the acting Leader of the Opposition, because he is the one who they have left in the chair and Hon. Solomon Silwany, to represent the Commission. Therefore, the minister knows the people he or she will - yes, I talked about the Chairperson of the infrastructure committee and the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I do not want it to be – no, minister for environment, no. These are issues where we need money. So, environment –(Laughter)- we are not going to discuss causes of the flooding. What we want is the money to address emergency situations.  5680STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTThe aim of this will be to look at the emergency situations because you see, as the presiding officer, in a day, I receive 20 issues of national importance to do with roads. So, you are stuck. That is why I would like us to own it up together as a House.Honourable colleagues, instead of us now having just the exchange on the Floor, let us go and exchange in the boardroom and we come out with a way forward and whatever comes out, should be reported on the Floor. Reporting on the Floor will be done on Thursday by the Prime Minister on whatever they will have come up with.DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I would like to request that you add Hon. Kaberuka; he represents the mountainous areas in this country. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Dr Baryomunsi, please, we shall send Hon. Kaberuka to handle Nyege Nyege.  (Laughter) (Member rose_) No, please, we have finished that. MR MATOVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under rule 45 (2) (3) (4) and (5). On 15 July 2022, I wrote a question for an oral answer, regarding the presidential pledge to tarmac the Nakawuka-Natete-Kisubi and Nakawuka-Kasanje-Mpigi road networks. The procedural matter I am raising - the question was written and forwarded to the Clerk and I presume the Clerk forwarded it to the respective ministry. However, while it is now over a month, I have not received any response, yet, the situation is very appalling. The road is indelibly impassable. So, I beg that the procedure matter be handled. I thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, these are issues you should always bring to our office because they are not issues of the Floor. But honourable colleague, I will ensure your question is answered. Therefore, honourable minister, please, on Thursday, let us handle this question so that the colleague’s issues are not just left to die.3.07MR ROLAND NDYOMUGYENYI (Independent, Rukiga County, Rukiga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The matter I would like to raise is related to what you have just ruled on because on Friday in Rukiga, we were hit by hail storms and heavy rains. The roads and bridges were washed away and the animals and crops were all destroyed. Therefore, Mr Speaker, in addition to the meeting that is going to be held tomorrow regarding the money for the roads, I pray that the Office of the Prime Minister makes an assessment in Rukiga with a view of giving relief items to the people there.  (Member rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssasaga, a colleague already has a disaster in his place; you might cause more disaster. Please, let him finish; I will allow you.MR NDYOMUGYENYI:  The school-going children are not going to school because the bridges have caved in. For example, Noozi Bridge at the Rukiga District Headquarters, caved in. If you see the pictures and video footage of the situation in Rukiga, you will feel very sorry for us. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I pray that you direct the responsible ministries, especially the Ministry of Works and Transport to go and assess this impact in the shortest time possible with a view of restoring the network. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Government Chief Whip, I know you are under the Office of the Prime Minister – because I do not see the Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness here. They need your intervention. (Laughter)3.09THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP  (Mr Denis Obua): Mr Speaker, I undertake to inform the responsible ministry to respond to [The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5681THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022the issue raised by the honourable member. The two ministers under the Ministry for Relief and Disaster Preparedness are all out of station. We will inform them, in writing, and copy it to the Member and ensure that the matter is responded to. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, in the public gallery, this afternoon, we have members of the Uganda Students Union in Kuwait. Yes, we have students everywhere. They have come to observe proceedings of this Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. You can stand up. (Applause)You can see how many they are. Thank you. This is your Parliament. Whenever you are around, come and follow the proceedings. Hon. Ssasaga, what was the issue?MR SSASAGA : Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was raising a procedural issue that this House has always had a culture - and directive, of course – that whenever disasters happen in our areas, we always start with the district disaster teams. If a colleague comes – or I come – to raise the issue to do with disasters in my area, I should as well have a comprehensive report coming from my district, which has been transmitted to the ministry –(Interjections) - and for that matter I could be –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, colleagues, listen to the colleague. He is giving you valuable guidance.MR SSASAGA: That is why they are always out of order and then, they raise procedural issues. It could be good to engage Government to make quick responses to the disasters in our areas. It could be good for colleagues to always engage their district disaster teams, transmit the report and then, come with a copy here for purposes of following up. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Chief Whip, kindly, talk to the Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness to write to all MPs on the procedure to be followed. What Hon. Ssasaga is raising is a very serious issue. I remember that when I was the Chief Whip, I used to guide that way. When disaster happens in your place, the district disaster committee should go, make an assessment and then, the chief administrative officer formally submits to the Office of the Prime Minister. It is from that submission that you can get a copy and say: “Even the CAO submitted, but nothing has been done.”However, I usually allow you, colleagues, because Parliament is a very big platform where you easily have interactions with the Executive. That is why I quickly allow you. However, let us also go back and ensure that that procedure is followed. 3.13MR SOLOMON SILWANY  (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. One of the uniting factors in this country is sports. Whenever you sit at home – honourable members will bear me witness - and Cheptegei is running or there is football going on, you are united.We all recall that during the last budget cycle, we budgeted for the different federations - athletics, FUFA and the netball associations. After budgeting, we went ahead and ring-fenced money for the federations.Mr Speaker, what happened is that the minister for finance, against the will of this Parliament, released money for Commonwealth Games only and ended at that. Right now, Uganda has qualified for CHAN and this is a chance that rarely comes. However, the federations are stuck. Women have qualified for the African Beach Soccer Cup of Nations. The She Cranes have qualified for 2023 World Cup. There are also several other games such as rugby. However, these people are completely stuck. They do not have money, which money was passed by this Parliament, but the ministry for finance has blatantly not released any money to these federations, yet, it was ring-fenced. 5682STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTMr Speaker, if you qualify, for example, for CHAN and you miss this season, you are banned from participating in the next three or four seasons. Therefore, Uganda risks being banned from participating in such important sports activities. However, you find us here discussing Nyege Nyege  and leaving such important matters. My prayers are that:1. The ministry for finance explains why it has not released money to the sports federations.2. Immediate action be taken by Government to support these federations to be able to access money so that they can go and participate in the games. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. On the matter Hon. Solomon is raising, colleagues, I understand that FUFA is completely stuck. It is about to send players back home from the camps. They do not have what to eat. They do not have allowances. We are about to see demonstrations. After these people have won, there is pressure on the presiding officers: “We need motions to congratulate.” (Laughter) At least this brings national pride. Honourable minister for finance, this is a matter where you have nothing to do. You cannot say: “Wait tomorrow.” We seek your intervention. You usually intervene very well. (Laughter)3.17THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I undertake to look into the matter - I do note the urgency - and report back to the honourable member who has raised it.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, report back to the House tomorrow and tell us whether money is available or not so that FUFA and the other federations can tell players to go back home. If people say they do not have what to eat and the players are leaving, it cannot –(Mr Kayemba rose_) - Hon. Kayemba? Hon. Kayemba has been in these things for long.3.18MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA  (NUP, Bu-komansimbi South County, Bukomansim-bi): I am the senior alternative minister for sports. (Laughter) In addition to that, the big-gest problem - I do not know – is that Gov-ernment is not prioritising sports at all. All federations are complaining. Boxers are in Mozambique right now; they do not have mon-ey. Rugby players are in South Africa and per -forming well, but they are suffering with the same thing. It is high time Government prioritised sports because it is the only thing that unites us as Commissioner Silwany said. It is also the only thing that is the hope of the poor person wherever they come from.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Chief Whip, you know this issue very well. 3.18THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP  (Mr Denis Obua): Mr Speaker, I am the immediate past Minister of State for Education and Sports in charge of sports. I submit that first of all, we are coming from a very difficult time. You are aware that in the last two to three financial years, the sports budget reduced from Shs 25 billion to Shs 17 billion to Shs 10 billion.  (Interjections)   Yes. With the support of the Cabinet and this Parliament, the sports budget in this financial year has risen to Shs 47 billion. Unfortunately, the release for quarter one did not capture the component for support to the different federations - it is not only football. We should say all sporting disciplines because the call centre under the budget for support to federations did not receive any release. [Mr Silwany]5683THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022Mr Speaker, the reason given by the finance ministry is what we know; we run a cash budget and for this quarter, all ministries received budgets - that I think was only nine per cent of what they expected - and that was across board. So, that was the reason advanced. However, all is not lost; we engaged with the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury (PS/ST), who committed that funding to support the different sporting disciplines will be released in quarter two - this was a commitment from the PS/ST on the issue of support to the different sporting disciplines. Mr Speaker, this is what I can say for now, despite the fact that football needs it today. However, all other sporting disciplines, including rugby - our rugby team has just been participating in the Rugby Sevens World Cup. You have seen countries that they have beaten, including Germany, Korea, and their ranking has greatly improved from wherever they were to No.17 in the whole world. (Interjection)  Even I, as the former minister, did not know where they were, but now they are No.17. Therefore, our sportsmen and women are doing all it takes to market our country. We need to support them with better funding and better infrastructure. However, on this particular subject matter, this was the commitment from the PS/ST that come quarter two, the releases for the different sporting disciplines would be effected by the minister of finance. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Government Chief Whip, you see, we are talking about people who are in camp. I do not know whether we are going to say, “You close the camp for now and come back until the funds of the next quarter are released.” That is number one. Therefore, that is why I have said that between today and tomorrow, the Government Chief Whip, minister of finance, the minister of sports, and maybe some technical people from National Council of Sports should meet and see what we can do quickly. That is all we need. We need an urgent relief, which cannot wait for two weeks.MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, I explained the bigger picture, but the minister of finance has already made a commitment that he is going to consult and see what can be done for the issue at hand. I just wanted to make a broader picture because we are not only looking at one discipline, we oversee 51 different sporting disciplines in Uganda. But for this specific one, I believe the minister of finance will be able to handle as pledged. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. So, tomorrow, we shall be expecting  feedback.MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been listening right from your communication, to the matter of national importance, to what has been discussed. It looks to me as if we are pressing Hon. Musasizi hard for him just to give us a political answer - of saying, “We are going to look into it,” yet we know that actually, if you go to all the budgets - The other day, I was asking the manager of UNRA who is in charge of my constituency - they were given Shs 10 million to work on all the roads of nine districts, including the one of Kanungu. Those are roads. When you are talking sports, seeds or health - we have not even talked about health today. It will all go to say, there is no money. Much as we press them, we know what we are facing as a country. Are we proceeding right, Mr Speaker, to say that the ministry of finance and ministry of works should answer us; are we proceeding right? My suggestion would be that let Hon. Musasizi, the minister of finance, come and tell us exactly what they have rather than for us, every day, asking them to bring this and that, only for the minister to answer without us getting anything. Let him conclusively tell us what they have and what they do not have, so that we stop lamenting, thinking and dreaming. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, our submissions here 5684STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTare not in vain. That is why you see me saying, “Go and coordinate.” You see, when they go to the kitchen, you never know what they will come out with, even if it is a bone. The other time, we were here, it was a tough day; we had a tough time, but we sent them back to go and coordinate. They got for us Shs 60 billion for District, Urban and Community Access Roads, and they have released that money. Therefore, when we engage in this House- remember when they had given only Shs 6.5 billion for all roads in the country and they had to add us over Shs 60 billion. Therefore, our role, colleagues - please; now you people, you are holding your own Parliament? Our role is to coordinate; we are not telling Hon. Musasizi to go and sell his goats. No; we are telling him that there is a situation, which is bad. Can you go and see if there is anything you can do? MR OKOT OGONG:  Mr Speaker, Parliament works with the laws that we have - the laws of the land; we have the Public Finance Management Act. “Section 15: Commitment of approved budgeti) After approval of annual budget by Parliament, the Secretary to Treasury shall issue the annual cash flow plan of Government based on the procurement plans, work plans, recruitment plans approved by Parliament. ii) The annual cash flow plans issued under Section 1 shall be the basis of release of funds by the Accountant-General to the accounting officers.” These were all done here and must be issued on that basis. What Government is doing is actually illegal; it is not based on the law. (Interjection)  It is already here in the law - I am reading it. (Members rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, do not accept side talk. Do not formalise it on the Hansard. MR OKOT OGONG:  Yes. “An accounting official shall commit the budget of a vote based on the annual cash flow plan issued under this section.” You already issued it; you do not have to do it now. (Mr Musasizi rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues - Hon. Musasizi, just wait. Now, what you are going into, we are going to degenerate into a discussion we will not finish here. Government, honourable minister of finance, you always engage well and rarely do we send Hon. Musasizi and he does not come back with something. We know him; he knows how to go and move around and – so, go and do something, honourable minister. We do not want our players to get out of the camps. Go, do something. I know you usually do it. Hon. Santa Okot?3.29MS SANTA OKOT (PPP, Aruu North County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of urgency. In 2015, under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, agro-processing facilities were constructed by the Government of Uganda in a subcounty called Parogali with support from the African Development Bank, under the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP). This facility was a house for a milling machine with a huller that was constructed in 2015. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries instructed National Advisory Services (NAADs) to purchase the milling machine and install it in the facility. It took about three years and NAADS did not send the machine. In 2018, they took the milling machine to Pader District. Surprisingly, a sharp councillor diverted the machine and offloaded it to a different subcounty where he comes from and dismantled the machine and put it in three houses. I heard the story during campaigns and I thought it was a rumour as during campaigns there are a lot of rumours. [The Deputy Speaker]5685THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022Last week, the chairman of the subcounty called me and told me that they had discovered where the machines had been placed. I advised him to write to the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) since he is in charge of security, he would investigate whether the machines are there. Indeed, the RDC found those machines and he brought them to the police station in Pader District. My prayer to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is to find a way of speaking to NAADs to - install the machine. Right now the machine is at the police station – maybe some of the parts will disappear from the police station as some of you may know. (Laughter) We have already spent Government money on the machines. My next prayer goes to the ministry for presidency because when such a thing happens the machine house is in another subcounty and the machines were found in another subcounty. The culprits are in the police. Now the councillor is instigating the people to begin saying that the RDC should be removed from the district because he went and discovered that machine. The ministry for presidency should find a way of protecting the RDC from those dubious people. But kindly, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should go and install the machine, otherwise we shall lose it. In addition, it took eight years for the machines to be installed. This was not right because if the machine was there, the people would be using it. Thank you so much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Ministry of Agriculture? A colleague can help, in case the minister did not get the brief well.3.32THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is now under Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. I would like to ask my colleague to come and shade more light on that. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable minister for trade? I called the minister for agriculture because the prayers were for NAADs to act. 3.33THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Ms Harriet Ntabazi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Member for raising that very important issue. I would like to inform this Parliament that the component of processing, especially mini-processing, under CAIIP and other simple programmes under Operation Wealth Creation (OWC) has been channelled to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives because the part of value addition majorly falls under the ministry of industry. So, last week we received around 66 machines of different types, maize mills, rice hullers, and we are planning to go and install those machines that are not installed. There are those ones that were installed in places where there are no raw materials, and we are identifying the areas where viability is so that we put them in the right place to serve Ugandans. We are so humbled and we are going to partake on that. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, kindly link up with the honourable colleague- you go and get the right information. The machine is at the police, get it, ensure it is installed and that is it. That is what the colleague wants. Hon. Namuyangu, you wanted to supplement on the same?MS NTABAZI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I am going to link up with my sister. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your colleague, it seems, also wanted to support you. 5686STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT3.35THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (BUNYORO AFFAIRS) (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Hon. Santa for the information and just to ask colleagues that there are many such value-addition facilities under CAIIP that have been put to waste by the local governments. So, if we can all be proactive and identify these facilities, link up with the ministry of trade so that we put them to good use. I saw the same in Hoima District, Kigorobya County, and many other areas. Some of them are coffee hullers, rice mills and maize mills, and some were put in locations where the local governments have not put them to good use. So, I would like to thank Hon. Santa and I thank the minister for taking it up. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa? 3.36MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the information is a bit scanty from the presentation. The people of Serere also have fallen victims. In Kasilo, there are two machines that were installed under CAIIP. The biggest problem is the cost of power. That is what has made most of those machines – the maize hullers, rice hullers, maize mills - to stop functioning. Even at one point, there was a brigadier who had come and wanted to grab one from the community in Kasilo until the people rose up. Mr Speaker, if we do not address the issue of power, either we provide generators or the cost of power is brought down, they will remain there as white elephants. The problem is not only in Pader, as the Hon. Minister for Bunyoro Affairs has explained. Let the minister address the issue of power. My sister Hon. Adoa, knows the one of Kileto, Kateta – those are the problems. The power bills – now they say Shs 20 million, Shs 30 million; the community cannot afford that! So, you either find a way of providing power; either solar or transformers. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I am seeing colleagues rise. Today I have been very generous and I am seeing we have gone beyond what was supposed to be discussed. So, honourable minister please, continue and follow up on that issue. Hon. Aloysius Mukasa? Colleagues, use two minutes strictly.  3.38MR ALOYSIUS MUKASA (NUP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public call in regard to the devastating floods at Nalukolongo Channel in Rubaga South constituency, which has become a death trap.Mr Speaker, with the rainy season, the channel, which stretches from Kibuye through Ndeeba, Nateete, Nalukolongo and Kabowa and onto Masaka Road, has claimed the lives of children and women whenever it floods. So far, 25 houses have been destroyed and the roads will soon be rendered impassable. The major flooding points along this channel are at Wankulukuku-Sembule, Nalukolongo-Road, Ndeeba, Samona-Nateete from where the devastation spreads to most of the channel’s catchments. Mr Speaker, the channel had been earmarked for construction by Kampala Capital City Authority in 2014, under the Kampala Institutional Infrastructure Development Project, which was funded by the World Bank. However, the project stalled after KCCA indicated that it did not have enough money to compensate about 450 residents, who had surrendered their land for the project to start. Upon the expiry of the above project, the second project whose implementation started in 2015 also stalled because KCCA still claimed it lacked funds for its implementation. The state of the channel has over the years gone from -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The story became long. Please conclude with a prayer.5687THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022MR ALOYSIUS MUKASA: Mr Speaker, efforts to get KCCA and the attendant Ministry of Kampala to act have proved unsuccessful. It is our prayer that Government urgently comes to the aid of the affected communities who have been rendered homeless. We also pray that the Minister for KCCA explains to Parliament, the status of the project. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  Minister for KCCA – yes, Hajati Minsa Kabanda.3.40THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS  (Ms Minsa Kabanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will come back with a concrete report, but we are working on that issue. I would like to assure the Member of Parliament that we are working on that issue, but I will give a concrete report on Thursday.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I thank you. Beyond the KCCA, I have had a discussion with the Ministry of Works and Transport officials. I think we are grappling with the big problem of desilting all the channels around cosmopolitan Kampala and around Lake Victoria. During my discussions with the Ministry of Works and Transport officials, one on one, they advised us to mobilise excavators - around 20 of them - go on a massive exercise to desilt and open these channels. According to them, when we do this, we will be dealing decisively with the question of floods around cosmopolitan Kampala. I even volunteered to go through the costing with them. It is not something very flexible, but no answer. What we want from KCCA and the Ministry of Works and Transport is the whole programme on how they can desilt all the channels around Kampala and cosmopolitan areas, and on the shores of Lake Victoria to do away with the issue. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Gen Katumba, you want to comment on this? This seems to be an issue of Generals. It is becoming - (Laughter)3.42THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the advice, which Hon Kivumbi gave to my counterpart, my minister of state. However, while I appreciate that, I also want to appeal to us all that we need to get more disciplined especially in regards to waste disposal. You can even see where you have a filter, the amount of waste that is in these channels. If we do not address waste disposal, including Kaveras and all this, we shall continue desilting, but having the same problem. Let us also be disciplined. Let us get our people disciplined on how we manage waste in this city. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That coordinated response is what Hon. Kivumbi was focusing on. Let us have a coordinated response. Hon Minister for Kampala, you promised to bring a comprehensive statement on this issue on Thursday. Please do. 3.43MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance that arises as a result of the continuous rains in the Bugisu sub region. I would like to very much appreciate the Prime Minister’s Office for the response they have done. However, as we talk, there is a big crack that has developed over 20 miles, along the way, in the sub counties of Bubyangu, Bufumbo, Wanale and Jowa Town council. There are big rocks that are in the way of this crack. They are shifting and actually giving way. My prayer is that the Minister for Disaster Preparedness should dispatch a team of experts to assess the impending risk that is exposed to the people living within the vicinity of these huge rocks. They are hanging and exposed. If they give way, the disaster or the damage will be enormous. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.5688STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, a few months back, Hon. John Magolo took me around Mountain Wanale, around 7.00p.m. to enjoy an evening from there. If really rocks could come from that mountain, then Mbale City would be in huge trouble. Minister for National Guidance, please guide the nation. (Laughter)3.45THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable member, thank you, for raising this matter. Yesterday we had an extensive discussion in the Cabinet. I have actually communicated to the public today about the intentions of Government regarding resettling people who live on those risky slopes in the mountainous areas like the greater Elgon, Rwenzori and even my own Kigezi areas. I would like to appeal to the honourable members to work together with us to sensitise our people to shift from those risky slopes. I was, over the weekend, in Kasese. It was very traumatising to see how people had been buried underground by the huge mudslide. We also agreed in the Cabinet, like he has prayed, that a technical team goes down these areas to assess the conditions of the communities there and guide them, particularly those on slopes, which are above 30 degrees’ gradient, to relocate to lower areas, which are less risky. Maybe the Minister responsible for Disaster Preparedness will be coming to Parliament to give us the comprehensive plan on shifting and relocating people who live in areas, which are at great risk. We would not want to continue losing people because of landslides and this kind of preventable death.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Please, dispatch a team of experts to go on ground, assess and guide the people of Bungokho, so that if they are to shift, they shift or if there are any other interventions to be done they are done. Honourable colleagues, today you had 27 issues of national importance. I made an assessment including the one from Hon. Biraro, and realized that most of your issues were issues meant for Prime Minister’s Time. They were not issues of urgency. Issues where you need comprehensive answers are not issues where you just call a minister to come on the Floor and give an answer right away. For example, Hon. Biraro, mining using mercury is a technical issue where a minister would need to go back and consult. Anyhow, I have informed my office to link up with you so that these issues are passed over to the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister consults with the relevant ministries and technical people so that you get satisfying answers. Otherwise, presenting answers, which are half baked on the Floor, is not good. So, that is why I wanted to inform you. If I don’t pick you yet you registered an issue, that will be the reason. I had allowed the honourable member who needed a clarification.3.49DR BAYIGA LULUME (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will end with Hon. Aleper. DR BAYIGA: I have just made an observation. The 27 issues, which have been raised, were on the demand side and Government, through the ministers, have committed themselves to providing answers. I think that is very sensible. The immediate question that I would like to put across, Mr Speaker, is whether these commitments, given verbally, are also accompanied with the financial commitments to undertake them. About four weeks ago, the Woman Member of Parliament for Mukono raised an issue of caged fishing in Koome Island. 5689THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022The minister in charge of fisheries undertook to visit the area the next day. Through our conversation, she was committed to visiting even Kiyindi in Buikwe South and also to involve Buvuma. She is only held back from undertaking that visit by the lack of finances. She cannot move to Mukono or Buikwe because she is not facilitated. I had a telephone conversation with her and that is why I can speak with confidence about this. Therefore, Mr Speaker, whereas the ministers are in affirmative about answering the demand side - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable.DR BAYIGA: Do they have the financial commitment to undertake? That can only be got when you put that question across and somebody from Government answers. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, there are some things, which I avoid because they make us look shabby before the public. Government Chief Whip, you know what I mean. Kindly, go and follow up on that. Okay?  Hon. Lulume, please, I have passed on my message.3.51MR MOSES ALEPER (NRM, Chekwii County (Kadam), Nakapiripirit):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance concerning the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road, which is due for tarmacking. This is a road which serves the regions of Karamoja, Sebei and parts of Bugisu and connects them to the rest of Uganda. Right now, there are torrential rains in that part of the country and the road has been ravaged to the extent that traffic is completely cut off. That is the only connection to the southern part of Karamoja. Even if you pass through Moroto, you will still encounter such difficulty. Around this time last year, the road construction was two years behind schedule. As we speak now, it is three years behind schedule, yet it is a five-year contract. What is happening is that the people using the road spend nights. Since the 22nd of August, the road has been cut off. I attempted to go to my constituency over the weekend, but spent one night on the road and just had to come back. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayer, honourable. MR MOSES ALEPER: My prayer is that let the agency – that is, UNRA – carry out a quick site visit so that the contractor is advised to fix that part of the road to make it usable for motorists. Otherwise, we are cut off from the rest of Uganda. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Minister of Works and Transport?3.53THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Mr Speaker, I appreciate the concerns of Hon. Aleper. It is true, the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road is under construction. Yes, I expect people to want quick fixes, but when you are doing a road of that nature – and terrain, especially around Ngenge area – you have to take a lot of time to ensure that you stabilise the road. Therefore, the contractor is still doing the drainage first. That is why he has constructed most of the box culverts and he is left with about two box culverts only. He has laid the hard core to stabilise the ground.  I call for patience so that we don’t rush him to do a shoddy job. I want him to do a job which will last for years because that road, apart from human traffic, is the road which brings marble and raw materials for the industries in Tororo and Mbale. Therefore, we are very careful not to rush the contractor to do a poor job. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am really pleased to find that you have issues at hand in regard to that road. This 5690STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTis very rare – knowing even how many culverts are left to be fixed. That is very impressive. This is an issue of stakeholder engagement. Kindly, keep updating the colleagues from that end. For example, during this rainy season – when you know issues are going to be coming – please, I urge that you hold a meeting with the MPs affected by that road so that you discuss those issues in detail with them. Hon. Ssasaga will be covered under that. (Member rose_) He is off the Floor. You have no one to address, unfortunately. Yeah. Honourable colleagues, for Item No. 3, I spoke to the minister. The document regarding this item was submitted more than three months ago. The minister feels that a lot has changed and they need to update it. So, he requested that we give them two weeks to update it. I allowed for the two weeks so that they can update and have it sorted on the Floor. The Minister of ICT and National Guidance requested me that he would not be in the House today because he had been assigned by the President to represent him in another country. However, I told him that since I have information that he is leaving in the evening, he must come and we sort out a certain issue which has been pending for long on the Order Paper. So Clerk, please, call Item No.8 (II)RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF ICT AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE ON THE ALLEGED ASSAULT OF THE LORD MAYOR OF KAMPALA BY THE DIRECTOR OF UGANDA MEDIA CENTRE AND THE GOVERNMENT SPOKESPERSON DURING A TELEVISION TALK SHOW3.57THE MINISTER OF ICT AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am making a response to the matter of national importance, which was raised by Hon. Joyce Bagala, the Woman Member of Parliament for Mityana District and the Shadow Minister of Information and Anti-Corruption. The matter has since gone to court and I am constrained to give information which may be interpreted as subjudice . However, with the leave of the Speaker, allow me to respond cautiously without injuring the court process. Mr Speaker, I would like to respond to a matter of national importance raised by Hon. Joyce Bagala with respect to the altercation that happened between Minister Ofwono Opondo, the Director of Uganda Media Centre, and Hon. Erias Lukwago, the Lord Mayor of Kampala during a television talk show, The Frontline,  on NBS Television on the night of Thursday, July 28 this year.On that date, I was invited as a guest on The Frontline  talk show together with Hon. Erias Lukwago to join regular panelists: Mr Ofwono Opondo and Hon. Winfred Kiiza, former Leader of the Opposition. The talk show commenced normally at 10.00 p.m. – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.DR BAYIGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and Hon. Dr Baryomunsi for giving way. You have proceeded quite well by recognising that this matter is sub judice . You and I are learning from the parlance of Parliament. However, the way the honourable member is proceeding is like he is reading his own affidavit, which would be called in court since this matter has crossed over to court. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is he one of the witnesses in court? HON. MEMBERS: Yes.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then, honourable member, if you are one of the witnesses, it is safer for you - but you have played your part. Clerk, remove this item from the Order Paper. In fact, you have saved him - I think it was a trick of a doctor saving a fellow doctor. (Laughter)[The Deputy Speaker] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5691THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON CLIMATE CHANGE ON THE MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO ADDRESS CLIMATE CHANGE IN UGANDATHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Vice-Chairperson. It is her maiden report to present; so please, let us welcome her - Hon. Jacinta Atuto. I want her to be heard in total silence; no point of procedure or point of order and no moving around – (Laughter) - only clapping. Honourable member, you have 15 minutes. 4.01THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON CLIMATE CHANGE (Ms Jacinta Atuto): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance to present a report of the Committee on Climate Change on the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to address climate change in Uganda.Before I present this report, allow me to lay on Table the following:1. The minutes of the meeting held with various stakeholders.2. The report of the Committee on Climate Change on the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to address climate change in Uganda.3. Written submissions from stakeholders reviewed by the Committee on Climate Change. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.MS ATUTO: Mr Speaker, this is my maiden report of the committee. (Applause). The same report has been uploaded on the Members’ iPads.This report came as a result of a motion moved in this august House by Hon. Emmanuel Otaala on 29 September 2021, for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to implement measures to mitigate effects of climate change in Uganda. In his prayers, he urged Government to commend the Climate Change Act and implement it. He also requested for the implementation of all the environmental laws enacted by Parliament, including the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 and the National Environment Act of 2019. Further, his prayer was to undertake measures to mitigate the effects of climate change in Uganda, including encouraging recycling, control of emissions and green gases, afforestation and use of clean energy from the renewable sources.Mr Speaker, I request that the House allows me to summarise some pages or sub-headings.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, do. We shall capture the whole report on the Hansard. Give us a summary because we already have it. (The report is hereby appended.)MS ATUTO: Thank you. On page 3, while undertaking our assignment, we met the following stakeholders as enlisted below in our report. When you go to page 4, there is “Overview of environmental change trends in the country.” As you are already aware, natural resources include the fertile soil, green vegetation, water and the climate itself. We are blessed with these and as a country we should be proud of them. However, we have misused our natural resources by degrading our land, cutting down our forests and building in the wetlands. Therefore, as a committee, there are interventions that we requested for from Government to address the climate change in Uganda. One of the interventions is implementing the legal policy and institutional framework on 5692STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTenvironment, natural resources and climate change. Laws such as Uganda National Climate Change Act, 2021; Uganda National Climate Change Policy, 2015; National Environment Act, 2019 and the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 were all established under the institutional arrangement to ensure climate change mitigation and adaptation. Recommendations a) The committee urges the ministry responsible for climate change matters to expedite formulation of regulations to ensure implementation of the interventions under the Climate Change Act.b)  The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment should strengthen coordination with MDAs to ensure the implementation and review of policies, strategies, laws and programmes to address climate change.2.2 Mainstream climate change and natural resources across all programmes The National Development Plan III recognises the need to stop, reduce and reverse environmental degradation and the advanced effects of climate change, as well as improve the utilisation of natural resources for sustainable economic growth and livelihood security. Committee recommendationsa) Ministries, Departments and Agencies should intensify awareness rising out of climate change, and its effects, mitigation and adaptation measures through clear messages to all highlighting the impact of inaction.b)  The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment liaises with other statutory authorities and bodies to develop guidelines for proofing and mainstreaming climate change issues in different sector programmes projects, and activities in order to reduce the duplication of efforts, pooling resources and increase efficiency.c)  The committee recommends that Government should encourage the participation of civil society groups, academia, local community, indigenous people, youth, women, the private sector and other cultural institutions in addressing the effects of climate change. 6.3  Protecting and enhancing the resilience of ecosystems and encouraging the use of natural based solutions The committee recognises the importance of ecosystems, such as wetlands, forests, and water bodies in addressing climate change, thus mitigating against floods and landslides.  There is need for proper use of wetlands to reduce the increase in maintenance. Recommendationsa) The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment and other stakeholders should intensify public awareness about the negative implications of climate-related disasters arising from poor management and use of wetlands. b)  Coordination between Ministries, Departments and Agencies should be enhanced to curb the vice of wetland encroachment as a way of averting its effects on climate change.c)  Government takes measures to stop the encroachment on wetlands by imposing stringent sanctions on persons who abuse their power to acquire land in wetland areas and ensure that degraded wetlands are restored.  Further still, Government should follow up on Parliament’s recommendation to cancel all land titles issued on gazetted wetlands. d)  The Uganda Investment Authority should ensure that its investment guidelines are climate resilient and deny permits to investors that are bound to disrupt the ecological systems in the wetlands. e)  Training and equipping of the Environ-mental Protection Force should be en-[Ms Atuto]5693THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022hanced to ensure effective environmental monitoring, inspection and supervision of environmental protection activities, among others. f)  The committee further recommends that 10 per cent of the Environmental Fund be ring-fenced for the purpose of addressing climate change-related challenges through environmental restoration. g)  The committee encourages the prioritisation of natural-based solutions in the fight against climate change. 6.4  Investing in early warning systems and disaster preparedness and management Uganda as a country is vulnerable to multiple natural disasters such as drought, floods, landslides, and many others, which have impacted the country’s economy negatively by causing loss and damage. There is therefore a need to consider for disaster preparedness and management rather than a relief and rehabilitation approach.The committee, therefore, recommends that:a) Government should strengthen and increase the existing network of meteorological and hydrological monitoring stations, and associated infrastructure to better understand, inform and prepare the masses for climate change across the country. b)  The committee further urges the Uganda Metrological Authority to disseminate weather and climate information to decision-makers in Government and other stakeholders. c)  The committee further recommends that Government should prioritise funding for the disaster management and preparedness sector in addition to ensuring effective risk response in cases of climate-induced disasters, and decentralised mainstreaming of disaster risk reduction up to the grassroots. 1.5 Preventing deforestation and rehabili -tation of natural forests There is a high rate of deforestation and the rate of rehabilitation is very low due to limited awareness, lack of funds and unclear boundaries. The committee, therefore, recommends that: a)  Government should ensure deliberate efforts to reforest areas that have been depleted due to human activity and natural causes as this will come a long way in reducing the country’s carbon footprint. In this regard, the committee calls upon Government to allocate funds for tree planting campaigns from the Environmental Levy and the Tree Fund as stipulated under the National Environment Act, 2019. b)  Government should promote tree planting outside forests and reserves and encourage agro-forestry practices within homesteads. Further still, the National Forest Authority should support and promote the development or prioritising tree species such as bamboo and other fruit trees, which are quick in maturing and friendly to the environment. This would in turn reduce pressure on the existing forests while allowing for the regeneration of natural forests. c) Government should initiate activities that reduce demand for forest products such as biomass for cooking, fuel efficiency, cooking stoves and clean cooking mechanisms. These should be emphasized in communities.d) Government should come up with initiatives to enhance or encourage the public to plant trees.e) Government should encourage carbon trade with better negotiation prices. The Ministry of Water and Environment should fast-track the development of regulations, governing, measuring, verification and reporting sources of green-house gas emissions from 5694STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTthe different sectors of the economy as well as reduce, remove or avoid them. f) Government should improve forest management by encouraging collaborative forest management, which will give the masses a sense of ownership of these forests and enhance their protection; andg)  Forest boundaries should be reopened and marked, and land titles issued in gazetted forests should be canceled. Transition to clean, reliable, affordable, sustainable and efficient energy The Sustainable Development Goal No. 7 obligates member states to ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and clean energy where Uganda is committed to ensuring several interventions under the energy sector to remove taxes on solar panels and LPG to make it affordable to the local masses. The committee, therefore, recommends as follows:a) Government should encourage masses to diversify energy sources and promote renewable energy transition within the households. In this regard, Government should encourage the use of LPG, solar biogas, wind and electricity as alternative sources of biomass. b) Government should encourage the uptake of technologies that reduce biomass use such as the use of efficient cook stoves and green charcoal. c) Government should review taxes levied on renewable energy equipment such as solar panel batteries and gas cylinders and wind energy equipment with a view of making them more affordable and available to the public. d) Government should increase investment in the electric transmission and distribution infrastructure. In this regard, the committee recommends that focus should be put on implementing the free-connection policy to improve access and increase demand for hydroelectricity as a clean energy alternative.e) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, through the Uganda Investment Authority, should encourage investment in the renewable energy such as solar panel assembling plants and manufacturing industries to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases produced while at the same time reducing on transport costs involved in importing such equipment. This will, in turn, create employment especially for the youth. f) The committee recommends that Government should encourage a gradual move towards carbon neutrality to attain to net zero, encourage an energy mix and ensure a balance with the country’s socio-economic needs.g) The committee recommends that the Uganda National Bureau of Standards should ensure standards on renewable energy equipment since using energy-efficient appliances reduces power consumption, which in turn reduce greenhouse emissions.Financing of climate change and natural resources Climate change financing is needed for mitigation and adaptation. This is stated out in the UN Convention on Climate Change to provide financial resources to assist developing countries in implementing the objectives to reduce impacts of climate change. The committee therefore recommends as follows: a) Government streamlines climate financing in the budgeting process by implementing climate certification as provided for under the National Climate Change Act in order 5695THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022to ensure that resources are available to the different stakeholders to mitigate the effects of climate change.b)  Government should strengthen the Climate Financing Unit under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to adequately manage the efficient funds geared towards addressing climate change. b) Government should utilise the funding options available under financing for climate change such as the Green Climate Fund and the Global Environmental Facility as well as other bilateral funds to fill the existing funding gap.d)  The committee recommends that the National Environment Fund and the Tree Fund should be reinstated with sufficient monies of at least 10 per cent tagged to addressing climate change and environment conservation. Rapid population growth and high rate of urbanisationAs you may already be aware, there is growing rapid population in Uganda as a country, which has so far affected the climate in a way that the growing population has forced so many young people to acquire land and settle in the wetlands thus causing climate change. The committee recommends as follows: a) Government should come up with policies and mechanisms to address the increasing challenge of high population growth, which is one of the major factors contributing to encroachment on the water catchment areas in search of cheap land for settlement and means of livelihood. b) Government should put in place policies and regulate waste management and encourage investment in industries that turn waste into energy since the option of land fields for garbage collection only increases the production of methane in the environment.c)  Government should increase budget allocation to the local authorities for waste management and population control with particular emphasis on recycling, resource recovery and waste treatment. Furthermore, the committee recommends that city authorities incentivise private companies to participate in and promote the transformation of waste to energy, thus reducing the emissions of methane and other greenhouse gasses. d)  The development of policy frameworks in the new cities should mainstream green growth into urban planning, management and finance in order to embrace a green urban development approach to minimise the impacts of urbanisation on the environment. e)  New cities should take up green and climate resilient transport by promoting walking and cycling. Government should also create an efficient public transport system through revitalising the railway, water and other transport systems. Mr Speaker, in conclusion, Uganda is highly exposed and vulnerable to the impacts of climate variability and climate change and at the same time facing widespread environmental degradation. The effects include slow onset processes such as temperature rise, drought, desertification and loss of biodiversity among others, as well as sudden events such as floods, rainstorms and landslides that are expected to increase in terms of frequency and severity, in future. Whereas these effects are cross-cutting and affect all sectors, some parts of the country are particularly at risk. Particularly, the mountainous areas, cattle corridor and urban areas are facing urban ecosystem destruction. Although Uganda has a robust legal and regulatory system on environment and climate change in place, there is need to consolidate institutional structures and ensure implementation of the laws in place to address environmental conservation and climate change adaptation and mitigation. PRIME MINISTER’S TIME5696STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTThe committee, therefore, calls upon Government to put in place the interventions recommended in the report to ensure sustainability and economic growth in the country. I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. (Applause) Colleagues, these are straightforward and cross-cutting issues. We do not have much debate on them. I will allow a debate of 15 minutes. We are going to repeat what is in the report, yet we have the Order Paper to handle. I will start with Hon. Milton Muwuma. Colleagues, I know you. I know the parties you belong to and I know the strengths of each party in this House. So, I know how to balance. I know where I can pick five or six and where I can pick two. So, please, take your time. Whenever I do not get it right, the LoP is always nearby to make a sign to me.4.32MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week, I thanked the committee for a comprehensive report regarding climate change and environment –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will have two minutes each. MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee is recommending that the Meteorological Department regularly disseminates weather and climate information to decision makers. They are right. However, the credibility of the information they always release is wanting. They normally tell us, “We will be expecting rains in this season” and people rush to the gardens. However, in the end, drought hits us. I do not know whether it is the machines or the staff manning that department that have something to say. We are saying that whereas the recommendation is good, the implementers need to do more work. There is also the issue of the Ministry of Water and Environment coordinating with Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs). Last week, officials from NFA survived being lynched in Iganga because of miscoordination. They came and began demarcating people’s land, saying it was a gazetted forest reserve. I am 47 years old. I have grown up not seeing any forest in that place called Walugogo. However, as of now, NFA is claiming it to be a forest reserve, minus informing leaders. They are encroaching on people’s land. If the LC 5 chairman had not intervened, people were becoming chaotic and rowdy, ready to sort out these people naturally. It is not the right way to go.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Youth Central?4.34MR AGNES KIRABO (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the good report and the recommendations they have made about climate change. On the use of gas energy to reduce deforestation, I heard the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development promising to distribute gas cylinders. I am wondering where the process has reached or whether the implementation has not begun.  The second issue is about wetland encroachment. In my village, in Nyimbwa County, Luweero District, we had a swamp and a certain General – I will not mention the name – came and started growing rice there. So, our swamp disappeared. I think that is also an example of wetland encroachment. I am wondering how we are going to mitigate these problems when the Generals and ministers are the ones encroaching on the wetlands. (Applause) Maybe before we preach this to our communities, we should take it up first. Thank you, Mr Speaker.4.36MR VINCENT OBONG (Independent, Lira West Division, Lira City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We know that as Ugandans we should [Ms Atuto]5697THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022come together to agglomerate our efforts in the fight against climate change and how we should mitigate against it. I also have a concern that the minister for finance was, on a number of occasions, quoted to have said that foreign investors that are on wetlands can stay and our own investors, who are Ugandans, should get out of the wetlands. How does that impact the message that we are putting across – that people should get out of the wetlands? (Applause) That is number one. Number two, I also want to borrow a leaf from what my colleague put across. We appreciate that the forests that have been deforested should be put back. The concern is that, one, most of the people who are going to claim the land that they think belongs to the National Forestry Authority do not know the boundaries of the land. I have a case in my constituency called Telwa Forest Reserve; they do not know the boundaries yet people have lived there for years and years. We have had governments and governments, nobody has been chased from that land, but now they are coming to chase them out of that land, and the situation is volatile as we speak now. We need to talk about these issues, and discuss them as Ugandans and also get to know that the people that we are driving out of these areas are Ugandans that deserve to live in this country. I thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, the honourable colleague is raising serious issues. When we are looking at this commitment, Government is proposing to remove the National Forestry Authority. Now, if you make it a department in the ministry, my friend, forget about forests in this country. Secondly, I love living in a clear and known world; I do not want to live a lie. I have seen people talking about forest reserves. The area, where Gulu University is, where Government put up buildings under funding from the African Development Bank, is called a forest reserve. You know, on paper, it is called the forest reserve. But Government borrowed money from the African Development Bank to build faculties for Gulu University. Therefore now, I am concerned and the minister may tell us; where there are no forests, you are saying that they are forest reserves. Okay, there are no forests, you find completely there is no - there is only eucalyptus, maybe one or two, it is in the middle of a town and you are calling it a forest reserve. Where there are real forests, you are failing to protect. (Laughter) Between me and you, I have seen many of them. In the 10th Parliament, I remember the issue was raised  and we said, “Why don’t you be open? What does it help you, for example, to look at where Gulu University is and you deny them their title insisting that it is a forest reserve when there is a university.” Will you evict yourself? Because you are the Government and you are the one who - would you evict yourself? So that is what comes to my mind. 4.41MR ROBERT SSEKITOLEEKO (NUP, Bamunanika County, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for the opportunity and I thank the committee. My submission is about the environment. As we are stating this issue, they are just beating about the bush, but we know the facts.The already existing laws, which we need to also put into consideration –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it seems today you are not prepared.4.42DR BAYIGA LULUME (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for producing this report. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, when we give you a microphone, and you start by saying, “I am submitting on environment 5698STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTissues,” but that is what we are discussing. Then you rotate around looking for words, while your time is running out. So I am going to give you one minute each and I will pick more people. Hon. Ssekitoleeko, I will give you again later.DR BAYIGA: I would like to invite this Parliament to the following forests because we cannot talk about climate change without talking about the forest cover which is dwindling every day; Mabira forest, which is just remaining on the roadside. I am talking about Kisisita forest in Buikwe, which has now been cut down in the pretext of planting new trees, especially Eucalyptus. Namazzina, which was about a square mile of forest cut down completely and eucalyptus being planted. Mr Speaker, I would like to invite this Parliament to give me a chance to present the motion on this at an appropriate time. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. MR SSEKITOLEEKO:  Mr Speaker, there is an initiative of private individuals like the church, which has come up with a campaign of planting trees. For example, Kasana Luwero has come up with an institute which is called BLI (Bethany Land Institute). We need to highlight and concentrate on that such that you give them funds and we see how they can move with such a good idea.Secondly, there is an issue of buveera here in Uganda. We need to just embark on how we can concentrate on the banning of buveera because that is the source of the problem. I know there is already an existing law that is not implemented. Let us implement the existing laws as regards to that and we move instead of just beating about the bush. I thank you. 4.45MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I also thank the chairperson for the good presentation. Your wish list has been too long and you may assume that Government is starting business today. We need a genuine conversation on issues of the environment. We all observe that we have sufficient laws, but we have challenges of enforcement. We need to enhance enforcement before you think about any other laws. Are we sure that we do not have sufficient laws in this country?  When Mama Mabira was still with us on this side, she used to fight so hard for the environment, but when she joined the colleagues from the other team, she relaxed. Therefore, Madam Minister, we call upon you to ensure that that ministry is put to good use, because that is the reason why you went to the other side. So please ensure that something is done. Mr Speaker, we need to enforce the rule of law in this country not only on the environment, but also on other issues of governance. I submit that Government should come up strongly to ensure that -  (Member timed out.) 4.46MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is about that swampy area in Namanve. As much as the committee talked about returning the land titles, the local authorities that give permits should also be cautioned not to give permits in areas that are swampy because I do not know what we are going to do. In Namanve Industrial Park, there are hotels and these hotels are owned by some of us. Like Hon. Migereko of Jinja has a hotel in the swamp. Then Sudhir also has a hotel in a swamp. So I do not know the mechanisms we are going to use; are we going to compensate them or are we going to break down the structures? Therefore, I want the laws to be stringent for the municipalities and the local authorities also. Thank you.[The Deputy Speaker]5699THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 20224.47MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I sincerely thank the committee for very good work; the recommendations are fantastic. But what we lack is the willingness to implement the laws that we have. The climate change issue, if we do not deal with it during our generation, will be some of the things which will destroy the country, Uganda. I would like to appeal to all of us, as we deliberate on this issue, let us see the will from Government. I come from Usuk County and we have a barracks called Olilim. I would like to tell you that when these people come for training, they cut down the trees that are around there to build their small houses. There is no replacement for these and the effects are adverse. If Government says, “All Members of Parliament…” like last – (Member timed out.)4.48MR PETER OKOT  (DP, Tochi County, Omoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee. Let us look at the drivers of this degradation. Look at the taxes. Since most of our districts have limited means of enhancing their local revenue, they go slow in implementing or in enforcing some of these regulations. They give permits to ensure that they raise local revenue. So, we have a challenge there. For as long as we still do not enhance the budget of the local governments, we are going to have a raw deal in implementing some of these policies. Therefore, I urge this Parliament and also Government, generally, to enhance sources of revenue for the local governments. Thank you.4.49MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA  (NUP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have a challenge in this country where the law is applied selectively. Recently, there was a public outcry on the shores of Lake Victoria where Sudhir Ruparelia was pouring sand into the Lake. NEMA was notified, they reached the scene, but told us that there is someone above; and they went away. Up to now, Sudhir is constructing in the lake.The National Environment Management Authority should be questioned. We have a committee here where it is supposed to report. We should put it to task to explain. Under what circumstances is the law applied to the poor and when it comes to the rich, they are exonerated?Secondly – (Member timed out.) – I have an area –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you do not allocate yourself more time. I would be selective if I allowed that. (Laughter) 4.50MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, somebody asked for a solution to the people who are constructing in wetlands. Let us impose heavy taxes on those who have already constructed there. For instance, we can say, “Pay Shs 200 million per annum wetland tax because you have already constructed there.” We already have people who have put up their buildings, for instance here in Namanve. They will run away by themselves. Let the tax drive people out and we use that money for other purposes.Secondly, on the issue of the charcoal that we are using, let us get cookers at a reasonable price. Let us drop the taxes. Let us make it affordable to get these. Can we give those in the wetlands alternative livelihoods? My agricultural people in the wetlands cannot just leave. Some people were given only wetlands by their parents; so, where do they go? Therefore, the best thing to do is to give them money as capital, so that they go for other businesses. Then things will go – (Member timed out.)5700STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT4.51MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA  (Indepen-dent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. First of all, I want to thank the committee.We see that in our Government, there is no coordination within the MDAs. Today, we met the Physical Planning Board. You find that they give a directive that, that person should not build in a wetland, but the police do not enforce it. We need the MDAs to coordinate in tackling this issue.Secondly, why are laws in this country selective? The rich people are building in wetlands every day or night, but when the poor go, it becomes a problem. Moreover, there is a lot of corruption in Government offices – the lands ministry. In NEMA, they are even giving outland titles.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But NEMA does not give land titles. 4.52MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG  (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, in 2021, we passed the National Climate Change Act and gave the minister powers to appoint the date of commencement. That has not been done. The minister must tell us why it is not done. Honourable members, Africa contributes 0.0 per cent of green gas emissions. Other countries like America or China could be more than 50 per cent. We must be demanding reparation. We are victims. As Parliament, we must demand so that we can ensure that our climate is protected and we adapt to climate change. Thank you. 4.53MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Honourable colleagues, I suggest that as Members of Parliament in our small villages, let us give ourselves the task to plant at least a tree in front of our kitchen. It would show a good example.Secondly, in this country, there are laws. Let there be tree planting; the law should not defeat us. A tree does not talk to human beings. It talks to the rain and God alone. In Northern Uganda, people are cutting down mango trees. Mangoes are useful fruits, but the trees have all been cut down. The shea trees have all been cut down. These things are food to the people. Therefore, we need to work very hard in this situation. For charcoal alone, in my district Otuke, people are carrying it 24 hours –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Today, I was reading an article in the Daily Nation of Kenya. This professor was focusing on an important topic concerning us, the legislators. He said legislators all over the world are asking for water connectivity to their areas, but very few of them are discussing the question of the source of that water. In very few years - he said in Kenya, if they do not take interventions, they have around 400 - there is a way they calculate their scientific stuff - amount of water - but that sounded little. That is why I did not want to commit myself on the figure. The issue was that we must address our concerns of sources of water, if we are to look at having water for our communities in the future. Most of you will find that for the boreholes we are asking for, they will come, look for water sources and fail. Therefore, colleagues, tree planting and all these issues; I think the minister will be needed to come and give a comprehensive statement so that we all appreciate it, in order to go and launch a much bigger campaign where each one of us can be involved.However, remember we used to give tree seedlings, as Members of Parliament. That also stopped. We have to fight and ensure that is back. 5701THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 20224.56MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the chairperson for the good presentation. Uganda’s economy is particularly vulnerable to climate change given its significant reliance on natural resources. Here, I mean that when you look at how we have been affected as a country, the longer droughts that have enormously affected agriculture productivity, the high drop in water levels, for example in Lake Victoria, low hydroelectric production as seen in Nyagak I Hydropower Plant in West Nile Region following the uncertainty of River Nyagak. The rainfall has decreased, is less predictable and not evenly distributed. You can see, in addition to that, that it has come out with the –(Member timed out.)4.57MR WILLIAM MUSEVENI (Independent, Buwekula South County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My name is William Museveni - I do not know whether I am protected.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kibalya is saying that the court did not respect the name Museveni. MR MUSEVENI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. My interest is where they recommend tree planting outside forests and forest reserves. If this Parliament can pass a new law on compulsory tree planting by all adult Ugandans, at least there will a change in this country. If necessary, we can pass a new law so that every Ugandan plants at least 10 trees per season, which is half a year. This is because we are losing tree cover because of human activities. So, if it is –(Member timed out.)4.58MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I totally agree with the committee report on the point that Ugandans must take up tree planting and that is why I moved a motion in the last session. Mr Speaker, I do not agree with the committee that Government should create boundaries in the forest reserves. This is because they should have gone into the nitty-gritty to state that Government must follow the processes as they are in the law. Why am I saying that? We have cases of unknown forest reserves. A member said that he is 47 years old. He grew up there, but never knew of any forest reserve there because people have always lived there. I will tell you of a case in my subcounty and Government –(Member timed out.)4.59MS IRENE MULONI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. We, from the Mt Elgon region, have been hit by disasters because nature is fighting back; flash floods, landslides - because the hills and mountains are bare. As a matter of urgency - Government needs to relocate people from Mt Elgon and let the trees occupy their natural habitat.  I am glad that the committee was able to interface with the Ministry of Energy regarding utilisation of renewable energies because 90 per cent of the energy is biomass, meaning people are cutting down trees as a source of fuel. There is a free connection policy. What happened? The regulator has now introduced –(Member timed out.)5.01MR JOEL LEKU (NRM, Terego West County, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to talk about two issues. One is the net metering policy for renewable energy installations in the country. 5702STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTWe do not have a policy that allows somebody who has excess power, for example, on solar to sell it to the grid. We also do not have a policy that allows such a person to also buy. I urge the committee to incorporate the net metering issue into the report. There is also the issue of connecting renewable energy to the buildings in this country. You can clearly see what happens when power goes off in the city, everybody runs to start a generator; a lot of noise - (Member timed out.)5.02MR BASHIR LUBEGA (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is very hard to comprehend issues of climate change without delving, in detail, into the population demographics of our country. Some deeper insight into this will help us exhaustively discuss alternatives. Mr Speaker, the fertility rate in Uganda today is about five children per woman - one of the highest in the world and that combines with the high libido among our youth –(Laughter)Mr Speaker, the high libido among our youth together – and with that you can see that annually, we register –(Member timed out.)5.03MS JOANNE ANIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There have been poor relations between the NFA and the local communities in Uganda, as you have heard from other colleagues here. This relationship has further gone down the drain because of the way in which the local communities are handled. In my district of Madi-Okollo, there is a forest range called Laura Forest Reserve, but nobody knows how the NFA took charge of this forest. Charcoal burning or collecting firewood is done in an unclear manner. Some people are allowed to collect charcoal, others are not. Therefore, it has led to a lot of discomfort amongst the people. Recently, many people were driven out of the community, and so, there is a very poor relationship, as you have heard even from other colleagues - we need to go on the ground and see –(Member timed out.)5.04MR AMOS KANKUNDA (NRM, Rwampara County, Rwampara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand to appreciate the committee for what they have done. However, I will emphasise one point: that as a Government, we need to go back to the drawing board and redefine the boundaries of our forests to avoid the conflicts that are ongoing between NFA/Government and the communities. We know very well that while these boundaries were put in place far back in time, the population has grown and therefore, it is true we still need these forests - but they should be in areas where they are supposed to be. Therefore, for that reason, to avoid conflict as Government, we must redefine our boundaries and see where they are needed, because some of the areas that had forests have grown into cities and municipalities and so, have relocated the forests. I pray that we give this the attention it deserves. 5.06MR YOV AN ADRIKO (NRM, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, point of procedure. MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, this Parliament adopted the mask as an instrument that we must all have. However, when I look especially the other side, a number of colleagues have been - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, the Member is protected.MR SSEGGONA: Thank you. I noticed that the Government Chief Whip on your right has whipped a number of the other Members not to put on masks. May you guide whether masks have been officially suspended so that we can all enjoy our freedom?[Mr Leku]5703THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Sseggona, I hope you are not talking about the presiding officer. (Laughter) Anyhow, honourable colleagues, you remember, I think around three weeks ago, I told you that because of the distance in which I sit from you, I can freely - and you have a chance to move out, remove your mask to feel some fresh air, but as for me, I sit here for five to seven hours while suffocating. That is why I have removed it. Therefore, honourable colleagues, please put on your masks; the Ministry of Health has not yet cleared us. And I think it is important to correct the record that the Chief Whip did not whip his colleagues to remove the masks.MR ADRIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that communities are suffering. In my constituency, NFA claims they have 26 forest reserves, but when you go on the ground, you realise they have not sensitised the community, but allow rich people to demarcate the forest and  after a few days, about 10 people  come and claim the area. They will give it to other people. This means the community is suffering. I request you to give us the opportunity, as Members of Parliament, to go on the ground and sensitise the community. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Stephen Kagwera?5.07MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that we have good laws and policies. The key word here is implementation. Mr Speaker, the issue we should be addressing is not even the policies and laws. What is important is: who and what is frustrating implementation in this country? Whatever we talk about here is about implementation. Let us have time and look at all these things generally and ask: “Who is the enemy of this country? What is the enemy of this country?” Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ababiku?5.08MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My observation is that Ugandans are ready to take action, but Government is not consistent because of the method of implementation. My proposal is that let Government bring the implementation plan to this House so that we can discuss, own it and join Government in the implementation process. Thank you so much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Bugangaizi?5.09MS AISA AGABA (NRM, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to appreciate the chairperson and the committee for the good report they have presented here. I support you, Mr Speaker, on what you have said. It is high time Government gazetted forested areas. At the same time, people have settled in these places - like you had said – in different towns and areas. Now they are coming up and telling people that this is a forest reserve. People have spent 20 or 30 years in these places. In my area, we have a place called Kalangala. People have spent around 20 years there, but Government is not sure whether it is a forest reserve or an empty area where people should stay. People are not entitled –(Member timed out.)5.10MS JOYCE ACAN (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report. I concur with the committee on the issue of population increase. 5704STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTMr Speaker, we have a problem between the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) and the local councils or the city councils. As city councils give land titles to people who want to settle in the wetlands, the NEMA people come and destroy whatever they have put. There is also a problem with us, Mr Speaker. We, the leaders, want to shield the people who settle in the wetlands. So, it is now our cardinal role to go back and sensitise the people and allow NEMA to do their work. That is only when we shall not experience floods. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 5.11MR PATRICK BINGI (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. Specifically, I will address myself to part 6.6 on transitioning to clean, reliable, affordable, sustainable and efficient energy.  Mr Speaker, about two months ago, the minister launched the use of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG). The minister promised Ugandans that the cost of LPG was going to reduce drastically after scrapping off Value-Added Tax (V AT). However, about a week ago, I was refilling my cylinder and the cost had drastically increased. That is issue No. 1. Also, to reiterate what Hon. Agnes Kirabo put across, the honourable minister, still while launching LPG – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Basil? 5.13MR BASIL BATARINGAYA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One, rural electrification was introduced to save forests. So, why is it that for three or more years, poles are spread over very many constituencies without electricity being connected to the homes of people so that we protect these forests? That is the case in Kashari North. Secondly, we live astride the equator. Why is it that we are not investing heavily in solar energy? I beg to move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oseku?5.13MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My issue is that there are areas that are heavily populated and are facing land fragmentation. However, Government has land, especially in institutions such as schools, health centres, subcounty headquarters and they are bare; there are no trees there. In my view, the ministry needs to mobilise resources and plant trees in these places. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Alyek? 5.14MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative. Kole):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mother Nature has really suffered through the actions of men and women. Mr Speaker, I suggest that besides planting trees in schools, we should engage children. Each child going to a day school should be given a seedling to go back and plant in their homesteads. I know that for children, when they are given the chance, they will actually take the trees as theirs and they will protect the trees they plant. So, as the children grow, the trees will also grow with them and they will protect the environment. That is one of the suggestions that I would like the committee and this Parliament to really approve of so that we see our environment being protected by the innocent children. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sekabira?[Ms Acan]5705THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 20225.15MR DENIS SEKABIRA (NUP, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have two issues. One, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee on whether once land titles of the registered proprietors are cancelled, Government will compensate them. Two, I am worried as well if it will not be a bonanza for land grabbers. (Text expunged.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am constrained to allow such information to be on the record of Parliament when you know that the honourable gentleman cannot be here to clarify. We appreciate your situation, but, humbly, allow me request the Clerk to expunge it from the record. It is difficult for me, as the presiding officer. It is a strong allegation against an individual. No, please. I will advise that it should be a court matter. That is his estate. You handle it. Once the court has pronounced itself on it, then I can be comfortable.5.17MR LINOS NGOMPEK (NRM, Kibanda North County, Kiryandongo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Kiryandongo, we have a forest reserve called Kaduku. It is on Kaduku Hill and the UPDF has gadgets on the hill. However, the UPDF soldiers deployed there are the ones involved in the burning and selling of charcoal. When local leaders rise up, they become ruthless. I request the authorities concerned to look into this matter such that our forest reserve is protected.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of Opposition, I will allow a little bit of this, but on committee reports, I do not usually allow your side to respond to it. I usually give it to the minister because it is a report of the House. I usually give special attention to the Leader of the Opposition and the team, when it is the Government side presenting and, therefore, they are supposed to be responding. The one of the committee is signed by the Shadow Minister for Energy, the members of the Opposition; so, it is our report. Since Hon. Kivumbi is the acting Leader of the Opposition, let me allow him to say something on this. 5.19MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I thank you. What the report did not give us is an audit of all other parliamentary resolutions. We have been at this issue for some time. We have spoken and made resolutions; to what extent have they been implemented? And I think the report did not give us that.  Secondly, I hear people want to go on a long campaign of tree planting. But you have been very clear; there are standing forests that are being destroyed every single day. So, why don’t we first concentrate on protecting a standing forest before even going into any tree planting? NFA is the number one destroyer of standing forests. They give permits to where a forest is, it is cut, or it is planted with eucalyptus. Before we audit - we have had the NFA for some time, can we audit it - its impact? How many square miles of forests did we have before NFA and what dowe have with NFA so that we know whether there is value for money. If I had the authority in this country, I would ban it within a minute because it has led to the destruction of forests.  To the minister, you are the regulator. Where are the regulations on these issues? You were an activist on this side. When we take up government positions, we should take some of our credentials to that other side and help. (Laughter) That is the only way we make a difference where people justify crossing. But if you cross and you also join business as usual, of what importance are you? (Laughter) My plea to my good sister - she knows that she is my good friend - is that you can fast-track the regulations.   Lastly, to the Minister of Works and Transport, we had an earlier suggestion that wherever we are constructing a new tarmac road, alongside 5706STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTit, let us plant trees. We can use the same borrowed money - the same loans - to say that as we plant new roads, we should have forests. I once drove through America - courtesy of the US Government, around 11 states. For each state, they have planted new forests alongside the roads and it is beautiful; it gives you good driving. I suggested that you combine it with prisons. Prisoners can go and plant trees. You can have cross-cutting rich ideas on how we can restore the environment. I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister for roads, before the one of environment comes. You wanted to respond to this?5.22THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. All the roads we are doing have trees planted alongside. The problem is sustainment. You plant them, and then some people cut them down. We have had a problem, for example, in the north; we tried to restore the cashew nut trees. Even before they could reach the flowering stage, they were harvested by some people for charcoal. I think we need also to continue educating people, but that has been established. For every new road, there must be tree planting.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: These are issues where you need to involve leaders. When you involve leaders, it becomes much easier. MPs are always complaining that we go and implement projects in their areas without even informing them. Some of them are launched by their rivals. There is an MP who told me that a rival was distributing items from NAADS in their constituency. It becomes difficult for colleagues to follow up. Let us engage leaders. As leaders, you should also now pick interest when such projects, as the minister has said - when constructing a road in your constituency. The one we are talking about today, go and ask, “Where are the trees?” Because there is a road reserve area where we would include all these trees. Honourable Minister for Environment, there is a procedural matter.MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In 2010, Cabinet had a resolution of the four million trees to be planted. The late Rt Hon. Oulanyah was supposed to champion that. The minister knows it very well. In the same spirit, there was the position of the Tree Fund. As the report from the committee was being presented, they expected the committee to hint on the Tree Fund. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, that as the minister comes to respond, she responds on those two items - the four million trees to be planted and the Tree Fund? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That would be really right. But what confused me was; there was a Cabinet resolution, then to be spearheaded by the head of the Legislature. I think he was launching. For example, colleagues, you can have your own initiative. Personally, I have already planned what to do on my birthday on the 10th of November. I am going to plant 10 acres of trees with Rotary. The Rotary club has arranged with one of the churches, I think in Mukono. I am funding those trees to be looked after for two years. I will plant and I will look after the forest for two years. So, I am not cutting any cake; I will be planting trees. We can have a meaningful life around what we do every day. Instead of buying a Nyege Nyege  ticket, buy a few seedlings. Or we can tell everyone who is supposed to go to Nyege Nyege to first plant 10 trees- (Laughter) Then people like Hon. Solo Kayemba here – (Laughter) Minister of Energy, you had a minute.5.26THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Opolot Okaasai): Mr Speaker, a number of issues have been raised about clean energy. Specific questions were asked. For example, there was a question of LPG promotion. Yes, that programme is on; it was launched by the minister and we are actually piloting it in Kampala. Six hundred cylinders have already been given out. We are [Mr Muwanga Kivumbi]5707THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022going to roll it out to the district- Kampala. (Interjection)  It is not meant for your class; it is for people with two bedrooms and so on. I can produce the list of people who have benefitted out of it.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee on Natural Resources, follow up on that matter. MR OKAASAI: You can follow up on that matter. The project is ongoing. We are promoting the use of mixed energy sources to reduce the use of biomass. Hon. Irene said - we have actually come up with a cooking tariff to encourage those who have power in their houses to go into using electricity for cooking. And that programme is running now.Free connection of electricity (ECP) free electricity connection, there isn’t enough money to actually implement that policy. But I wish to assure the House that Cabinet approved a project where we shall reactivate the free connection policy. It is going to be debated here in the House. I expect that you will support it to connect your people to electricity. It has already come to Cabinet. The Minister of Finance will present it soon.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister -MR OKAASAI:  Yes. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now what you are doing is getting side talk and formalising it on the Hansard. Someone reading the Hansard in future would ask: “Who was the minister talking to” because the ones talking from the sides are not on record, but you are on record. MR OKAASAI:  Okay. So, let me continue.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Don’t respond to interjections.MR OKAASAI:  Thank you very much for that guidance. And then the poles, which are standing - those poles are in the plan; the projects are actually running –(Interjection) - it does not matter that the project is running.Please give me time to submit that yes, those poles are standing and the projects are ongoing. It is because of COVID-19 that we were not able to acquire certain materials, which are imported into this.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are waiting for a statement on the performance of REA, which was promised by your senior minister. So that is when we shall discuss.MR OKAASAI: We shall actually discuss that. So, on the use of solar, many households - more than 38 per cent of the households - actually are on solar electricity and we are promoting it. So, in essence, the Ministry of Energy is actually moving forward to popularise the use of sustainable energy and clean energy for applications at households and at industrial level. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister for environment.5.29THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Environment)(Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee chairman and the team for the report. The issues which have been raised are actually not new. As Government, we have been engaging the committee and we work very closely with each other. However, for the benefit of issues raised, before I can proceed to the honourable members’ concerns, allow me to respond as such: As Government, when talking about this environmental undertaking, we have actually involved the multi-sectoral approach. My colleagues in other ministries, for instance, the Ministry of Works and Transport have just responded, they are working closely and they are doing their part. The Ministry of Education is doing its part, churches, cultural institutions, civil society and the youth; we are engaging them in the restoration. We want to let you know that the Climate Change Act was enacted in 2021 and we are 5708STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTsupposed to bring in place the regulation to operationalise it. I would like to report that the work has been started; the committee team has been put in place, the consultation is on and in judging, we have gone above 30 per cent of putting in place that regulation. The bottleneck, which we still are buffering with as you are aware of, colleagues, is that after recovering from the COVID-19 pandemic, the budgeting part of it to enable us to go as fast as we should have done curtailed us a bit. However, I would like to say that we have made progress on that and we are more concerned that that regulation should be in place to help us protect our environment. Mr Speaker, I also want to report that Cabinet, in August, passed the 10-year Restoration Programme, which was spearheaded by the First Deputy Prime Minister, and indeed a number of resolutions towards the restoration of our environment were agreed upon. And all the concerns, which my colleagues raised, most of them actually are being catered for there.I would like to briefly highlight them so that I do not go into the colleagues’ concern, again. One, that the National Environment Fund was restored; Cabinet confirmed and approved that. The enforcement arm, the Uganda Police Environmental Force, is going to be beefed up with the UPDF and we are also going to train some guards to help us enforce the laws, which actually as you know, we have, but the enforcement arm was a bit weak. And that is going to happen as one of the resolutions. And I would like to tell you that once we have the funds, which have been authorised by finance, we are going to do more than what we are doing currently. Amongst them is boundary opening, restoration of degraded wetlands and already cut down forests. Let me also be on record on this: that if we, the people’s representatives who are supposed to protect; we are actually trustees for the environment in the Constitution - if we can come and we cut down or we bring motions to cut down the existing forest or to turn it and degazette it, it defeats the purpose. My humble prayer, colleagues, is that we should be the ones protecting this environment. Not even those who are talking have trees. We have the atlas. I have been in this Parliament for a while and I remember Dr Ariomanya of NEMA gave atlases to Members of Parliament, and we have them. We are working-around the-clock with the help of our development partners, to bring more copies so that Members can appreciate this. We are not just inventing this; these boundaries do exist and are known, only that they were degraded and encroached on; now you cannot see any trees. Friends, let us be sincere with ourselves; most of these places had thick forests, which have been degraded - (Interjection) - my sister, I wish you could let me run through this. I beg your protection, Mr Speaker. These forests were thick and it was our own people who did it; because of politics, sometimes, we fail to tell the truth. However, it is not only one section of people degrading the environment. We have all fallen short of God’s glory as far as protecting the forests and the environment is concerned. If you keep on pointing fingers at Generals, Members of Parliament and the ministers - it is all of us. And I have the records; if I brought them, they would blacklist everybody, and that is not going to move us forward. Let us just stop it now and protect the existing ones and then restore the ones, which have been degraded. We need to protect our environment if we want to have sustainable development in this country. The road works you are talking about, the floods and landslides are as a result of degradation of the environment. This has been also clearly highlighted in the report of the committee.Therefore, it is now important that we all play our part and God will help us. If not, God is going to - nature is talking; we must actually listen.5709THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022The meteorological departmentColleagues, you are aware of the challenges we have. I would like to also be on record that even last night as I was watched television, I noticed that the meteorological department is continuously trying to forecast what is coming. It might not be 100 per cent accurate as it was raised by Hon. Okot-Ogong, but it has the forecast given to our people. We shall try to improve the information relayed, but that should not be something, which deters us from moving forward. I would like to also bring to your attention the double application of the law, as colleagues have said. It is true that people are occupying the wetlands; others are cutting down trees. I would like to let you know that we should also appreciate the effort of NFA. We have impounded vehicles, taken cases to court and prosecution has taken place. We are moving towards having an environmental court or a specialised court that will fast-track environmental cases so that there is no delay. That is what is in the offing. We already have some courts, which are - at Buganda Road, the Chief Magistrate there is handling some of these cases. This also has been a problem because as soon as you arrest the offenders and take them to court, you must prove that that was a forest. You know, I am not a lawyer, and my son-in-law here – Hon. Kivumbi could know some of these more – but the court will say, “Prove. Have you gazetted it? Where are the boundaries?” And that is what colleagues are already raising here and that gives leeway to the degraders to finish the remaining trees because there is delayed justice. This is one of the issues we should solve.Mr Speaker, we are also promoting agro-forestry. This is already ongoing. The report has already alluded to that, but I would like to be on record that as Government, we are already encouraging that. Actually, we see it as a solution. The trees we are talking about - some people grow trees and once they have problems, they just go and cut them down. My honourable colleague has just talked about even mango trees being cut down.That is why we want to promote agro-forestry especially on the private land. We should differentiate between Government central forest reserves and the forests on the private land. How we manage it is the difference, but most times, just look at even those who are cutting down their own trees, which we should, by law, regulate. But somebody decides, “I have a problem, I’m cutting down my trees to pay for school fees.” What we are saying is: can we try to introduce some specialised tree species. Can we promote coffee growing? If a person had grown coffee, that is already a cash crop yet to us, it is a tree and helps us improve the tree covers - macadamia, avocado, cashew nuts, jackfruit or whatever. These are alternatives we are trying to advise our population on. I implore you, friends, to promote this in our constituencies so that people can no longer go for species, which, after a while, they can cut down.I also want to bring to your notice what we are doing in improving the forest cover. We think this is quite critical. We are talking to you, the people’s leaders, that as a country, we should improve forest cover, not for the sake of just improving it. The world is moving towards carbon credit. This is another hotcake, which we, as leaders, must prepare our people for and appreciate to keep their tree covers - not destroy it - while as Government and Parliament, we will put in place - my ministry is already drafting a regulation on how we are going to set ourselves ready to engage in carbon credit. Therefore, the trees our people have should not be cut down. We should instead encourage them so that when the carbon credit time comes and the regulation is put in place, we are able to let our people start earning from it. 5710STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTI know that there are some investors who are running around, deceiving Members of Parliament that, “We are going to give you so much money. Go and plant some trees then we sign some agreement.” That is not good because during the time of carbon credit, you will not know how much to earn from it.Please leaders, let us not sell our country. Let us not give away the rights of our people. The trees our people are planting are going to be traded. That money must come to this country, and not to somebody who will use the tree covers he has given the money for and goes to trade it at an international level, where you and I do not know.Mr Speaker, after a while, once our regulations are ready, we shall come back and also, through this Parliament, let the people’s leaders appreciate and we pronounce ourselves as a country so that we also start preparing ourselves to earn from our tree covers. We have been engaged in so many international meetings. We are advancing that leave alone the carbon credit; we also need to make sure that we put value to our natural resources. Most times, we do not know that the water bodies we have – the wetlands and the Mabiras - are doing great work in regulating the greenhouse gas. We do not know the value attached to that. We want, as a country, to start putting value to our natural sources so that when we go to discuss in international fora, like last week we came back with a team from Parliament - I welcome you back, including the vice-chairperson and I praise my friend from Gabon, where this engagement has been on - at that level people are already preparing themselves. Therefore, it is us to encourage people to plant more trees so that they are given value and that becomes a negotiating tool rather than advocating cutting the existing one and even try to de-gazette the remaining one. Mr Speaker, also allow me just respond to a few –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable minister.MS ANYWAR: Honourable members, you have raised so many pertinent issues. On some I gave response to them in the first summary. Anyhow, on the issue of kaveera, for instance, you know that it is one of those worst hard plastic things. The law, which we put in place banned 30 microns and below. As Government, we are going to move - unless we have the law put in place. The Attorney-General is advising on which laws to put in place so that maybe we can have a total ban. Or, if there is recycling, as some people want to advocate, how will that be done so that it is not littered? The discipline of our people - what is blocking the drainages are the plastics. Maybe one time we should even start thinking - by the way, we used not to have plastic bottles for soda or water. Rwanda does not have these plastics. What is wrong with us, Ugandans? Can’t we ban these? Can’t soda go back to the glass bottles –(Applause)As we prepare, we shall come for your support because it is this House that should help us finalise this. As Government, we are looking in that direction, so that we have a clean environment. Mr Speaker, I also want to say that we must agree, as a country, that corruption has eaten everywhere. Therefore, friends, morals start with you and I. How are we not taking bribes? How are we not even forcing ourselves to bribe others so that we get our way? If a Member of Parliament goes and talks to a forestry officer in Mukono that he wants the land and gives, maybe, about Shs 5 million, what do you expect? Both you – the giver and the taker, are corrupt. This is something that should also be addressed as we try to protect our environment. Mr Speaker, as I conclude, we are moving towards gazetting central forest covers, which are under our jurisdiction because there are [Ms Anywar]5711THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 13 SEPTEMBER 2022challenges with the legality around it. We are even moving towards having titles around it to cement it. However, it is a process. Friends, the land titles, which have been cancelled, are because we are collaborating with the lands ministry, the Attorney-General and other stakeholders. The Prime Minister heads all these – [Member: “Procedure.”]-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not in response, please. Honourable minister, go ahead. MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Thank you. These are undertakings that I think will move us to another level. We appreciate that things have not worked very well, but we should start somewhere. All of us should say enough is enough and then we go into action. I think the beginning of everything is the 10-year restoration programme, which includes funding. The source of funds is already cleared and that is what was missing. I think we are on the right track. Friends, I appreciate all your constituency concerns. We had actually planned that all Members of Parliament be given tree seedlings, but funds - My kind request to this House is that we allocate funds for tree seedlings so that each Member of Parliament, at least, goes with 50,000 seedlings and leads by example. This fund was removed last financial year. The committee did its part, but along the way, we lost it. Colleagues, if we really want to walk the talk, Parliament should provide funds and then we shall tighten the implementation. His Excellency the President has gone an extra mile. On all occasions, the President has directed that we must restore our environment and those who are in wetlands or forests should be evicted. Unlike what colleagues are saying, we are standing by that presidential directive. It will be implemented. However, I would like to be on record that we shall have a human face to that by giving an alternative source of livelihood. We are telling those in the wetlands: “Friends, can you leave and we give you fish farming, for instance? For those who are around the forests, can you engage in beekeeping as an alternative source of livelihood?” However, we want the will and willingness of our people, with the voice of the leadership, to leave our encroached areas. If you come here and say: “Where are my people going?” Where did they come from?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We have done our part, as Parliament. The bigger part is yours. As you said, we ensured that money was appropriated to you. Therefore, it is up to you to go and engage the Executive and say, “Parliament has done its part; they have appropriated the money. Show seriousness in protecting our environment.” (Applause)When you say we give you money – we have done it; we have not refused. In fact, on environment and climate change issues, Parliament has gone beyond what it could do to give you all the necessary support. So, now, you need to convince the Executive to take all these issues. You can always count on the support of Parliament. Colleagues, we have discussed this matter for long. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Climate Change on the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to address climate change in Uganda be adopted by this House, with amendments. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as per Rule 220 of the Rules of Procedure, we need an action-taken report because Hon. Kivumbi raised a very important issue. Clerk, comb for me the issues we have passed here to do with climate change. I need to 5712STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTformally forward them to the Chairperson, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources to see which action has been taken. This guides you in your day-to-day work. Committees, your work is not only processing budgets or ministerial policy statements. You also do oversight. Therefore, during this period when we do not have the budget – we are soon starting the budgeting cycle. I think Hon. Musasizi’s team launched the budgeting cycle for Financial Year 2023/2024 today. So, you better use this time to look into the issues, which you will be strong about when considering the budget for the ministry – Parliament passed A, B, C and D; where have you provided funding for it? How have you implemented all this? That is the best way we shall ensure that parliamentary resolutions are implemented. With that, colleagues, I adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2 o’clock, when we shall be paying tribute to Her Majesty the Queen.(The House rose at 5.54 p.m. and adjourned until 14 September 2022, at 2.00 p.m.)  [The Deputy Speaker]