



Tuesday, 29 September 2020

Parliament met at 3.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. We have had a slight delay because we were engaged in consultations over a number of issues, especially since we are winding down to the October recess. I hope we shall be able to move fast and catch up with the work. Thank you. 

I think there are just two matters of national importance. 

3.27
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I wish to raise a matter of national importance in relation to Kapchorwa Hospital, Kapchorwa District in Sebei Sub-region. Kapchorwa Hospital serves over five districts, which include Kween, Bukwo, Kapchorwa Municipality, Nakapiripirit, Bulambuli and others. This is in reference to records in the hospital. 

However, as I speak, Kapchorwa Hospital is closed and people are seriously suffering because they have nowhere to go for treatment. There were various reasons for closing the hospital. First, there was a COVID-19 patient, who later died. Subsequently, Kapchorwa Hospital lost two members of staff to COVID-19. There were no protective gear for the health workers and the support staff in the hospital. 

At the moment, Kapchorwa Hospital has no ambulance and in case of an emergency, there is nothing that can help the staff or the hospital. The nurses, the doctors and other staff in Kapchorwa Hospital were working very hard to save the lives of the people but they were not protected at all and on a sad note, the Government did not provide them with any protective gear. Therefore, the nurses and staff were afraid to handle more patients due to the increasing infections rate. 

Therefore, the number of cases in Kapchorwa District is over 73 and they are already in Mulago Referral Hospital. Some of these are staff of Kapchorwa Hospital. The staff feared and panicked and those who were admitted at the hospital were all discharged because everybody was in a disturbing state. The only areas that they left open were the maternity ward and the theatre. 

Madam Speaker, since Kapchorwa Hospital serves over five districts, it is and has always been my prayer that it be upgraded to a referral status to serve the sub-region and other patients who come for service in this area. I have raised this matter on this Floor several times. 

Secondly, the hospital should be provided with an ambulance for quick response and transportation of patients and other emergencies in the hospital. The Government should also provide protective gear and other necessary items to the medical and support staff of Kapchorwa Hospital. The hospital should be fumigated, the staff should be reorganised and reopen the hospital. 

The Government should also provide funds for massive sensitisation because people have not been sensitised enough - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the Member to raise her issue.

MS CHEKAMONDO: The only method of communication in Kapchorwa now, is through radio although it does not reach all areas. Therefore, my second prayer is that Ministry of Health beefs up the staff because right now, there is disaster in Kapchorwa that calls for more staff, equipment and reorganisation before reopening of the hospital. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay my –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the august House and the country at large that wherever hospitals have been closed due to COVID-19 yet we have many community infections. Last Sunday, I attended a church service. Out of the 70 people who were present, only 10 had masks. This is a sign that Uganda still has a problem and I request - let big churches that have enough space be allowed –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, hon. Chekamondo raised the issue of Kapchorwa Hospital. Let us first deal with her issue. Honourable member, I will give you time; I want hon. Chekamondo’s issue to be handled. 

MR MACHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please don’t divert us from the issue raised by hon. Chekamondo. I know that the issue you are talking is important but she raised an issue about Kapchorwa Hospital being closed, staff being sick, and patients being sick. That is what we need to address now.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Madam Speaker, you know the terrain of Kapchorwa and how difficult it is - you have ever travelled to Kween, Bukwo and all those other districts that are served by or fall under this hospital. It is very difficult to bring someone from Bukwo to Mbale District, and even Mbale may be overwhelmed. 

We are kindly requesting the Ministry of Health to have the hospital reopened, provide staff with protective gears and beef up those staff so that the hospital is put into operation. Right now, it needs fumigation, among other things so that the staff can reorganise themselves and start work. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to confirm the situation in Kapchorwa. On Friday, while I was driving to Busoga, I received a call from one of the citizens in Kapchorwa, telling me that they have this alarming situation, and I contacted hon. Nabbanja who said something was being done. 

Minister, now that you are here, can you tell the country what you have done on that issue?

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for raising this very important matter on the Floor of Parliament. If you recall, last week, the same issue was raised here. It is very unfortunate that it has come again.

However, Madam Speaker, it is true that Kapchorwa District Hospital is currently not offering all the services that it is supposed to offer. It is only handling emergency services in the maternity ward, in the operating theatre and other few parts in the hospital.

This is simply because a high number of health workers from Kapchorwa Hospital have been confirmed with corona virus. A total of 22 healthcare workers were confirmed with the cases and we registered two deaths; it is very unfortunate. May their souls rest in eternal peace. Following that high number of health workers, services could not be provided as expected. 

Secondly, the health facilities - the wards and places where the health workers have been working – needed to be fumigated and interventions needed to be put in place before services could resume.

Thirdly, we needed to redeploy healthcare workers and to reorganise the staffing within the district and outside the district. Madam Speaker, this was the plan of action that we have put in place, together with the district leadership of Kapchorwa District.

However, I would like to confirm that as you have said, my colleague has been in touch with the Director-General, HealthCare Services at the Ministry of Health to ensure that the hospital is fumigated, staff are rearranged and redeployed, so that services can start being offered to the people of Kapchorwa.

Madam Speaker, I note that this has not yet been done as of today. However, I would like to pledge to the people of Kapchorwa and the entire country that my ministry and the people who have been assigned to do this as a matter of urgency are working on it to ensure that in the next couple of weeks or by next week, this should be able to resume.

My colleague raised a number of issues as regards to the hospital. Of course, we need to move in a phased manner. For now, what is important is to see that services have come back to the people, the hospital is in position to offer services, protective wear has been given to the health workers and of course, the communities have been sensitised about the danger of COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, on the other questions that have been put by my colleague on upgrading the hospital to regional status; on these issues, that one can be discussed at a later time. However, as we are all aware, it has a criterion. It has a procedure to be followed, right from the district council approval as it comes high to the ministry.

For now, I request that we look at the phased manner of reinstating the services in the hospital, so that the services can be given to the people.

Madam Speaker, allow me to make this comment that currently, Uganda is in phase four of corona virus. That means we have got extensive community transmission of infection. At the same time, a number of health workers are getting the infection.

To date, we have 403 healthcare workers who have been tested positive from 54 districts in this country. Out of that, we have so far lost six health care workers; very unfortunate. These people have committed their lives; they have dedicated their service to save our country but unfortunately, they are contracting the virus. Those are the reasons services in some of the hospitals, including my own district hospital, are having a lot of challenges because of the staff getting infected.

I would like to commit, once again, that as we work in the new intervention, in terms of policy shifting and intervention targeting community-based strategy with proactivity of the community, things will get a little bit controlled.

Finally, Madam Speaker, this is a phase four of infection transmission. It is a phase that calls for collective community strategy. It is a phase that needs a community mitigation strategy in order to control the spread of Coronavirus in the country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I invite hon. Mbwatekamwa. Hon. Mbwatekamwa is going to raise an issue that has been raised before but because it has not been attended to, it is now recurrent. Hon. Mbwatekamwa, two minutes please.

3.41
MR MBWATEKAMWA GAFFA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter is about power blackouts in most of the police barracks in this country. Most of the police barracks like Kawempe, Wandegeya and Nsambya have not had power for almost a month. 

My biggest concern is that the Minister of Education and Sports came here and told us that our learners, our children, our pupils are supposed to learn through virtual learning, which will be considered when promoting the lower learners.

My major concern is that our police have been denied the right to access power, which means their children cannot even learn like other pupils in this country.

Madam Speaker, my biggest concern is whether this is a deliberate way by our Government to make sure that they punish these police officers? The matter came here some time back. You gave instructions; they reinstated their power for almost two weeks but since then, it has been reoccurring.

Therefore, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I think as Government, we need to be considerate. These officers die for this country. These officers sacrifice for this country and the children of these officers must live on the good things that people in this country enjoy.

These police officers cannot demonstrate; otherwise they would have protested long ago. More than three months ago, I was here. I raised the same issue and they promised to do something for these people. However, we should not take it for granted that since these people cannot protest like others, they should be punished and mistreated.

I think, Madam Speaker, we request that you use your office. This time, it may not be a request but a directive, if we really feel that the police officers do work for this country and they are there for us. They sleep outside their homes. Their children are now supposed to go back to school but they do not have where to read from, as if they are serving a punishment. 

Madam Speaker, I request that this time, you use your office so that this Government can hear and do something for these people who cannot protest like us –(Interruption)

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague, for giving way. We are talking about the police officers. I do not know what else to call load shedding these days. It is also surprising, as we talk, that even female officers are deployed to work at night, given the fact that there is no power at night.

Madam Speaker, you are an advocate of women’s rights; so given the fact that there is load shedding, I would like to inform my colleague that as he talks about the other issue, he must also know there are policewomen who work at night, and you know what it means for them to work in the dark when there is no power. I need to be helped so that we sort out some of these problems once and for all. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, we seriously need your intervention because the police is so vulnerable. They do not have any direct representative in this Parliament like the UPDF; that is why you do not hear the army crying. So, it is we, who are supposed to rescue them.

My prayer is that the minister should come here with a comprehensive statement on why these people and their families have been marginalised. I also pray you give a directive to make sure that their power is reinstated within 24 hours. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said, the matter has been on our Order Paper for some time and the minister has not come to answer us. Because we are about to go on recess, the Minister of Internal Affairs – but is she the supplier of – thank you, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development.

3.47
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, the power supply at the Ministry of Internal Affairs, under which the police falls, is on prepaid service. Prepaid means you pay first and then you are able to access the power. 

This matter came up, and it was a directive from Government that they should budget and pay for power. So, I think we should ask my colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs or maybe the Inspector General of Police why they do not replenish power at the police barracks. It is because Umeme said they put them on prepaid and as a result, you have to pay to access power. Thank you very much. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like you have heard, it is quite appalling the way the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development addresses the House on such a very important sector of Government that touches national security. 

Recently, we had a prison break in this country. Police barracks and stations do have armouries. We have a lot of sensitive things in police barracks other than people. For one ministry to throw a niche to another ministry as though they do not sit in the same Cabinet is really appalling, and it is a vote of no confidence in the integrity of this Government. 

The most important question is, in what country do you envisage that key sectors, for example, the health sector and military garrisons do have to pay prepaid knowing that appropriation of this money is not based on the same? It is based on projections. Where is the patriotism we are talking about in this country when the national referral hospitals, police barracks and key institutions of Government cannot have power supplied from the same Government? Do you have to wait for companies like Umeme and others to supply power to key Government institutions?

What sort of agreements are we signing for this nation? If our own institutions – before we realise, during a surgery in a national referral hospital, we shall have a power outage when some of you are in the hospital. These are not things the august House should condone.

Therefore, if there is any shortfall, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be able to immediately write to Umeme and say, “Listen, your money could have delayed, but police garrisons, military installations and hospitals should not run out of power and water”. These are very important and key institutions of Government.

So, I find the answer from the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development still wanting. It is not in the spirit of nationalism and patriotism. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to come here tomorrow, first to confirm whether the police barracks are on Yaka, and to also tell us why he has not paid for power supply. We need the police to be comfortable before we go for recess. So, tomorrow, the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and update us on the issue of the power supply to the various police barracks in Uganda. 

3.52
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. This issue is about Apaa where over 60 people invaded the area on Sunday, 27 September 2020. As I walked in here, you could have seen I was on the phone because the place is on tension. About 20 people have been arrested by the UPDF but there are many others who have come. These bring the total to over 100 people now. 

These are people coming from Adjumani and they are armed with bows and arrows. I have been informed that there were over 10 people protecting them. They attack villages whereby they destroy your home, erect their own houses and start staying in your home. They are removing foodstuff and killing cows and goats of the people in that village. 

A similar situation happened in 2017 where over 12 people were killed. We are worried that these people are organised by politicians from the Adjumani side. You are well aware that the report was read here on the Floor of Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, sometimes you make very sweeping allegations. Please, just state the issue. Do not start allocating blame because we do not know.

MR AKOL: I withdraw that. To be sincere, it is there in the report of the select committee. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. Based on his allegation and your guidance that he should not allege issues on other people especially the politicians, which I have heard about, unless he substantiates, won’t it be procedurally right for him to withdraw that statement, where he said the people who are organising these attacks are politicians from Adjumani District? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Akol, please withdraw the statement.

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, maybe the honourable member has not come with her ears to the House because I made it very clear that I withdrew the statement. I made it clear here.

THE SPEAKER: Statement withdrawn.

MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, but still the honourable colleague said unless I have not come with my ears in this House, yet I came with my ears; I heard the issues and that is why I was able to raise this matter. Can also that phrase be erased? Can he withdraw that statement that he assumes that I have not come with my ears yet I listened and it was based on that that I came to raise this matter?

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I am talking about a serious issue involving human life and I do not want to get distracted -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Akol, I heard you say that she may not have come with her ears. And she has told that -

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, the hair is covering the ears and I do not know whether she has the ears because I made a clear statement.

THE SPEAKER: Just withdraw it.

MR AKOL: I withdraw the statement.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, the issue I am raising is a serious one that involves human life; and we have lost human life in a similar situation in Apaa. As I speak, people are invading the village and that is why when I am talking, you sometimes see the pain.

Madam Speaker, these are individuals with bows and arrows who have invaded the village and people are now in disarray. I have just been informed that about 20 of them have been arrested but others are still at large.

I request that we have this debate on the Floor of this House and come up with a position as a House. I, therefore, request that this should be taken as serious; if we can debate this matter of Apaa because the select committee reported and then the minister also came and read her report, it is important that the House should come out with a position on this Apaa issue.

Secondly, I request that there must be some active way of dealing with emergencies because since Sunday, people have been calling - they reported to the police and the Army and nobody went to the area until now that they have just arrived. 

I request that the Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs and the Ministry of Internal Affairs should take a serious step and come up with a detach of the police and the UPDF to protect the people in this area of Acholibe.

Madam Speaker, these people have suffered a lot including, as we prepare to vote, there are no electoral activities in this area. Not even the voters’ register update yet we have polling stations there. There are over 2,000 voters since 2016 and there have been no elections for the special interest groups in the area. 

I request that we find out from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Electoral Commission why these people are treated like non-citizens. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, certainly, we need to conclude the debate on Apaa. Fortunately, you have said that some of them have been arrested. However, let us urge the Government to move faster and ensure that all those walking around with bows and arrows in Apaa are apprehended.

However, there is also the issue of being disenfranchised. I hope that the Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs are listening to ensure that those people, if they are there, should be able to exercise their rights. Please find out the situation in Apaa and enable them to enjoy their rights.

3.59
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, one of the candidates for the elderly came to my office with a concern that needs to be addressed. He came to me with a list of the voters or delegates that are going to vote in the eastern part of this country.

Madam Speaker, the matter that he raised is constitutional in nature. It is surprising that in some districts, the delegates are only men; there are no ladies and yet we have a provision of having a third of women in the executive. Therefore, some districts have the executive of the elderly without female representation.

If you allow me to name, I have a list here; we have Bugiri, Serere - where I come from - Bugweri, Kaliro, Namayingo, Bududa, Kween, Kapchorwa, Namisindwa, Butebo and Kibuku; are some of the districts without women representation on the executive of the elderly of the delegates coming to vote. How can this be allowed to happen?

Therefore, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Attorney-General and the Electoral Commission should address this before elections can take place because if elections took place, this can be challenged in court.

Madam Speaker, I pass to you a copy of the delegates who are supposed to vote from the eastern region. This is a concern of the representatives. It may not only be limited to the eastern part of this country; it may be something that cuts across the entire country. And for some, you will find only one woman among the delegates. Therefore, we cannot allow this to continue. If they are going to vote soonest this thing should be suspended until this matter is sorted out. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to remove Bugweri where I have sighted a woman there called Safina.

MR SSENYONGA: Madam Speaker, earlier on you requested hon. Kafuuzi, who is the Deputy Attorney-General, to handle the matter of Apaa. As I remember, before hon. Kafuuzi’s appointment as the Deputy Attorney-General, we were together on the same select committee investigating Apaa.

I rose because that issue is very hot to Members and if it is hon. Kafuuzi again to come up with a solution, they may think there is a lot of unfairness.

THE SPEAKER: No, we are asking him to check because we have been told that there are some 2,000 people who may not vote because there is no plan for them to vote. That is what I am asking him to check.

MR SENYONGA: Most obliged.

THE SPEAKER: However, hon. Kafuuzi, in the same vein, I would like to request you to review the membership of the elderly throughout the country to see that they comply with the provisions of the law. Otherwise, we may not be able to raise what we agreed in the law.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I have taken note of the concerns and I will get back to you after doing the necessary search.

4.03
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Madam Speaker, I rise under Rule 128(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament seeking permission of the House, through you, for an extension for the climate change committee to report back on the Bill to the House. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a request from the Committee on Climate Change; they have not been able to complete the Bill. They are requesting for enlargement of time to - 30 days? (Interjection) Honourable members, is that okay? Okay, 30 days’ time granted to the Committee on Climate change.

MR BIYIKA: Thank you very much.

4.04
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance - that is the worsening state of roads in my district. 

I have been in touch with the Ministry of Works and Transport but they have not helped us very much because of limited funding. The pressure on the ministry has kept increasing because of the increasing floods in the country. Further, I would like to say that the hope for the local government to work on this road has been depleted.

Therefore, I request that much as the Ministry of Works and Transport will come and present the challenges it is facing, Government should come out with a position to help the ministry to address the poor status of roads in my district.

My villages are cut off from each other thereby making movement difficult. This is harvesting time. However, some crops are rotting because they cannot be transported. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, the Minister of Works and Transport is requested to address the situation in Adjumani and ensure there is accessibility. He could report to us when we return from the recess.

Honourable members, when we started, we were a bit few yet there were issues I wanted to communicate and now more members have joined in, let me do so. I would like to remind members that on Thursday, 01 October, we shall go on Independence recess and resume on 27 October 2020. This is to enable members seeking re-election to participate in the electoral activities in their constituencies.

I call upon the Executive that if there is work between now and Thursday, it should be brought and we complete it.

In addition, on Saturday, 26 September 2020, the country received, with profound shock, the news of the death of former Mayor of Kampala, Al Haji Nasser Ntege Ssebaggala, which occurred at International Hospital Kampala (IHK). His death is yet another blow to the entire country after the death of other prominent personalities that occurred this month.

Al Haji Ssebaggala rose to fame twice: when he was elected the Mayor of Kampala Capital City (KCC); and when he ran for the highest office in the country, the presidency, in the 2006 general elections before he eventually dropped out.

He is described by many as an enthusiastic and enterprising personality who wished everyone success in their livelihood. He consistently appealed to Government to ensure equity in the share from where the nickname “Seya” was derived.

It was a bit like a national dialogue. He wanted a share of the national cake. He thought that it was the right of Ugandans to receive from those who are privileged; the middle and lower class citizens. For that, the country will miss him.

At the time of his demise, he had expressed interest in running for the Office of Lord Mayor in Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) under the National Unity Platform (NUP) ticket.

Honourable members, at a personal level, I was the first woman to open a law firm in Uganda but he is the man who had the confidence to bring me the first business when I was a very young person; I will always remember him for that.

Therefore, I invite you to stand and we observe a moment of silence in his honour.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

The Speaker: Honourable members, there is one or two other issues. This is important for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Government. 

I have a letter from the Uganda Manufacturers’ Association (UMA) raising concern over the blockade of Ugandan goods by the Republic of Kenya. They applaud Parliament for the debate on the blockade, which we had here but they say that a lot has been lost. For instance:

    1. Our export trade with Kenya shrunk by 60 per cent within one year. The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) dropped from six per cent, in the financial year 2018/2019, to 3.2 per cent, in financial year 2019/2020.
    2. Industrial performance has dropped from 5.9, in the financial year 2018/2019, to 2.2 per cent, in the financial year 2019/2020.
    3. Manufacturing Value Added dropped from 7.4 per cent, in the financial year 2018/2019, to 3.1 per cent, in the financial year 2019/2020.
    4. Services Value Added dropped from 6.1 per cent, in the financial year 2018/2019, to 5.4 per cent, in the financial year 2019/2020.
    5. Tax collection dropped from Shs 2.7 trillion to Shs 1.82 trillion.
    6. Value Added Monetary Terms dropped from Shs 7.42 trillion to Shs 7.17 trillion.
    7.  Employment in manufacturing sector has contracted by 65 per cent while production has reduced by 70 per cent; and
    8. Over 350 farmers’ groups, each with an average of 1,500 farmers, are stranded with raw materials.

Now, they require the Government of Uganda to notify the Republic of Kenya of Uganda’s readiness to institute retaliatory measures against Kenya-originating goods and services that trade in Uganda should the Republic of Kenya fail to comprehensively address and resolve all the sticky non-tariff barriers by 31 December 2020; since the East African Community (EAC) framework has failed to resolve the said non-tariff barriers despite the process of common market under the EAC regime.

The foregoing position is informed by the continued unwillingness by Kenya to even respond to a reasonable protest note issued by Uganda over the same. 
They require Government to champion legal and structural changes of the EAC with the objective of creating a robust EAC with organs optimally functioning to promote the ideas of the EAC as enshrined in the treaty.

They also say that Parliament should appropriate additional resources to the education sector, which is a home for now to 15 million Ugandans, with a view to the local market broadening for milk and locally made textiles. 

Various studies by UNICEF confirm that there is wide spread stunted children in Uganda. Despite the Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE) programme, 75 per cent of children drop out of school by senior one.

They also want us to appropriate more money to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Export Promotion Board, Uganda Insurance Regulatory Authority, among others.

I will be sending the letter to Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but these are the feelings of the Uganda Manufacturers’ Association about the blockade.

I also did inform you last week that we had received an appeal about reopening of Casinos. Both the workers and employers are suffering. They brought a proposal of what they are able to do in order to meet the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) with the Government. We shall be sending this to the Government. 

They attached a protocol and guidelines from the Republic of Kenya, which has started gradual re-opening of gaming activities during the COVID-19 pandemic.

I would like to ask the minister to study them and see what we can borrow from the guidelines from Kenya.

4.10
Mr MOHAMMAD nsereko (independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we broke off last week, you requested the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and address this House on the matter of the tax increment on the issue of materials and apparels.

The whole country is waiting for the response from the ministry because the time waiver they gave to clothes is up to 01 October. Over 50 containers and orders that were made by various Ugandans are now either stuck in Mombasa or have even failed to make their shipments at the moment. The reason is that the tax is very high. This House expressed its discontent and honourable members all over expressed their displeasure.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development promised to come up with a response. In your communication, you have made it clear that on 01 October, we may go for recess. This is the only House where our countrymen expect answers and real answers to address their issues. 

Taxes are formulated from this House and it is only this House that has the powers to do away with these exorbitant taxes. 

Madam Speaker, we might find people hanging themselves or closing business. A shift of a tax, like you stated, from Shs 40 million per container to over Shs 400 million and one from Shs 200 million to over Shs 1.2 billion in a space of two months is unacceptable. We cannot sit here, as legislators, and think everything is going the way it is. Our people are going to commit suicide. We need answers now – (Hon. Franca Akello rose_) - you can see how hon. Franca is in a Ugandan made dress and this is what we are talking about –(Interruption) 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much, my honourable colleague, for giving me the opportunity to give you information over this matter.

Madam Speaker, if one takes time and moves around downtown Kampala here to see how most businesses have closed -something has to be done over this matter. Unless we do it, the country is going to lose in terms of income because the moment these businesses close forever, we shall not realise even the little that we would expect from the taxes. 

Therefore, it is better that Government comes very fast and addresses this matter so that people are able to do business. At least, let them earn something little. People have lost a lot in the COVID season and again we are imposing impossible taxes. That has explained the reason why if you moved in town, you will find most malls and shops closed. I beg to submit.  

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Franca. Comrades and colleagues, when we talk about the issue of apparels and materials that make clothes for the poor people in this country, it means a lot; the gomesis that are donned by our women in the villages. There is no reason as to why you can levy or as to why – that it is based on kilos on materials and not the size of the material. It is wrong. It defeats all canons of taxation and the principle of certainty in taxation. No one can explain what the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did. 

When we were downtown with the officials from the Uganda Revenue Authority, they also admitted that ordinary Ugandans are going to walk out of business. Where is our patriotic call, as members of Parliament, when we should stand up for our people and protect the local small enterprises? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsereko, give us one minute. Can somebody bring back the Minister of Energy and Minerals? There is something we need to finish but I see her walking away. Please conclude. 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, I came along with part of the list of the members who are both importers and manufacturers of materials and apparels – they unite under the umbrella of the Union of Tailors and Textile Manufacturers Association. These are ordinary Ugandans that have started with cheap capital; each of them employing over 100 people and their businesses are going to close. 

We cannot sit here and pretend to be legislating when we are legislating our own natives out of business. We must do something and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. We only have three days for this window that they gave to get closed. We either extend it or make an amendment to take back the tax to the status quo that we had before passing this tax. Thank you very much. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this document containing those companies and individuals that import; they are Ugandan companies that we cannot afford to lock out of business. We must fight for these people to be in business because they employ fellow Ugandans and are, therefore, contributors to our taxes. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we addressed this issue last week. Are you ready?  

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we request that we make a statement to this House on Thursday before we adjourn. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the moratorium they have given expires on 30th September, which is tomorrow. It is serious.

MR BAHATI: That will be worked on administratively between today and tomorrow but then we will make a statement on Thursday.

In other words, hon. Nsereko, we are going to attend to this matter between now and tomorrow and brief the House on Thursday. This is because we cannot make a pronouncement on the Floor of this House now before adequate consultations have been done with the stakeholders.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, hon. Bahati had from Thursday up to today; four days. What magic is he telling us he is going to do in the remaining two days? Please, when you are given an assignment and you take it up from this House, with due respect, our Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we expect you to come back with answers because people’s livelihood depends on the solutions that you give. Mere statements will not help. We want visible solutions. This is why we are legislators; to create solutions that break impasses. That is what people are waiting for. Every single day that a container is not cleared, someone pays damage in thousands of dollars. 

If people sit in air conditioned offices and wait for weeks to take on decisions, it is at the economic detriment of an individual. Therefore, your delay is a creation of economic disaster for another. We need a clear answer tomorrow, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is working. That is when the window closes. It will be overtaken by events by 1st October. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, tomorrow, we must have answers; we must have a solution. I have seen these people and they are real; just ordinary Ugandans. We need answers on this issue tomorrow.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2020” for the first reading. 

THE SPEAKER: Does it require a certificate or not? 

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, the copy of the Bill had already been laid before the Clerk. We are just making the official pronouncement 	of the first reading - (Interjection) - yes, members, after reading, the Speaker calls for justification. You do not justify before you are allowed to.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the minister?

MR OSHABE: Madam Speaker, I am raising on a matter of procedure. This is a very critical time when people are under nomination and they are ending on Thursday. My expectation is that the Minister for Local Government would have taken this matter very seriously so that we handle it expeditiously with the urgency it requires.

Madam Speaker, last time we witnessed a situation where a minister threw statements here. we are also witnessing another one who is not even in charge of the docket trying to bring a critical matter to the people of Uganda- where is the line minister? This is very unfortunate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course, last week we informed the minister that this amendment was very crucial and impacts on the rights of those who want to contest for elections. However, time is also of essence. I do not know if there is anyone to move a motion; maybe I should just send it to the committee.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, as you have rightly guided, this matter about the amendment of the local Government, is a matter that was handled last week. I am afraid that if we have the Attorney-General here, the minister of finance- we actually have Cabinet and the House is properly constituted. 

Following what hon. Patrick Nsamba has stated, the Bill is about the electoral process- save for one aspect about the age, is purely to harmonise. The other aspect about a woman for each sub-county, where I have personal interest supporting that and the Government wants to repeal, for the record, that is controversial because I will oppose it also.

However, for the age, it is a matter that we would probably proceed to handle right here and suspend the rules because there are young people who want to be nominated tomorrow and before the electoral process ends.

Therefore, surely, if the Attorney-General would permit, referring this matter to the committee, Madam Speaker, realising quorum in the committee one of these days, is not difficult but it is quite a good challenge.

MS AKELLO FRANCA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter before us deserves urgent attention and like the Chairman of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee has stated, at the moment, there are a number of citizens out there who are seated and glued on their televisions waiting to see what Parliament is going to say about this matter.

I personally have several cases of such in Agago where we have people who had gone to be nominated because they thought when the age limit was lifted, it was done for every Ugandan to freely enjoy the goodness of being a Ugandan aged 18 and above and given the freedom to participate in the electoral processes.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, as I was getting in the House this afternoon, I saw hon. Raphael Magyezi with a copy of the Bill. I was glad that this was going to be presented this afternoon and we resolve the matter.

Madam Speaker, we are all aware that the deadline for nominations for local governments is on Thursday. Therefore, we have only today to sort this matter out and allow our Ugandans to participate in this electoral process. Thank you so much.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I know everybody is concerned about the issue of women. You are aware that the process of nomination is ending this particular week. Therefore, we have no choice but to make one of the two decisions. 

First, we handle that matter even if the minister is not here. We know the two sticking issues- the issue of the age and the minister just has to agree that the age must be uniform. Once you have removed the age limit from the top, then you must remove it from the bottom- I think that is obvious. 

The issue of the women, we have to agree that this Parliament had already resolved that one woman should represent one sub-county. Therefore, I do not see why we should either extend the sitting up to next week or we have to wait for the minister. I do not see any technical thing which the Chair of the Legal Committee cannot handle or the Attorney-General or even you, Madam Speaker, you can guide us. I think we all understand the issue. We can suspend the rules and resolve the matter today.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, the Electoral Commission is closing nominations for these people on 1st. Therefore, we have to handle this thing today so that those people are in position to do something tomorrow.

If we want to amend for the next Government then we can discuss those others. However, for today and for those people to be nominated before 1st, we must address these lacunas today.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the matter regarding nominations has been raised. If the minister feels, there is no time, then he can ask the Electoral Commission to extend the nomination time, after all, we are even being nominated so early compared to the previous years. How can you nominate Members of Parliament three and half months to election date? Therefore, if the minister needs time, let him ask the Electoral Commission to extend (i) the Local Government nomination dates up to next week, and then (ii) he can extend the parliamentary and presidential nomination dates. After all, it is the presidential candidates that require more time to cover the whole country. 

However, members of Parliament do not need three months. How can you give presidential candidates two months to canvass votes in the whole country, and then you give members of Parliament three and a half months? 

Madam Speaker, if the minister needs time, let us give him time but he should tell the Electoral Commission to extend the nomination dates because there are people who have already been affected; we have not even concluded the matter and the Electoral Commission is saying –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the issue of nomination for Local Government or any other nomination, is a matter of administrative procedure; it is not a matter embedded in the law. We shared with the Electoral Commission and that is the common position. In case, we pass this law today or tomorrow, and some people are closed out, it is still within the mandate of the Electoral Commission to have residual nomination; to extend it for the period for those who could have been left out, to be nominated. 

Therefore, nomination is not cast in stone.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last Thursday, we asked the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to consider enlargement of time because of the activities involved. However, are the nomination dates cast in stone? We are disenfranchising a number of people by failing to amend this law to allow the young people to contest.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, you remember one day when we were in the House and requested the Electoral Commission to extend the date for registration of these people that had been left out; those who did not register as voters because of the timeline and the age. They had clocked 18 when they closed, and you saw how they dilly-dallied and refused. Therefore, the same people may refuse if we give them space unless, it is explicit and clear. Otherwise, if we leave it to their discretion, they will refuse and people will be locked out and it will continue because we already have what happened when they refused to register those that had clocked 18 years. 

Therefore, we must be clear on this so that we know how we are moving.

4.37
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chairperson of the committee has made it clear that the issue of when to conduct the nominations is an administrative issue by the Electoral Commission. Administrative decisions have to be rational; we cannot entertain irrational decisions by an administrative body. It is surprising that the presidential nominations are coming up in November - meaning that a presidential candidate who has to campaign in the whole country, has only been given two months to campaign.

However, somebody who is campaigning in a sub-county is required to campaign for four months or even more. When you ask yourself; what judgment is this that a chairman LC III, and a parish councillor is nominated before the presidential candidates and is required to campaign for a longer time than them? 

As Parliament, I think we need training because we cannot accept this kind of decision, which is a burden to the common citizen to be tolerated. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, having allowed the President and the chairmen to take up nomination at lower age, we should have taken judicial notice of those changes in relation to the others. If we do not, it means we are discriminating against part of this society. If you are young now, you are discriminated against -and it is not right.

4.39
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Madam Speaker, it is my humble request that we deal with this law whether the minister is around or not but we would have expected him to be around. 

However, let us handle those parts that are very crucial because when you look at the law, we asked the minister for representation at every sub-county. Now, what he has presented in the Bill is just one-third and that is why we needed him around. However, let us deal with those two issues; the one of women councillors and age in this sitting. Thank you.

4.40
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I have a simple proposal to make. Already, nominations are underway - unless, as the august House, we engage the Electoral Commission immediately because if we make laws now, the whole law will be overtaken by events. 

There is an issue of the workers and councillors, and no one is nominating them; they are being told that Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is coming up with some guidelines. I do not know whether the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development regulates elections or it is this august House! 

For them, they are talking about nominations and no one is talking about their nominations, and even consequent elections. Therefore, the entire election cycle is not capturing all the people, notwithstanding that there is also a court ruling on the prisoners that has not been challenged or vied on the prisoners and the people in the diaspora. 

Madam Speaker, I entirely agree with you. Are these nomination dates cast in stone that they cannot be changed? There is no logical explanation as to why a councillor is nominated way earlier than a presidential candidate. Therefore, as the mandated people that make laws here and do the oversight role, we recognise the fact that we have an independent Electoral Commission but it can only organise elections for all of us when we feel comfortable that everyone is captured, enfranchised or is given the opportunity to vote or be voted, and finally that results shall be transparent.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I saw the minister in the vicinity. Therefore, let us listen to one item as he organises himself. The important thing is that today, we must take a decision. In the country, there are people who are waiting to hear about this issue of the age; we cannot run away from it but to deal with it today. 

Therefore, as the minister is organising himself, let us look at item IV.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ALLEGED CONSIDERATION BY THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION NOT TO NOMINATE PERSONS WHOSE NAMES ON THE NATIONAL IDS DIFFER FROM THOSE ON THEIR ACADEMIC TRANSCRIPTS

4.43
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, this august House requested that we produce a Bill to consider amending Section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act, 2015. As a ministry, we prepared a Cabinet paper, which was supposed to be presented to Cabinet yesterday but due to business on the Order Paper of Cabinet, we were not able to do that. Tomorrow morning, we have a special sitting of Cabinet, where we have been given a slot to present that paper. Therefore, I am seeking for extra time so that on Thursday, I am able to come and report to you having made a presentation to Cabinet. Most obliged.

4.44
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was here during the Communication from the Chair and she said recess will begin on 1st October. Nomination is on 12th. The Attorney-General wants to come on Thursday to present. Eventualities could happen because they have secured a slot on the Order Paper of Cabinet tomorrow in the morning. I do not know whether it is morning or afternoon.

I wonder whether the Attorney-General cannot have that issue addressed in the morning and then in the afternoon, he comes to present. The moment we give room for Thursday, Madam Speaker, and we begin looking for the Attorney-General the way we have been looking for the Minister of Local Government or something happens, it means whoever will have not been sorted out by that day will not be nominated because the Electoral Commission is clear. They will not nominate someone.

That means we are giving chance or we are putting people’s nominations at risk because of something small that we can amend. This is the same Government, Madam Speaker; Parliament and Cabinet, unless Cabinet is for Kenya and Parliament is for Uganda.

However, if we are the same Government and we cannot harmonise this and the same ministers that you want to have in the next Government are the ministers that are seeking to be nominated and helped in this; I do not know why we cannot have this addressed, Madam Speaker!

The Office of the Attorney-General, the Executive, Parliament and Government must have this amended and put right before Thursday, so that by the time we go for recess, people’s hearts are at peace. Otherwise, we are putting their nominations at risk, Madam Speaker, and at the end of the day, they will not be nominated.

4.46
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, again, this is the House where we were the other week. I have never known any electoral-sensitive matter like the issue of names.

Madam Speaker, rightly to say, this again largely affects the women because it is the women who adopt their husbands’ names. We met with the learned Attorney-General, Electoral Commission and the Ministry of Local Government. If it was to be an amendment, it is a very small one.

The minister says he has to do that, rightly so with the permission and knowledge of Cabinet. The people need to know and I have been – Madam Speaker, I do not know about your office but they must be bothering you. People think we are deciding today.

We should not be looking at only women MPs. There are other people in the nomination whose names need to be harmonised. It is a small thing that as a committee, we said go and simplify the process for this change in name, instead of requiring those who have adopted their husbands’ names to gazette. 

Make it simpler so that statutory notice and an affidavit would be sufficient because time for nomination and time to gazette would be too far and would leave out many contestants.

Madam Speaker, that is a matter – Simple as it is, the learned Attorney-General is still requesting for time and get consent of Cabinet, which is the right procedure. How do we harmonise the issue of nomination with the variation; not just variation of names but names which are adopted from their husbands?

It is not criminal to take up a husband’s name and the Attorney-General agreed with us. He could only be telling us that this process is done and we could wait for him and wait for Government to come back with this Bill. It is a very small amendment but it is still also an amendment.

The Attorney-General is whispering to me here. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I do not think my senior colleague, hon. Oboth, is being fair to me. It is a well know principle that for a matter to be brought here as an amendment, it has to go to Cabinet first.

Last week, I presented, on behalf of my senior colleague, the Minister of Local Government, a paper to Cabinet, in respect of the women councillors. Twitter went on fire; they insulted me and said I am making efforts to remove women councillors from being represented. 

That is why I think my senior colleague is not being fair to me when he says or appears to say that I am standing in the way of females who have adopted their spouses’ names.

Madam Speaker, if it was not a matter of time, we would not have this kind of pressure. I understand hon. Kibalya’s proposal that if it were possible to have a presentation to Cabinet in the morning and come to Parliament in the afternoon, I understand that. 

In our ministry, we have division of labour. For example, tomorrow morning, I have a meeting scheduled with the Speaker but my senior colleague, the Attorney-General, will be in Cabinet. Immediately after that, we can liaise and see how fast I can get back to this House.

I do not want to be or said to be the stumbling block. I can promise, Madam Speaker, that tomorrow, I will endeavour to present to this House what will have returned from Cabinet.

Thank you very much.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the Deputy Attorney-General - who is my friend and not until a few months ago, I have been his chairperson in the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs –(Laughter)– knows I mean well. 

He is imputing words and when Attorney-General says such words, the record may capture it that I was saying what he was saying. In fact, I was supporting you. There is no way you can come here without the consent and approval of Cabinet. It is not you, sir. Were you saying that I said that you were against the women? (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I did not say that and the Attorney-General knows that for the record, future readers, you will never see that there is any issue between me and the Attorney-General. What is important is that we have time behind everybody. 

When you talked about the women councillors, I was one of those who also tweeted but I am not a woman. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, we would like to advise that maybe you seek the earliest opportunity in Cabinet in the morning to get that cleared. You will leave Cabinet, go and deal with the Bill and then come here by lunch time.

It is really crucial and I think we shall not forgive ourselves for failing to address this injustice. This is an injustice. 

4.54
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Madam Speaker, the law as it is, as we speak now, is unfair. It has created an injustice for the womanhood of Uganda. It is women who are running up and down to get their deed poll so that they can rush it to Entebbe, yet we hardly have the required time to have them gazetted. Therefore, the issue we are discussing is an issue of humanity and fairness, which is embedded in our Constitution.

The Attorney-General should consider this issue as urgent. There is no way you will continue telling us, the women of Uganda, that we should use our husbands’ names when you are doing us a disservice. This issue should be handled with the utmost urgency it deserves - not later than tomorrow. 

It is hardly two weeks to the nominations, yet in order to gazette names, you need two or more weeks. I would like to urge the Attorney-General that even if we are to have a sitting in the morning tomorrow, let us sit and have this issue sorted out. 

In future, all the laws that we enact here should have gender lenses. This law ensures that our male colleagues sit here very comfortably while, for example hon. Jalia Bintu Lukumu, has to run up and down to make sure she owns the name “Lukumu”. You can imagine that! Thank you.

4.56
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the issue of amending the law is very urgent. I am a practising lawyer and since yesterday, I have been receiving a number of people who would like to comply with the law as it is but they cannot. This is because the days left are not enough to have the women change and gazette their names. So, you cannot comply with the law. 

It is very important that there is equality so that some people are not discriminated against. This will bring up a number of constitutional cases against the Attorney-General. I think it is in the interest of not only the women but also the Government - Government will incur a lot of costs in damages if they do not bring the amendment soonest. 

I would like to plead with my learned brother, the Attorney-General; we can have that Bill processed tomorrow so that everyone is at peace. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have agreed that the Bill should be here tomorrow to be processed. 

I was wondering, Mr Attorney-General, whether you cannot actually seek – I know you do not want to interfere with the Electoral Commission, but they are dealing with people. They are dealing with elections. They are dealing with candidates yet there are some who will not be able to meet the conditions. Can’t there be an enlargement of time even for a week? Imagine someone traveling from Kitgum to come to Entebbe to gazette. 

MR KAFUZZI: As we appear before Cabinet tomorrow, I am sure several other options will be considered. We can then see how to liaise with the Electoral Commission. When we come here, I will have a complete idea of what I have to state on record. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MS SARAH OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard colleagues talking about the nomination of councillors. I thought we removed qualifications when we debated whether the local government councillors should have them.  Therefore, there is no academic document required for people vying to be councillors in the lower local government. 

I just wanted to inform Members that there is no qualification required. It is not a requirement for somebody who wants to contest to be a councillor at the district or sub county to have any qualification. What certificates are Members therefore talking about? It is only the people contesting for the district chairperson that I know are required to present academic documents.

Also, -(Interjections)– I am talking about the issue of qualifications. I thought we should be clear on that, that there is no academic requirement. Therefore, the people who want to contest to be councillors are free to go and get nominated. It is only for the district chairpersons. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us wait for the issue of names at the other level. We shall get an answer from the Attorney-General tomorrow. 

MS JANE AVUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification. 

I do agree that we have to move very fast to process this Bill, but I am just wondering; if the House passes the Bill tomorrow, it still has to go to the President for assent. What guarantee do we have that the President will expressly sign this Bill? What should we do first? I think we should first push the Electoral Commission to extend the nomination dates as we process the Bill. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: If there is a will, that Bill can be signed in a day. Certainly, for the young people who want to stand for chairmanship, we may need extension of time. If the nominations are ending on 3 October 2020 and they are not yet sure whether they are eligible to contest, we shall need an extension of time.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020


5.02
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Maganda. I was told he had already moved that the Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read the first time. I beg to justify this Bill. 

I have the certificate of financial implications for this Bill. I will, at the appropriate time, request that the House agrees to suspend rule 128 so that we can expeditiously handle the Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion for the First Reading of the Bill seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded by several Members.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2020 is necessary to align the Local Governments Act, Cap 243 and the Local Governments (Amendment) Act, 2020 with the provisions of the Constitution as amended. This amendment is needed urgently for application during the forthcoming 2021 general elections.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we need to move on suspension of the rules first, so that we can go to the second reading and then you justify.

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, I had moved under rule 16 and I am proposing that we suspend rule 128 so that we can expeditiously handle the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2020. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is that motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded. Proceed.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, this Bill is necessary so as to remove the requirement of lower and upper age limits for a person to qualify to be elected as chairperson of a lower local government as currently provided under the Local Governments Act as amended.

If you read Section 111(4)(c) of the Local Governments Act, it is clear that for one to become a chairperson of a municipality, municipal division, city division, town council or sub county, one must be not less than 30 years old and not more than 75 years old. We need to amend this in line with the Constitution amendment which we did in 2017 that removed the age limit for district chairpersons and the President of Uganda.

Secondly, the Bill will also seek to reinstate the reservation of one-third of membership of councils being reserved for women as provided under various sections of the Local Governments Act. This is in line with the Constitution under Article 180(2)(b), which provides thus: “one-third of the membership of each local government council shall be reserved for women.”

Honourable colleagues, you will recall that during the recent amendment of the Local Governments Act, which we did in July and August 2020, we amended the provision such that a woman councillor is directly elected to represent each electoral area in every local government. Cabinet’s position on this matter is that the constitutional provision on affirmative action, as stated in Article 180(2)(b) of the Constitution, is adequate because of the following reasons:

(i) 	Timing: The national Independent Electoral Commission’s electoral process is already underway, including nomination of candidates for various leadership positions in local governments.

(ii)	Party primaries: Political parties have already held their primaries or have other arrangements to select their flag bearers, based on the status quo, as per the Electoral Commission’s guidelines.

(iii)	Cost Implication: This proposal of one woman councillor per sub county will automatically expand the councils and impose a significant strain on the budget, especially during this time of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Madam Speaker, Government appreciates the need to build on the efforts we have made in gender equity and fairness in representation at all Government levels. Government will study this proposal in detail and advise on the appropriate reforms to be undertaken.

In terms of financing, the implementation of the provisions of the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2020 contains no additional financial cost, and I have the certificates which I will lay on the Table.

In conclusion, honourable colleagues, I am here to request Parliament –

1. 	To approve the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2020 to remove the requirement for lower and upper age limits for a person to qualify for election as chairperson of a municipality, division, town council or sub county;

2. 	To reinstate relevant provisions of the Local Governments Act, Cap 243, to provide for one-third of council to be reserved for women.

I beg to move.

Madam Speaker, I hereby lay on the Table a copy of the Bill and the original copy of the certificate of financial implication.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Bill was published on the 21 September 2020 and it is required to come here after 14 days. Therefore, I would like you to now move under rule 129(5) to suspend the 14 days so that we can proceed to the second reading.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I beg to move that Parliament suspends rule 129, which requires 14 days before the second reading of the Bill. I hereby beg to move that we do suspend that rule.

THE SPEAKER: Is that motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the motion has been seconded.

5.10
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill 2020 be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you may now speak to the Bill.

5.11
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for responding quickly on this urgent matter, which was going to create a lot of anxiety and disfranchise a lot of people. I am sure it could have been an oversight when we were amending this Bill in the first place. Nevertheless, it is not too late.

Honourable minister, this Bill has come in a bit late. What we need now is to give an opportunity to those who have been left out to be included in the election process. What do we mean? We are already getting complaints from outside that the time given is too short yet the population is big; there are so many people interested in participating in this process.

However, the Electoral Commission must now look into the nitty-gritties so that we do not lock out the young people who want to take up leadership in this country. This is very critical. I am happy that this House is considering it now and giving them an opportunity. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.12
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for this Bill. However, I must say that we feel terrible as women Members of Parliament on behalf of the women councillors who must continue to bear the burden of handling two sub counties while their male counterparts are handling only one sub county.

This Parliament sat and passed the law that every sub county should be represented by a female councillor. We do not know why the minister kept quiet until this moment and came up with the excuse that it is late.

It is also unfair to say that we should keep the burden on the women councillors just because it is going to have financial implications on the Treasury. These people do not even get a salary. They just get a token in form of sitting allowance. For the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Government that has championed the rights and equality of women, to come at this minute and say that the women councillors should continue to bear the burden of two sub counties while their male counterparts all this time are handling one sub county is so unfair. 

We have all been dealing with issues of equality and equity. We are a country that is highly prized for guaranteeing and dealing with issues of rights of women, children and all Ugandans. It defeats logic that the Government should come at this material time and claim that this issue should not be entertained because of expenses.

Lastly, we have been creating constituencies to ensure that men do contest for them. I know that women can also contest for these constituencies but it has been mainly to benefit the men. The expenditure for a constituency far outweighs the expenditure for a councillor. 

In the interest of equity and equality, we should insist that a woman councillor represents one sub county. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, with hindsight, I think Cabinet cannot go back on this clause. The law was passed and assented to. The areas, which the President was interested in, were returned and we handled them; so, we cannot change now.

5.17
Mr Wilfred niwagaba (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Honourable members, I move a motion that debate closes and we go to the committee stage and consider the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: I had called up some Members. Hon. Othieno.

5.17
Mr RICHARD othieno (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion and thank the minister for coming up with this. However, I have some few observations to make.

Whereas it is okay, and I think that was the spirit we had, that we should not discriminate between people contesting or offering themselves on the basis of age, I have a problem with the way the minister has worded the motion. I have a problem in particular where we are talking about removing the lower age limit. When it comes to the lower age, we are not removing it but simply lowering it. If you say that we remove the lower age, it means you are removing even the constitutional age of 18 years. You may find a senior four chap who is just 16 or 14 years old offering himself for LC III chairmanship and that may bring us problems.

Therefore, when it comes to the lower age, I think the minister will have to rephrase his proposal. Instead of saying that we are removing it, we should say that we are lowering it.

Having said that, I must say that it was the spirit, when we were amending the Constitution, to allow everybody who was above 18 years old to offer themselves for elective positions right from LC I. The challenge we have is that most of us thought that is what was contained in the Bill. It is only surprising that we learnt much later that we did not include everybody. 

In future, we need to be given copies of these Bills once they have been assented to by the President, so that we scrutinise and know whether what we passed or intended has been captured or the spirit has been maintained. We would have cured this much earlier if we had been given copies of this Bill. All along, we have been thinking that when we were amending the age cap, it spread throughout all circles.

Finally, I share the pain of the women, that they should have one representative for every sub county. Again, this is an oversight on our side. This is a constitutional matter and we should have focused on amending the Constitution.

Honourable Minister of Local Government, instead of going to tussle it out with your colleagues in Cabinet, what you should have done was to bring a constitutional amendment. I do not know whether you are the one supposed to bring it or somebody else but it should have come. This is a cosmetic approach. We are giving the women hope that we are going to allow them to have one representative in every sub county when actually the principal law remains unchanged.

What we should have done was to first, amend the Constitution so that the provision, which refers to one-third should have read, “at least one-third”, so that women could be in a position to have representation –(Interruption)

Mr magyezi: Thank you, honourable colleague. You are raising some very important matters. When we say, “remove the lower age limit”, it does not mean that you can be elected even at 10 years old. In law, you still have the requirement to be a voter. That means that you must be 18 years and above.

Secondly, when we amended the Constitution, we could not have amended the law on age limit for the chairpersons of the sub counties, divisions and town councils because that is not in the Constitution. In the Constitution, we only have the district chairperson and the President. 

However, out of necessity, what we are bringing now is consequential, that since you did it for the other offices, even for the lower offices it should happen. Thank you. 

Mr othieno: Thank you, honourable minister, for that clarification. I think in the law, once you say that you have removed the lower age limit, it becomes another matter. The lower age limit is 18. When you come and say that you are removing the lower age limit, it may still create confusion. So, we need clarity. 

My emphasis is that let us have clarity in the law. It must be very clear so that whoever reads it should not have that mind-set and ask: “What do they mean; can they allow somebody who has just left senior four to also contest?” We need to get that clearly because we can change the law. Even that reference to 18 years is in the law and we can amend it. Thank you. 

5.23
Mr Richard gafabusa (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the proposed amendments in the Bill. 

First of all, I would like to thank the Minister of Local Government for working on this very fast. Like my colleagues have said, people have been waiting for this, even today. How I wish immediately we are done with this the President quickly assents to it. It would allow Ugandans benefit from it because they have been and are still waiting for this decision. 

I will not spend time on the age limit because, like the minister said, it is a consequential amendment arising from the amendment we made in 2017 for the President and the LC V chairpersons. We could not have seen this because it was not in the Constitution. At that time, we were only amending the Constitution. Since this provision remained in the Local Governments Act, I support the amendment to remove that age restriction. Whoever is 18 years and above - since we do not even have academic requirements for these lower levels - should be free to stand for an elective post.

Madam Speaker, I, however, have issues with the other amendment because I share the pain with the women. Why should each sub county be represented by a male councillor but when it comes to the women, we burden them with representing more than one sub county? I find it illogical and unfair.

Why don’t we always look at all these details when we are planning and creating these sub counties and lower local governments? I have said before, for instance, that it is a Government policy for every sub county to have a health centre III and a seed secondary school, and all these have cost implications. However, we ignore them when we are creating sub counties and lower local governments. We do not look at these financial implications at all. However, when it comes to an elected woman councillor, we begin raising issues of cost implications, yet these councillors are not paid salaries. They only get sitting allowances. 

I find the argument that we cannot have a female councillor for each sub county because of cost implications unfair. I think we should not backtrack on this. We should be fair to the women. If a male councillor is representing a sub county, we should also have one woman councillor representing a sub county, just to be fair. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. 

5.26
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for tabling this motion. 

I would like to begin with the point my colleague ended with - the issue of discriminating and ignoring the voices of women when it comes to leadership, especially when it comes to representing sub counties. Each sub county is being represented by a male councillor but we are saying the women are more powerful, so they should represent two, three or five sub counties. 

As a member of the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA), I would like to request the minister to tell women in this country, especially those councillors, that he is sorry because it is bad manners. It is not proper and it is uncalled for, for us to amend what the President had assented to. We must be very clear about that. 

To say that political parties have already held their primaries yet even today there were nominations somewhere in this country is not fair. Even in the past one week or so, there have been elections. In the next few days, there are going to be elections in some political parties. I do not know whether that is a proper justification to keep the women representing bigger constituencies like sub counties. I do not agree with that. 

Madam Speaker, now that we are talking about amending this law, I would like to be helped to understand certain things. There are people that were sent away from the nomination centres because of issues relating to this law. If we amend this law, is the Electoral Commission going to adjust the time to let that category of people table their nomination papers? Will they be allowed to go and begin looking for votes tomorrow? 

This law is good but I am questioning why the Attorney-General, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Electoral Commission have been quiet all this period, yet they know there was an amendment here, which would lead to a consequential amendment? I wonder why they were quiet. I wonder whether they were in their honeymoon at that time. I need clarification.  

At this stage, when the nomination exercise is ongoing, is it the right time for the Ministry of Local Government to bring this amendment? I would like clarification in those two areas. Thank you very much.  

5.30
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I support the amendment on the age limit for the lower councils. 

I would like to thank my friend, hon. Magyezi, for bringing it up because it has affected many people in my constituency. I still remember two people who were turned away at the nomination table and one of them decided to take nomination papers for LC V councillor instead of for LC III chairperson. I just thought, how will this person now change and go back, after being nominated as a councillor for LC V, to the position he was already consulting for? I think that is something that is going to affect many Ugandans after amending law. However, I support the amendment of the age limit for the lower councils. 

It is unfortunate that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, even after accepting some constituencies that we created, decided to reject the amendment to have one woman representing a sub county. This is unacceptable to us, as Members of Parliament. 

We are quite aware that there is no payment of salary to such councillors; they are only paid an allowance, which is not much money. That adjustment can be done; I have seen the finance minister come up with supplementary budget requests. We have to stand our ground. There should be one woman representing one sub county. 

We should not go back to thinking that we can change our own decision. If there is need for us to amend the Constitution - it is very good that the Attorney-General is going to Cabinet tomorrow - they can do the paperwork. I do not mind whether they do it at night, but it is important that we do not compromise our position that we have a woman representing each sub county. 

I would like to give you an example. There is one sub county in my district called Lakang and another called Layima. For a woman to represent these two sub counties in the council, it is almost like she is representing a constituency for a Member of Parliament. It is actually impossible. 

If you are reasoning that the primaries have already ended, that is fine. We have people who were in position No.2 in the primary elections; automatically, they would become the party candidates for those parties. In my constituency, for example – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to share with my good brother is to the effect that matters of political party primaries are not matters that you can ably use in this House. We have had by-elections. This House is enjoined to make laws that work for everyone. Therefore, the justification of political party primaries - How about parities that are not having primaries? There are people who can nominate. Besides that, NRM is not the only political party. Therefore, we cannot give this justification because NRM is done with its primaries. 

I know, in my constituency, people who were nominated in the NRM primaries for sub counties and most of them failed because they were concentrating - There is a lady called Susan who concentrated in Mulanda and she could not go on when the Electoral Commission said “no more”. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the Constitution amendment, Article 180(2)(b) of the Constitution is not being read together with Article 180(2)(d). It is the same paragraph, same Constitution, which gives this Parliament the powers to review the composition and functions of local government councils just like we do for Parliament under Article 78(2) of the Constitution. The other month, we did it for the elderly. Now, why are we short-changing? That is the information. I hope you find it relevant.

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I thank the chairperson for the words of wisdom. It is very clear that we will not accept the amendment on the one-third that the minister is putting forward. 

I implore Members to agree with me that it is unfair for the women of Uganda. A woman raised me when my father died when I was in primary five. I know the struggle that women go through for this country. It is unfair for us to say that women should represent two or three sub counties while a man represents only one sub-county. It is unfair. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I still want to remind you that any attempt to alter what we did is smuggling. There is a procedure by which the President returns Bills and identifies areas of amendment; he did not touch this area. Secondly, we have powers. The Constitution, under Article 180(2)(d), gives us those powers.

5.36
MS JUDITH FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for standing firm on that matter. That is the point at which I want to start. 

The proposal by the honourable minister to reject the signature of His Excellency the President, to me, is disobedience of the highest order. He is not allowed to unpack what the President has sealed. Therefore, that issue of having women councillors represent one sub county must stand. 

In addition, I think the Electoral Commission should move very fast to re-demarcate these areas because under the current provision, they have maintained the status quo. Some women councillors represent four sub counties and yet some sub counties are so big geographically and in terms of population. Also, because this does not have any direct financial implications, the minister’s proposal does not hold water.

Secondly, I would like to support, for obvious reasons, the proposal to remove the age limit for councillors for local governments III, IV, and any other position in this country. Madam Speaker, when you sent us to consult our voters on this matter, we discovered that a majority of Ugandans thought that the proposal was meant for everybody. In my district, for instance, people were saying if you want to remove the age limit for politicians, you should also remove it for the workers so that there is no retirement. That means every Ugandan thought the removal of the age cap was for all positions. That is why there was a very high turn up of young people vying for these positions.

Therefore, I think this proposal is just to correct that error which was made and which is obvious. We would like to thank the minister for that and I want to propose –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Akello, for giving way. 

Parliament did pass the particular Act that we are attempting to amend in this particular session. I would like to bring it to the attention of Members that our rule 219 prohibits this House from reconsidering a matter that it has considered in a particular session unless there is a motion to revisit that particular decision, and which motion is taken on by half of all Members of Parliament participating in that decision. Therefore, what the minister is attempting to bring, to remove what we passed in favour of women, is against our rule 219. For that matter, I will move that it be expunged.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Niwagaba, for that information. I think that seals the matter on representation of women councillors. We shall be glad that from this evening onwards, women who want to vie for these positions will prepare to represent each sub county.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to urge that this House resolve that the Electoral Commission extends the period for nominations to allow these adjustments. I am sure when we do this, it will give room for those who had backed out because of the blockage. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just wanted to let you know that when we were vying for the Central Executive Committee (CEC) positions, one of the things that the women talked about was the large areas they represent. They asked me if this unfairness was going to continue. When I said we amended the law, they were excited.

When we were amending the law, I told you about my councillor Jessica; she was representing Mbulamuti Rural, Mbulamuti Town Council, Kisozi Rural and Kisozi Town Council- four sub counties! What is affirmative there?

5.42
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, when I saw hon. Magyezi’s name on the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill over age limit, I just knew that the age limit issue is following him - (Laughter). We hope that it follows him even to the Ministry of Labour, Judiciary and everywhere we want the age limit to be removed.

Madam Speaker, since the proponent of the age limit issue is removing it, I support it.

Madam Speaker, I am worried; Members proposed to the minister something different. The way the Bill has been written, it is not proposing what we are discussing. It is instead proposing one-third of the council. I do not know whether the minister wants us to put a legislation over this, by implication or we do it directly the way Members are discussing it so that we leave this place knowing that we have taken a decision that every sub county is represented by a woman councillor. 

I propose that at committee stage, probably, we need to make an amendment to the proposals, the way they are presented in the Bill so that we have exactly what we are discussing on the Floor of Parliament. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We shall do that at the committee stage.

5.44
MR GUTOMOI ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to thank the honourable Minister of Local Government for finally bringing us on the positive side. 

Honourable minister, I know there is going to be urge for more local council levels up to village level. In Lira District, there are electoral laws up to some villages but some villages have not been affected and they are still under local Government. Why is it that some villages belong to local Government and not to Electoral Commission, yet they are urged to come together and vote in one location? 

In future, this should be put right so that we do not have discrepancy of electoral areas not tallying with the villages in an electoral system.

Secondly, I would like the honourable minister to clarify. Apparently, we have lost Amach sub-county in the local Government list and I do not know how far this matter has been taken seriously. This creation is going to affect the lower councillors. I think it is now time for the honourable minister to begin thinking of how these local councillors’ allowances could be increased. They do not earn salaries but allowances and this will urge more local units to be created.

Therefore, one thing that could be of benefit and efficiency to them is to increase their sitting allowances. Otherwise, if this is done, it will cause an effective and efficient working system in the local Government.

Honourable minister, I am grateful that before this Bill, Uganda belonged to all the citizens of Uganda. However, when it comes to elections, it was very funny because it looked like politics belonged to only some categories of people. We have now respected the Constitution of this country, which provides that by 18 years, you are a very active and responsible person. It now means that Uganda politics belongs to those who are above 18 years. Thank you very much for your effort. May God bless you.

5.48
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, after listening to the discussions, I notice that we have more or less agreed on the principles. The matter has already been resolved by this Parliament and the minister can only now get himself busy and come up with more appropriate presentation at the committee stage. As far as you are concerned, the issue of age has been resolved through this discussion and I am sure the minister must be working on the amendments. 

On the issue of women, it is unfortunate that the Attorney-General sneaked out when the matter became a bit hot. However, he needed to be in the House because I would want clarification from him on the constitutional provision of one-third. What does that imply? We need to understand. Maybe, that is what the minister is banking on. However, as far as I am concerned, when the House agreed that a woman should represent one sub county, Parliament was definitely aware that there is a third in the Constitution. Can we be clarified on that so that we do not fall on wrong ground?

I am extremely disappointed with the minister’s statement that if we are to allow one woman per sub county, it would put unnecessary financial burden on the country. The minister is completely out of order because the women on the ground are the ones who are holding the economy, homesteads and they are the ones who are the pillars of all the activities that go on. They are the farmers, home keepers, business women and market vendors, among others. 

Right now, you are involved in political mobilisation; the people you are putting on the forefront to mobilise for you to come to Parliament and become a minister are women. Women are the ones dancing for you, mobilising votes for you and they are not sleeping in their homes because of you. Here you are, now saying that giving them that extra seat is putting unnecessary burden on the country. That is very unfair.

Finally, I want the minister to note that Uganda has already signed the African Union (AU) Charter on Gender Parity, and the AU has adopted 50 per cent representation. Therefore, even if we are still stuck on the third because you have signed that commitment at the AU level, it is necessary that Uganda should go back and rectify whatever disparity there may be. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.52
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the honourable minister for the submission and faster response to our call because the country needs this urgently.

On the issue of the lower and upper age limit, I support the proposal by the honourable minister. However, I request the honourable minister to reconsider the issue of representation of women in councils because what is on the ground is that one woman per sub county has failed to yield the expectations we deserve from this representation.


I have done a survey and I was very happy when we passed to have one woman per sub county. All women councillors have confined their operations within the sub counties in which they reside. They have never managed to go to the neighbouring sub counties.

Therefore, what is in the law has never helped this country to yield effective representation. When we talk about affirmative action, it is not just about having a woman in office but the outcome from that representation. Based on what is happening on the ground, we have failed to yield what is expected. 

Therefore, the amendment we did is a cure to this state of affairs. I know the honourable minister is also experiencing the same because he has a constituency. 

If he has been interacting with the district councillors, he will admit that it is a total mess. Even the level of debate is affected because they cannot manage to move beyond the sub county of their residence.

Therefore, honourable minister, please, help us to represent our views in Cabinet because you are our representative and your area of jurisdiction needs this reform. My good friend and brother talked about financial implications. However, Madam Speaker, you have ably informed this House about it. Can he elaborate on the amount that is expected so that it shows the exact picture before we worry about it?

Otherwise, what we know is that they get allowances, which are not much. I also know that the country is big and we need more effective representation than the worry about allowances because the districts approve those sub counties’ budgets.

If we have a district council that is effectively represented, many of the issues which are brought to Parliament will be resolved at the lower level. (Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much. The honourable member is asking a very valid question; What do we mean by financial implication? What is the cost involved? I beg to correct hon. Ogwal on this. You put in words, which I had not used, that “This will put unnecessary financial burden”.

The word “unnecessary” was not part of what I used. I said, “It will put a financial strain”. It will certainly put a cost. The question is what is the cost? I hear Members say they get meagre allowances. It is good to put this on paper and on record so that Members are aware.

When we say that it has a cost, we mean that at every district, a district councillor gets Shs 250,000 per month as honorarium. At the sub county, they get Shs 35,000 per month as honorarium. This is on top of the allowances for sitting.

Our quick calculation on what this would mean is - I take my district with 20 sub counties- if we say, let there be a woman councillor per sub county, we will have 20 women councillors in that affirmative action.

Then, the other 20 directly elected councillors, the women can compete as well. You have 20 directly elected councilors and so, 20 plus 20 is 40, plus the special interest groups; the Persons with Disability, Workers and so on who are eight in total. So, that is about 48. 

You realise that 20 who are on affirmative action out of the 48 represents 41 per cent and so, it is no longer 33 per cent. That increase has a cost, if you multiply by the amount they get in terms of honorarium and their other allowances.

However, I take the point given here, that it is time for the country to move beyond merely affirmative action of one-third to gender equity and equality.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, once they are elected at the sub county, all of them will be directly elected. The other categories are going to collapse because they are not necessary. Please, conclude.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for that information. As women members of Parliament, we are also finding it very difficult to cover the whole district.

I am citing this to give better insight for the minister about the workload that is expected from these representatives. It is not about representation or mere sitting there but the quality of work we want to do.

As you have hinted that the other positions are open, we are aware as women but our capacities are still questionable. Look at that woman in your village who wishes to become a leader but does not have the capacity now. That is the question.

We would like to participate within the limit that we have as we prepare ourselves to struggle with men for leadership positions. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERAL DEVELOPMENT) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take note of the point that hon. Niwagaba raised. However, I would like to interest this House on one issue that I have raised before.

The Ministry of Local Government – I support the position, first of all, that women should represent one sub-county. I actually drummed up support for this and enlightened people, especially the women during my tours in the villages. Most of them were happy that they were going to have smaller areas of representation. However, we are aware that the Ministry of Local Government created over 600 sub counties and town councils during this term. When we were approving the Budget, there was hardly any funding for these sub counties and town councils.

The Minister of State for Local Government was on the Floor of this House – I think it was in June or July – telling us that there was no money for the new sub counties and town councils. Although later, we were told that some money had been got. That was when we were moving into approving the new constituencies.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the point I would like to raise is to be sure that what we are doing will be implemented. I see the issue of money coming up seriously. Where you have a district maybe with one-third of women and now we move into a district with 20 sub counties with 40 women and 40 men, there are definitely a number of issues to do with finances – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, my understanding of the effect of the amendments we are trying to make is that these are supposed to be catered for in the next financial year. This is because the elections are taking place next year around February. They will be sworn in in July or thereabout –(Interjections)– As always; thank you.

Madam Speaker, this thing does not apply this financial year.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Budget cycle is starting in October. If we make the law, we also make the provision.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, that is where I was moving to but since he has raised it, I think we will leave it at that.

We have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here. Let him assure us that by that time, we shall be having resources to cater for the female councillors. 

Also, it would be of interest that – How I wish –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, painfully, I have had to interrupt the debate by my sister, hon. Opendi, to raise procedural issues. First of all, the other procedural matter was well handled by hon. Okupa who gave information to the minister. The Minister of State for Energy and Mineral Development is probing the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and actually say what she is saying; that there is no money. (Laughter)

Of course, hon. Opendi supports the women but we also know in this House that she does not like creation of many things including cities. (Laughter) That is why Tororo does not have a city. Are we proceeding well to allow hon. Opendi to drag the debate by probing the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who is silently here when we are actually coming to conclusion? This law was passed and assented to. The issue of financial implication does not arise at this time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of the law was settled. We passed the law and it was assented to. It is already a law. So, let us move on.

MS OPENDI: Thank you for that guidance. This is already a law and I remember that when the women were going for nomination to be councillors, I stood firm to say His Excellency the President had assented to this law and I informed them that they are to represent one sub county. However, why isn’t it being implemented? There is a reason. 

I remember calling hon. Magyezi – he is here and he can testify – during the nomination when they had just started. He assured me that the President had assented to the law but they have an issue, which they are supposed to resolve because the Constitution says something different from what we passed. That is what he said. 

We all support this. How I wish the men could one time also represent two or three sub counties and the women represent one so that they see how it feels. We would then be able to debate this from an informed position. The decision makers are the people who are still not comfortable with this proposal. 

Therefore, I just want to state that I support this but the Constitution says one-third should be women. (Interjections) No, it does not say at least. It says one-third should be women. We have settled this using Article 180 (2)(b) and (d), which gives Parliament powers to – 

THE SPEAKER: “Parliament shall exercise similar powers of review as stipulated in Article 78 (2)- ”. I do not know what people are doing –

MS OPENDI: Yes. It is Article 180(2)(d), which you have just read that says, “Parliament shall exercise similar powers of review as stipulated in Article 78(2) of this Constitution in relation to paragraphs (b) and (c) of this clause”. Article 180(2)(b) is the one that we are talking about. 

What I also wanted to state is that we have moved this for the local governments. I would like to propose that we move women from this business of putting us under the affirmative ticket. If we are equal; why should we be under the affirmative seats? We should be equal. We can be equal by saying if Tororo has six constituencies, then three must be represented by women and the other three must be represented by men and we move on. 

I think we have to move an amendment to this business of putting women under affirmative action because when you come here, there is a review after every five years. (Interjections) Not now but at an opportune time, we have to move an amendment so that we get out of this business of women being put as alternatives.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the record, the word “affirmative” is a misnomer. We are elected by universal adult suffrage of thousands of people. So, that word is a misnomer. Let us even stop using it. 

Honourable members, I put the question that the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1 deleted.

Clause 2, deleted.

Clause 3, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.10
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.11
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2020” and deleted clause 1, clause 2 and passed clause 3. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.11
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

6.12
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read for the third time and do pass. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2020

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. 

6.12
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Madam Speaker, I would like to make a little correction on the rules, which we had suspended. This was Rule 128 and 129(5). I thought I would make that correction for the Hansard.

Secondly, I beg to thank you more sincerely and the entire House for passing this Bill. I want to believe that what you started was right and where there is a will, there is a way. His Excellency the President will bring his attention to the urgency of this Bill so that he can give us the assent and we proceed with alerting the Electoral Commission on the necessity to provide adequate time for nominations of the Members.

I would like to thank you and this is a key decision that will move this country a step forward. Not just affirmative action for the women but we are talking about gender equality. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member.  We would like to thank you for doing justice to the young people of Uganda and giving them their due rights and also for supporting the principle of equity in our society.

6.14
MS CECILA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, before we leave this subject, it is important that we should record our appreciation and gratitude to the Minister of Local Government, hon. Raphael Magyezi. He has been very cooperative and diligent to this House that whenever we needed him, he would be here. I pray that he will continue to be so.

I would like to thank you that you have been very compromising. I know it is a very delicate matter but you have been able to compromise. Madam Speaker, I beg to record this as special appreciation for outstanding standards, which the minister has displayed in the House.

That does not mean that I am not appreciating the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development. (Laughter) All I can say is that whenever the Speaker requests that you should also be here, you are here. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday 30 September 2020 
at 2.00 p.m.)




