Wednesday, 19 September 2012

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. For the record, I have altered the Order Paper from what it was yesterday. The item on the budget will reappear tomorrow. I had instructed the government and the Committee on Budget to meet, but by lunch time, they had not completed their consultations. So, today we shall proceed with other business. 

PETITION ON INCREASING THE BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH

2.50
MR JEREMAIH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament, I stand here under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. I am a messenger to deliver a message from the civil society organisations on the rights for health in this country.

The message is about the fears of Ugandans about the bad situation of the health services in this country, and in particular, the women and children who are dying day and night. 

The petition is addressed to the Parliament of Uganda.

The humble petition of the civil society organisations on the rights for health presented on their be half by the hon. Dr Twa-Twa Mutwalante Jeremiah, Member of Parliament representing Iki-Iki County of Budaka District.

The petition goes as follows:
THE SPEAKER: No, honourable, you have given the heading, go to the prayers. 

MR TWA-TWA: Thank very much, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. 

Let me proceed to the prayers of the civil society organisations on behalf of the voiceless where all the petitioners pray that the Parliament of Uganda resolves that:

a)	Parliament underscores for the attention of the Executive the need to find at the minimum Shs 260 billion in the budget, for the recruitment and enhancement of facilitation for professional healthcare workers.

b)	The current Ministry of Public Service ban on the recruitment of health workers in the country be explained and justified given its adverse impact on the delivery of maternal healthcare services in this country.

c)	Government should be strongly urged to recruit under absolute minimum 2,000 healthcare workers with particular focus on the midwifery practitioners. 

Your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

And, hereto, your humble petitioners have by annexure appended their signatures. 

I beg to lay the petition on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Mutwalante. The petition is sent to the Committee on Budget to work together with the Committee on Health and report back to this House.

PETITION BY LEADERS AND RESIDENTS OF GOMA DIVISION NANTABULIRIRWA PARISH

2.54
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to present a petition by the leaders and residents of Goma Division, Nantabulirirwa Parish seeking for the intervention of Parliament in matters pertaining to the abuse of the doctrine of public trust by the Government of Uganda through eviction of residents and other gainfully self-employed Ugandans, from Kampala Industrial Park and its neighbourhood, and the failure by Uganda Investment Authority to accommodate leaders and residents of Mukono Municipality in the development of the park, bad stewardship to the environment, denying the council administrative authority over their area of jurisdiction, destroying the environment and water sources, denying residents a source of livelihood, and the right to earn a living. 

Madam Speaker, because of your earlier guidance, I now go to the prayers.

The petitioners have made the following prayers to this honourable House:

1)	They pray that Parliament finds that Government abdicated on her role as trustees of Namanve Forest Reserve, and so order that no remaining part of Namanve Forest and the wetland constituting the Lake Victoria catchment area should be given away to investors, that is, that Uganda Investment Authority should not extend their activities beyond the 1,006 hectares of land earlier de-gazetted.

2)	Granting Mukono Municipal Council a fund to conduct massive tree planting across the municipality to make-up for the lost 1,006 hectares of forest already destroyed.

3)	Causing Government to lay before Parliament all developers allocated land in Namanve Forest Reserve clearly stating the details of their intended developments.

4)	Require all the developers allocated land in the area to plant trees around their establishments.

5)	Ensuring the conducting of an environment impact assessment to guide the change of land use in the area, especially in regards to whether the area is appropriate for industries.

6)	Offering remedies for the absence of enabling regulations which must have limited the role of the public in the de-gazetting process.

7)	Making a provision to avail alternative sources of water for the villages in the neighbourhoods.

8)	Compensating the victims of the recent and other evictions in Kolebu I villages and other areas bordering Namanve Forest Reserve.

9)	Prevailing on UIA to provide their ground plan and hand over to Mukono Municipality Council patches of land to  be used for public utilities like markets, taxi parks, administration offices, Police housing estates and  housing estates for low-income earners.

10)	Clarifying to all concerned that Kampala Industrial Park is located in Mukono Municipality and uphold the resolution of the Mukono District Council that this area be renamed Namanve Industrial Park, and thus all the development in this area be guided and all local taxes be paid to Mukono Municipal Council.

11)	Guiding Kampala Capital City Authority to refund and remit back to Mukono Municipal Council all monies earlier collected by them from Namanve, an area which is not under their jurisdiction.
12)	Stay the evictions and further encroachment on the remaining forest reserve and wetland until this petition is disposed of.

Your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray. 

They have appended 83 signatures as annexure to this petition. I beg to move and let me lay this petition on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nambooze. The petition is sent to the Committee on Natural Resources but taking into account the prayers, we shall allow them to seek the support of the other committees of this House whose areas have been touched.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (REFINING, GAS PROCESSING AND CONVERSION, TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE) BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, the motion for the second reading was moved supported by the report of the committee, but before we commence debate, I would like to inform you that I received notice that there was a minority report. Let me invite hon. Lukyamuzi to present his report before we go to the debate.

3.02
MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I deliver this minority report, I have learnt from the newspapers, that is, the Daily Monitor, of yesterday, that Uganda has got an extra over 1 billion barrels of oil. If that is so, then there is need to strengthen the legal regime which will deal with oil, hence the need to pay some attention to the Lukyamuzi proposal in a minority report.

One of the most celebrated economists of our time, Prof. Joseph Stiglitz, who is also an eminent scholar in Economics, and a recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize, recently stated that the GDP figures are not safe economic measures for oil production, especially, in Africa.

He says, and I quote, “A government which over focuses on GDP indicators may easily be encouraged to give away mining or oil concessions to the disadvantage of its citizens.”

There is need, therefore, for honourable members, to listen to some of the issues which I raise constitutionally in regard to the refining of oil vis-a-vis the environmental hazards that we are likely to encounter. 

Uganda should not celebrate for having discovered petroleum, for no country in sub-Saharan Africa among those that own oil resources, has ever achieved sustainable growth. Countries like Chad, Angola, Sudan and Nigeria said to have oil have demonstrated that oil can also plunge them into a curse, if not economic decay, environmental degradation and even political instability.

There are issues that we should ask ourselves as Parliament, and by asking them, we are not being cynical or skeptical about oil production; we are being realistic.

It is said that Uganda shall construct a refinery soon. Who is constructing the refinery? I have not seen a refinery budget reflected anywhere in the nation’s budget. This Bill, therefore, has financial implications beyond the normal financial implications we know of. Where is the equipment to build that refinery reflected? 

Will the oil investors build the transportation infrastructure like roads, airstrips and the railway line? How can you pass a law in a vacuum? How has the refinery land been procured? Are we talking about land purchases or Government acquired land? How will the people living in the refinery area be protected? We need a comprehensive report on that.

It is said that Uganda has oil in basins beyond the Albertine Graben. When are we beginning to explore the same oil in areas like the Hoima Basin, Wamala Basin and Moroto Kadim Basin?

I have also attempted to define a refinery, although the main report left it out. The oil refinery being a new phenomenon demanded that we also know what goes on in a refinery in scientific dimensions.

Refinery is a process where heavy hydrocarbons and lighter gaseous elements are converted into higher value products like liquefied petroleum gas, gasoline, kerosene, wax, asphalt and petroleum coke.

But among those that are worried about the repercussions of the oil refinery, why should the refinery be discouraged? These are also some of the reasons which honourable members need to know. One of them is that Uganda is a small country where nearly every area can be put to agricultural use. Locating a refinery in a proper place is a problem due the environmental hazards attached to it.

Secondly, a refinery should be located faraway from residential areas as well as national parks and game reserves. Should the refinery be located in Kibaale, the two national parks of Murchison Falls and Queen Elizabeth may become extinct.

NEMA has no capacity to detect and monitor environmental hazards related to oil refinery. Uganda also lacks capacity to address the big cash and the human resource environmental-related hazards which the oil refinery will cause.

When we go to the NEMA factor, this is where the real problem lies. The practical capacity activities under the cover of the Petroleum Refining Bill are huge, and include gas processing, conversion, transportation and storage.

When NEMA senior officials last met the committee on which I sit, they admitted that they did not have the capacity to monitor and assess those activities due to lack funding. NEMA too, may not even have the technical capacity to do what it is supposed to do when they access the required funds. NEMA should have an already worked out programme on oil refining, but they do not have one. How are we beginning?

Climate change in the Albertine Graben vis-a-vis petroleum with reference to the data released by doctors Pomeroy and Tushabe - Makerere scholars - according to their report, the area where oil refining is going to take place is a biodiversity area.

Land for the last four years has been de-gazetted immeasurably in promotion of production and refinery activities. Oil-related activities leading to production and refinery, namely, construction, mining, pollution are all a negation in what is likely to happen in so far as climate change is concerned.

These are some of the issues we should look at very carefully. There is need, therefore, to create a new a clause. 

I am hereby proposing humbly that the activity of a refinery is too hazardous to be implemented without constitutional command. There should be a clause in the Constitution which addresses the phenomenon of oil refinery so that the refinery Bill operationalises that activity. I have not seen anything of that kind, Madam Speaker. 

The Refining Bill we are about to pass, therefore, would be existing in open isolation from the basic law, and that is an atrocity. What is the justification of that humble proposal? To address possible oil spills and refinery problems similar to what happened recently in Venezuela, and also, what happened in the Gulf of Mexico.

I would like you, Madam Speaker, to relate the contents of Article 22(1) of the Constitution of Uganda to the contents of the Penal Code Cap. 120, Section 188.  The basic law talks about murder as an offence, and the appropriate law to translate that, which is the Penal Code, equally addresses murder under section 188. So, it is not strange that I seek a constitutional command in the Constitution of Uganda to foresee what is going to be operationalised under the Refining Bill.

Finally, oil refinery in Uganda is a new phenomenon. I will not repeat this. The studies so far conducted on oil refining in accordance with the Ugandan environment are too scanty to cause fear. I, therefore, propose the following:

a)	Oil should not be refined until an environmental impact assessment report has met the litmus test of NEMA coupled with a public hearing -

THE SPEAKER: What page are you reading? 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Page - I am using one with -

THE SPEAKER: What you are reading is not what I have. No. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Where there is justification. It is page 4, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you just go to your proposals?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I, therefore, propose the following:

a)	Oil should not be refined until an environmental impact assessment report has met the litmus test of NEMA, coupled with a public hearing. 

b)	Uganda should immediately implement the 2009 resolution of Parliament banning the use of polythene material. If that is not done, the manufacturers of polythene materials will be on the increase since polythene material is a direct by-product of petroleum. So, it is important that we guard ourselves well in advance. 

Madam Speaker, where is the environmental impact assessment report that guided such a decision to be carried out on oil refining? Parliament has never seen such evidence, but is making a law to endorse a refinery. This is not acceptable. You cannot make a law before you have the facts. 

The implications of a refinery on the ecosystem in the Albertine Graben and beyond - I am mentioning these in passing as issues which I intend to specifically raise at the committee stage. I will also raise the issue of the pipeline from the oil wells to the refinery. For example, the Natural Resources Committee proposal fails to take these issues into account. The decision of a refinery must involve all those likely to be affected both within and outside Uganda.

I intend also to raise issues in the form of amendments on the economic implications and ownership of a refinery. I will also raise issues in terms of amendments on the presence of oil in the region and lessons from the failed early production schemes. 

But finally, as I end, these are the main issues, which I would like this Parliament to examine, that were totally ignored in the main report of the Natural Resources Committee.

1.	The majority members’ report fails to recommend reduction of direct ministerial discretionary control on the midstream operations.

2.	The report fails to recommend for the strengthening of the independence and better defining of institutions and their roles. The institutions created are allowed to act independently as if we have no effective command, and Parliament is made to look like a spectator. Parliament must command these exercises by way of checking what is going on in the course of the refinery.

3.	Further, the main report leaves the minister to legislate a lot on oil through secondary regulations and contracts plus ministerial discretions, and that is dangerous. 

4.	The main report does not specify what kind of system the Government of Uganda will use for partnering with international oil companies. All that remains in the hands of the Executive, but without indicating where Parliament comes in. We are duped as if we do not command. We are supposed to command, pursuant to the basic law contents.

5.	The main report fails to recommend for Parliament to play a major role in the management of the petroleum sector by giving it the explicit power in the legislation to approve new acreage, regulations, licences and contracts, as well as playing a greater oversight role than the traditional one.

6.	More so, the main report miserably fails to recommend that all documents relating to all midstream operations are public unless specifically defined by the same Act under the exemptions.

7.	The main report equally fails to recommend that the petroleum bids on upstream, midstream and downstream should be debated and passed at the same time, to ensure consistency of petroleum laws for the common good.

8.	I recommend that all midstream operations at all levels including licensing, allocations, licence renewals, terminations and environmental impact assessment processes must be implemented in effective consultation with the relevant stakeholders, including local communities, religious leaders, civil society and cultural institutions, including Parliament.

9.	I will also touch on clause -

THE SPEAKER: No. You will do that at committee stage. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Okay. Finally, the last word. Madam Speaker, I guess I do not need to tell the House the detailed amendments I intend to bring.

THE SPEAKER: You will do that at committee stage.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Okay, I will do that at committee stage, but lastly, the issue of clarity on financial management of oil refinery and production is not sufficiently addressed in the two Bills. All that will also be addressed. Transparency will be addressed. I have specific amendments on accountability, lack of clarity, parliamentary oversight, the whistleblower role, the ministerial control, the environment and gas emissions which we have let to go at large.

Much more importantly, I want the following to be noted - it is on the last page - environmental and social protection. When we refine oil, we are not going to do that exercise in international isolation. Everyone will be watching and monitoring us. The report recommends the best petroleum industrial practice in several clauses, but there is no reference to internationally recognised principles and guidelines. These could include, but not be limited to initiatives such as the International Finance Cooperation Performance Standards, the IMF Guide and Resource Revenue Management, the Natural Resources Charter and the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative. 

All in all, the proposals I am floating across the Republic of Uganda are in good faith, because while we have oil, we do not want to regret when it becomes a curse. God forbid! Thank you very much. I beg to lay the report on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Member. Members, you have heard the main report and you have heard the minority report. The Floor is open for debate.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity to raise a procedural matter on rule 216, Appendix J, about the rules of television coverage of Parliamentary proceedings. For the last one week, the public out there is not actually in the know of what is happening in the House, and they are asking themselves why the debates in the House are now closed and not opened to the Ugandans.

When you read objective 1, it states, “The Public Relations Manager shall seek to give a full, balanced, fair and accurate account of proceedings of the House with the aim of informing viewers about the work of the House.”

The work that we are doing here is not for Members of Parliament, but for the people of Uganda. I want to know from you, Madam Speaker, whether it is procedurally right for us to close the debate of the House from the public and from the Ugandans, and world over. 

THE SPEAKER: As far as I am concerned, I have not closed any debates. I am not even aware that we are not on air. I do not know why the press has not come. I cannot go looking for them. Honourable minister, do you have any idea what is happening?

3.23
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Madam Speaker, we have got members of the media here and I can see them in the Gallery. As for UBC, I have been watching, but now let me go out and ascertain, because all the time -(Laughter)- absolutely. I am not going to speak out of the dark. I will just go out and ascertain and come back and report, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, as the minister goes to check, I want you to join me in welcoming in the Public Gallery, pupils and teachers of Vienna Junior Day and Boarding Primary School represented by hon. Acire and hon. Aol. They are from Gulu. Can you stand up if you are the ones? (Applause)

We also have members from the civil society organisations who came to witness the presentation of their petition. I do not know where they are seated. (Applause)

So, Members, the debate is open.

3.25
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much indeed for guiding the House. I just want to confine my remarks to responding to hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s minority report on the Petroleum Refining, Gas Processing, Conversion, Transportation and Storage Bill.

Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi raises several fundamental questions which we really need to answer. The first fundamental question is whether Uganda should celebrate the discovery of oil. We have had this oil since the beginning of time, and fortunately, recently, we discovered it and the viability is confirmed. The issue now is, this oil and gas sector, which is a new sector in our economy, has a potential to multiply the size of our economy, three times. We are struggling for economic transformation to be accelerated so that this country can move from being third world to first world. 

Surely, when you have this sector that can enable you to achieve this, why would we not celebrate its discovery? I think we should celebrate it. Uganda is fortunate to have discovered oil, and it is fortunate to have discovered it in our time. I would, therefore, urge hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to work very hard and tirelessly as he is doing, to ensure the exploitation of this oil is done in your term as a Member of Parliament, and you move from being a third world country. I am sure you will be very proud to belong to the first world.

Secondly, I really wonder - there must be something fundamentally wrong, because how can anyone not want to move from being third world to first world in this House?

Thirdly, he has quoted examples of Nigeria and Chad as a proof that this country could be plunged into a curse instead of being a blessing. That is why we are here. We must learn from the mistakes of others. Frankly, I know hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi very well. The essence of wisdom is the ability to learn from the mistakes of others, so that you do not repeat them. We must learn from the mistakes of Nigeria to avoid being a curse. I am really serious. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, I know we shall work together. It is our joint commitment on both sides of the House that we must learn the mistakes of other countries in exploitation of oil for us to make a law which ensures transparency, accountability -(Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and the minister for giving way. As a minister, what lessons have you learnt from the rest of the world where oil has been a curse? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, if the honourable member takes trouble to look at the draft bill before the House, it has attempted to address what would have been a source of a curse. I can specify this. Look at the transparency provisions in the law. Look at the accountability provisions in the law. All these are aimed at – look at the very act of debating it in this House. Look at the possibility of making amendments to this Bill. All I am doing is to appeal to Members that when we come to the Bill and its amendments, we should look at this, not with the partisan tongue, because this oil resource is for us and those after us. We should be very analytical, very serious, and we should be positive about it. 

It should not be seen like this oil is being made for the benefit of just a group. No, and indeed, that is why by the way, having a refinery is indeed part of avoiding a curse, because to refine oil within our country, enables us to avoid the enclave characteristic of oil extraction, so that oil extracted feeds into the growth of other sectors, including skills development which must be an inheritance even when this oil is exhausted. I want to submit to the Members that this is an opportunity for us, and we should support the refinery because to export raw oil would have robbed this country of the benefits which result from processing. Processing means diversification of products from the oil as crude. I know hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi will agree with me on this point because we have shared it. This is very important.

Madam Speaker, let me add that we must build the capacity - quite obviously, you need capacity to exploit the oil, and that capacity is being built. Look at the oil college being established, and you have raised issues about NEMA. May I inform this House that every effort is being made, including seeking technical assistance to strengthen the capacity of NEMA to be able to carry out environmental impact assessment when this is being done?

Lastly, I really want to assure this House -[MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: “Clarification.”]- that the point is this. It is not that we should not extract –(Mr Wamanga-Wamai rose_) Madam Speaker, you will give me more time.

THE SPEAKER: Let him wind up. Please conclude.

PROF. KAMUNTU: You will give me more time.

THE SPEAKER: No, I want you to conclude.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I wanted clarification from the minister, Madam Speaker.

PROF. KAMUNTU: The Speaker has ruled.

THE SPEAKER: You will contribute.

PROF. KAMUNTU: The Speaker has ruled. [MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: “Don’t get scared.”] The Speaker must be. I know the distinguished Member is a diplomat and he would find a language that does not scare Members.

The last point I want to mention is about the critical element about environmental protection. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, let us agree that the fundamental concern you have raised about the environment is appreciated, because oil is a wasting asset that will be exhausted. When it is exhausted, we shall remain with the environment. Therefore, it is very important for us to protect the environment, and at the same time, have the oil. It is possible. Let me put it to you that it is not a zero sum that when you get oil, you forfeit the environment. No, you can have both of them as long as you emphasise the appropriate technology for extracting this oil -Interjections)- It has been done -[HON. MEMBER: “Where?”]- Honourable members, look; the whole coast of Scotland is drilled but the marine environment is protected. If it can happen there, why can’t we do it here? We extract oil and our environment on the surface is protected. So, the issue is using appropriate technology and we can get it. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have noted from the two minority reports presented -(Interjections)- the first one and this one. He has presented two so far. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi has persistently raised the issue of amending the Constitution before we can proceed with a debate on the Bills. Can we be guided on this matter, because I have heard him on radio and elsewhere, hammering this point of the need to revisit our Constitution and that what we are doing is unconstitutional? 

I thought it would do all of us a lot of good if hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s fears would be put to rest and those other listeners who believe in him that whatever we are doing is constitutional and, therefore, they should not have any problem with the debate that we are handling here.

Madam Speaker, I thought you or the Attorney-General would help us so that hon. Lukyamuzi can continue debating from a very well-informed point of view, fully knowing that he is well-buttressed from a constitutional point of view.

THE SPEAKER: I know that hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi enjoys dealing with the Constitution, but let us ask the Attorney-General to respond to those two minority reports regarding the issue of whether we are operating under the Constitution or not.

3.35
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is in order if he feels convinced about his submission to question the constitutionality of any Bill presented in Parliament and that can be looked at on its own merits.

What he has raised in his two minority reports in terms of their constitutionality, I do not find it worth following. For instance, in this very current one on an anonymous page that is headed, “There is a big problem,” –(Interjections)- I do not know which page this is - page 3. He talks about constitutional amendments and says, “Petroleum refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation and storage is a dangerous undertaking which calls for a penalty to address negligence and failure of the petroleum developers to observe environmental standards.” I do not know what is unconstitutional about that because you can only prescribe a penalty in an enabling legislation made under the Constitution. Therefore, you can provide for it here.

Then you continue, “There is, therefore, need to create a new clause from which the Refinery Bill will draw its power of existence. The refinery law is supposed to operationalise an existing constitutional provision on oil refinery. The refinery law, therefore, would be existing in open isolation from the basic law.” I take it that what you mean by your basic law is the Constitution. 

If you go to Article 244, Clause (2), it states, “Subject to this Article, Parliament shall make laws regulating:
(a)	The exploitation of minerals and petroleum;”

How do you define the word “exploitation”? To me, exploitation of petroleum includes all these processes for which these Bills are in Parliament, and of course includes your refining. So, there is nothing, even if we were to look at your submission on its own merits, which warrants considering amendment of the Constitution because it is already provided for. 

Madam Speaker, with all due respect, when it comes to his proposed amendments, we shall look at them in their own merit, and if he wants to further substantiate the unconstitutionality of any provision, we shall look at it specifically. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I may I also draw the attention of hon. Lukyamuzi to Article 79(2) of the Constitution, which provides as follows: “Except as provided in this Constitution, no person or body other than Parliament shall have the power to make provisions having the force of law in Uganda except under the authority conferred by an Act of Parliament”. So, we are the ones to make all the laws of Uganda. 

3.39
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Mary Karoro Okurut): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Well, I made some rapid response – and I want to note that there is nothing about masts, my shadow. Honourable members, the UBC link was disconnected because of the rehabilitation that is going on in the East Wing of Parliament. This was in the pantry, and as soon as they have fixed the East Wing, the link will be restored. 

3.40
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking your guidance in respect to the two Bills that have been submitted to us. The two reports are exactly the same; they have raised the same issues, same recommendations - everything is the same; and we have fully debated them. So, are we now going to debate the same issues? 

We are now dealing with the second one and it is a very serious one. I would have expected the committee to come up with different and important issues for us to discuss. Are we going to debate the same issues which we have already debated?

THE SPEAKER: Now, chairperson, is it true that your reports are exactly the same?

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, to a greater extent, I would like to say, “Yes”. There are variations, however. If you look at the second report, regarding the refinery, there are a few exceptions. When you talk about the refinery, it has something to do with land. If you talk about environment, the refinery is going to impact on the environment. So, there is that convergence; there is no way we could avoid talking about the same issues because the impact of the refinery, the exploration activities, productions and all that, affect this area which we are considering. 

But when we go into the details of the clauses, there is proper delineation of the activities pertaining to the clauses within the two Bills; there is a great difference there. But the general overview talks of pipes; where are they passing? They are passing over the land. If you are going to explore minerals, it has something to do with land; if you are going to transport, it is over land. Environment; it is the same environment which the refinery will be operating from and the same environment that the exploration and production are going to affect. So, there was no way you could draw serious distinctions except in the detailed clauses, you will see how these are delineated, especially, when it comes to the mid-stream Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me just assure the Members that at committee stage, we shall handle Bill by Bill. So, if we find that a matter has been dealt with in the first Bill, we will not need to do it again in the second Bill.

3.43
MR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for their reports. I wish these reports had been presented after we had debated the report of the ad hoc committee because, when the ad hoc committee went to some of the areas where oil is being explored, there were genuine issues which were raised of a genuine nature, that would have guided the debate before we debate the committee reports. 

However, the success of any project depends on how the local community where it is, supports that project. In the case of oil, which is no exception, we would have expected Government to move a little faster - and we have been raising this matter - to make sure that in areas where oil activities are taking place, Government takes a major step to ensure that the communities own the project. The community should look at this project as theirs.

There is no amount of security deployment that is better than the community and the government knows it. When you get the community to embrace the project, they provide the first line of security and I would have expected Government to do that. We have talked to Government about that but they do not seem to move in the direction we are telling them. The people should embrace this project. 

Even accessing areas where oil exploration is taking place requires strict passes. Now, if the local community does not feel ownership of this project, how will they provide the security I am talking of?

Government set up a commission of inquiry in the oil matters and a report was availed in 2006. This commission of inquiry made many recommendations including one on how land matters in Bunyoro should be settled. Since 2006, Government has not operationalised the recommendations of this very serious commission of inquiry. 

Now, some of the land issues have not been addressed, and the oil activities, have compounded the problems which should have been handled much earlier. That is why we have matters of land compensation and ownership, which were well defined in the report of this commission of inquiry. How I wish Government had moved faster to implement the recommendations of this report, we would be moving ahead at a good pace. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the environment, to some extent, this time round, I would support hon. Lukyamuzi. If we do not handle the issues of the environment well, we could have a big problem in the region. The committee is referring to NEMA; but if NEMA has not been strong enough to handle wetland encroachers in Kampala, how will they handle oil companies?

I would have wanted us to include in the laws that any oil company that pollutes must meet the cost –(Applause)– it must be in this law of ours. He who pollutes pays – and very strongly –

THE SPEAKER: Information from the Chair.

MR WERIKHE: What hon. Kasirivu is proposing is clearly enshrined in the Bill, and I echoed it in our report. It is clause 5 of the Bill – I think that is where you get that - the Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Bill.

MR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Madam Speaker, we have discussed with the chairperson and he knows that it is not as strong as I want it. I want a strong provision and I will move at committee stage.

I am happy that the committee recommended planning the area, because then, we should move in a way that is well planned. In an area like Buliisa, where the oil wells are scattered all over the community, the people are within - they are sharing space with the oil wells. You should not fail to make good provision for planning and then you cause unnecessary confusion –(Member timed out.)

3.50
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): I thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I re-echo the submission by hon. Kasirivu about the ad hoc committee findings. I think that they are very important and I do not know when we are going to incorporate them after we have passed these Bills into Acts.

Secondly, I thank the committee and of course, the shadow minister, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, for endeavouring to come out with a report that has enriched the entire debate –(Applause)- otherwise, some of us would have missed the issues raised and we could have missed a point.

However, there is one thing that both the committee and minority reports have not touched. There is a lot of hype about oil and we are overshadowing other sectors like agriculture. I was surprised by the Minister for Tourism to come and even talk about the first world when he knows that even tourism can over take –(Interjections)- is he for water? I am sorry for that; but he was there. He should have been the one to advocate for the lessening of that hype.

Why am I speaking about this? Nigeria is one of those countries that first discovered oil. It was a very good producer of palm oil, groundnuts and maize, but as we are talking now, even the arable land has shrunk and people are depending on imported foods - including beef. So, these are some of the things that we policy makers should come up with because we are talking a lot of oil as if we are going to heaven. 

Many States that hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi has cited like Equatoria Guinea, Gabon and Angola are all cursing why they discovered oil. So, we are not going to be an exception, unless we become very careful with our laws by putting strong clauses in these Bills that bring everything back to Parliament; to have a strong hand in this industry. Otherwise, this kind of opportunistic hyping is going to derail the entire society. 

Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and the committee have come talked of the environment. Remember the source of the Nile is here. Uganda is in the interlacustrine region with a lot of rivers, which are every time draining towards Egypt and other countries. We are going to destabilise the entire interlacustrine region and it will cost us a lot. Remember that it has been predicted that the next war will come from water. If we pollute that water – it has already happened in South America, in Ecuador, where these oil dealers destabilised the entire water catchment area and there was no money for it, and they left it hanging in the balance. It is the people who are suffering now. Even now, for those who are digging gold in Ghana – people are already suffering from these heavy metals and with oil comes heavy metals that if we are not careful, it is going to affect not only the national parks, but the riverine territories. 

They have talked about other areas like the environment. If you talk about a refinery, it brings in a lot of things and we have to be extremely careful. Therefore, when we are considering these clauses at committee stage, we should strengthen our stance regarding the clauses on environment, water and on things like Parliament’s role in the entire mineral industry. 

People are talking about NEMA, but whenever I look at NEMA even in this context, I shudder. What has happened? Even the soil that was scooped from Parliament, do you know where it has ended? It has ended up in a wetland in Banda. Our own soil which was supposed to be taken ended up in a swamp and yet NEMA is just a doorstep away from where we are. Which kind of NEMA are you talking about which has the capacity to go and marshal enough energy and resources to overlook oil? 

I think, like our colleagues have said, we should make sure that we strengthen the clause that will cause the oil companies to pay for any damage on our environment. And even after the oil is exhausted, they should pay some money back to the people who are going to be affected because the people in places where the oil is are going to be affected most. 

Lastly, when it comes to the issue that hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi raised – if we really find that there is some kind of a lacuna as they call it in the Constitution and things are not well elaborated, I think that we should revisit –(Member timed out.)  

THE SPEAKER: Five minutes.

3.56
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): I thank you very much. I welcome both reports. They have come a long way and I am glad that as Parliament, we have the opportunity to scrutinise the Bill and the report and make a law that will stand the test of time, and to also realise the dreams of Ugandans following the discovery of such huge quantities of oil. 

The announcement that an extra one billion barrels has been found is a positive one. The potential is five to six billion barrels because the exploration area is not yet exhausted and for that matter, as Members of Parliament, this is our opportunity to make the law that realises our aspirations and those of Ugandans. 

I would like to address myself, due to the limited time, to a few salient issues. The environment; it is true that there is provision for the environment and I can read it for the benefit of Members. Clause 4(5) “A person who carries on the management of the production, transportation, storage or treatment of waste arising out of petroleum activities without a licence, commits an offence and on conviction is liable to a fine not exceeding five thousand currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 10 years or both.” –(Interjections)- no, it is 100 million. 

Madam Speaker, one of the challenges in this petroleum production is storage and management of waste. So, for you to put five thousand currency points times (x) 20,000 is 100 million. What does 100 million mean in such a sector? Now, considering the past experience – the spillage in the Gulf of Mexico, and in Venezuela, what can this token of money help to recover the damage that may have been suffered? It is a problem because this oil is found in a very ecologically sensitive area with a national park, Lake Albert and water bodies.

Madam Speaker, we should put in place stringent measures to ensure that this oil, at the end of the day, does not become a curse. And to me, I would move to suggest that as of now, there should be clarity on how the laws, regulations, contracts, licenses and the permits work together. Why I am putting these together is because in other countries, there is a standard format of the contracts, which go hand-in-hand with the technology to be applied in the extraction. 

The national parks, for example, are very sensitive breeding areas. They are also very sensitive ecosystem places. You know that the oil will not last us for generations. So, we should prepare for what shall remain of Uganda after it.

Indeed in their contracts, they provide for the horizontal and vertical drilling, but which is missing here. Those who are going to get licences in these areas must be under conditions such that they don’t trample upon the breeding areas of our ecosystem. Actually, in those developed countries, you have to add technology – they go a kilometre away and drill vertically before proceeding horizontally to access the oil. But here, the pictures we looked at showed that the elephants were running around the ridges and platforms of oil. This is a matter that we can’t sit by and just watch. 

Also, when you look at Section 76(1) (f); it talks about requiring a licensee to carry out the environmental impact assessment. How can you ask the licensee to go and carry out the environmental impact assessment? What report –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, two more minutes given.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In such circumstances, we need to be honest with ourselves. Since time is not on my side, let me talk about two other areas, briefly. The first one is about the Petroleum Authority of Uganda in clauses 5 to 7. I would like to appeal to you honourable members, that we should, as much as possible, minimise the role of politicians. Let us instead strengthen the role of the Authority because when the politicians are in Government, they may take advantage as the powers may demand. Let us entrust the core functions of the Authority with trusted and capable Ugandans who shall be well vetted by Parliament after their appointments from the President so that whoever will manage this resource tomorrow, will do so without bias and favouritism, but to the benefit of Ugandans.

Lastly, let me also say something about the National Oil Company. This is where the beef is. The proposal by the committee is to allow the private sector buy shares in such a company, which is going to be transacting on behalf of Ugandans. But we need to know that Uganda is not the only country that has found oil. So, we should pick on the best practices from those other countries that already have oil.

That means that once we have the National Oil Company, which is truly national, all Ugandans will have hope that tomorrow, they will benefit from it. But must you allow private individuals – they are already rich and they are going to buy out shares and by the time you realise it, it will be too late - the airport that was privatised is there for everybody to see and other assets of the country. People with money are buying them out. They are buying out shares and at the end of the day this oil will only benefit a few individuals at the cost of the entire country.

5.03
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this important subject. I also want to thank the committee and the shadow minister for presenting those very important reports.

While I still served this country as a journalist, I attended a number of international conferences on international aid. Because of the stealing of money generated either locally or just given to us, the main subject was whether it still made sense for donors to continue giving Uganda aid. And I always had a standard answer for all of them to the effect that the individuals siphoning public resources or stealing this money – the day you close the taps or the day you will stop sending aid here, maybe this country will starve. I always told them that when money is sent, at least there would be enough of it to steal and we would use the balance to provide services.

We are dealing with the laws to regulate the oil industry in this country. And I think our focus is about making them very nice laws. However, one wonders whether everywhere we have had problems, it was the laws or due to their absence. We have had a selective application of the laws. We have also had cases where laws have been totally disregarded.

That is why today, I am calling upon, especially colleagues on the other side, to reconsider having a national conference where we will discuss our own conduct as leaders. We have been debating issues of health here where we presented ourselves as a very poor country. Despite that, we always find money to buy jets for fighting; ewe always find money to bribe voters; and we always find money to compromise leaders.

So, as we debate the laws concerning oil, the laws themselves won’t be enough. In fact, the biggest challenge we have as a country is not the absence of the laws, but the conduct and behaviour of leaders. 

This is the only country where appointments are made because individuals who are being appointed either used to play with the children of those who make the appointments or their parents were friends. And this will happen in this law where we are providing for an Authority. Look at all the Authorities in Uganda and their boards. Who are the people sitting on these boards and Authorities? Either they were NRM MPs, but were unable to make it to Parliament or –(Interruption)

MR TODWONG: Thank you. Madam Speaker, through your able committee, I have just been cleared for the appointment to a ministerial post. But neither my father nor mother, not even my auntie played a part in the bush war or played with the children or relatives of anybody. Neither I nor my children are connected to those people. So, is it in order for my good friend, hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju, to insinuate that all those who have been appointed have connectivity to those he mentioned on the Floor?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, he is out of order because he is diverting the debate. Please concentrate on refining, transportation and storage.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, when you read page 6 of the report on transparency and accountability – I did not like this report. The report tells us how Ugandans are disappointed with the processes that have happened so far –(Interjections)- that is what the committee reports to this Parliament. I am only expounding on what the committee has written. If you have reports, look at transparency and accountability; and that is the point I am emphasising here.

Once you begin filling public offices with relatives and friends - I don’t want to speak about my friend Todwong - but you know the reason you are a minister. I don’t know whether the NRM MPs think you are most competent, but I don’t want to discuss it. I want to discuss the oil Bill and not individuals.

When we are talking about matters of transparency and accountability, they begin with individuals that you pick to assemble a team to provide services -(Member timed out.)

4.09
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to restrict myself to about three areas. One, I want to start where the committee pointed out the issue of participation and the local content. They said in their remarks that amidst all this, it is imperative to note that the extractive industry is generally less labour intensive and as such, local content and participation should not be narrowed down to job allocation.

I think, in this law that we want to formulate, we should be careful to include - I remember in their remarks, they put it clearly that His Highness the Omukama, the Ker Kwaro of Acholi and the traditional seats of the Jonam happened to interact with them and stated their interests.

I also happened to meet the Ker Kwaro of Acholi who clearly stated the royalties, and they put it very clearly by stating a percentage that for the Ker Kwaro to work well, the local government, regional tier, land owners and the clan leaders, should be given priority of 30 percent as royalties by giving a percentage of 10 percent, eight percent, seven percent and five percent, respectively.

Madam Speaker, we have the institutions, which are helping in training some of our students and children so that they can be absorbed in job allocations. However, if we have to go a little bit further, we would have given provision for people who are coming from where the oil has been discovered, so that we give them a better and higher percentage in training.

However, you find that very few are even taking steps or opportunities to be trained. I think we should go further to include provisions for training these people.

Under land use, we are well aware that land has been given and it is not something to be sold. Everybody who settles in a certain location uses land for cross-production, animal rearing, for hunting and others use it for looking for local medicine and collecting building materials. Now, if you are talking about a refinery; processing and conversion of this crude oil, definitely, we understand the chemical reaction that is going to take place. That means that land use in a way is going to change, and that is why if it is changing, we should go deeper to make sure that the environment is well catered for because we know chemical reactions can take place, and that means the atmosphere is going to be distorted - the ozone layer and many things that we can talk about.

I would like to state that in our recommendations and during the time of amending this law, we should be careful and very attentive to put a provision that land use, which is going to change, should be for the benefit of the people who are going to live in those areas.

Finally, I want to announce that yesterday was the last day of the National Musical Festival and Agago District emerged winner. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: On behalf of the House, let us congratulate the baby district of Agago for performing so well.

4.14
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report and hon. Lukyamuzi for his minority report. I want to assure the other side that everybody is excited about the discovery of oil, but we should not close our eyes unless we have not been following what is happening in the world - in all those countries that produce oil.

I want to disagree with Prof. Kamuntu. Uganda discovering oil and putting a refinery in this country does not make Uganda a first world country. Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Libya, Iran, Venezuela, and Mexico would have joined the first world but they are not there. Therefore, do not deceive Ugandans that by discovering oil here, we are going to join the first world - not at all!

I want to tell you that a country like Angola, which has got more oil than Uganda has not jumped to the first world. We should not forget the misery that could come out of oil. The Ogoni people and Ken Wiwa are mourning because of oil. Therefore, we cannot close our eyes to what will happen to this country; the environmental degradation. 

We cannot rely on NEMA as they have already let us down. You can see all the wetlands that have gone and people are guarding them with guns. Therefore, we cannot rely on NEMA, rather, we must have laws put into these Bills.

Does this country of Uganda have the capacity to use all the oil we are going to refine in this country? Not at all; we do not have the capacity. Kenya has got their oil now, they talk that they have discovered oil and they have a refinery in Mombasa. Tanzania has discovered oil. Where are we going to sell this oil? Where are we going to use it? We do not have the capacity in this country to use all the oil we are going to refine in this country.  We cannot and this is the fact.

Sudan and Rwanda will not buy much oil and you are not going to export it to Kenya, Tanzania or abroad. You are able to export unrefined oil and make money out of it, but when you talk about these facts, people are just making noise blindly. If you follow what is happening in the oil world, countries like Ghana are not refining, but selling their oil in barrels. Many countries around the world like Angola do not refine oil. So, do not get excited that we are going to refine oil.

If I were the Minister of Tourism -(Interruption)

MS MULONI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to my brother hon. Wamai that the refinery in Mombasa is old technology; producing 70,000 barrels per day. It is obsolete and currently operating at half capacity. All the three countries in East Africa region are importing petroleum products. So, the issue of adding value to the oil that has been discovered in Uganda is first and foremost to meet our country’s needs and the needs in the region. Any excess can then be exported.

Further, Ghana has a refinery.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: No, they do not. Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I was saying is that it is fine to refine oil here, but do we have the capacity to use all that oil here? That is what I am talking about. 

Secondly, if I were the Minister of Tourism, I would be the first one to raise the flag because I can assure you that these animals are going to move away from the national parks and the birds are going to migrate. As a result, tourists are not going to come here because the animals will no longer be there. With the noise, fumes and vibration caused by the machines, and the smoke in the air, a lot of environmental degradation will occur in this country. (Hon. Peter Lokeris rose_) I am not accepting any information because I do not have much time. You see what I am telling you is that the fumes that are going to come out of these machines – I have been to countries where there are a lot of fumes and the whole world is complaining –(Hon. Ssekikubo rose_)– I will take the information. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: That is selective. (Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Wamai, for giving way. The honest information I wish to give is that even in the developed countries where they have undertaken oil-drilling like in the United States such as in New Mexico, Texas and others, they have in their contracts specific areas between September and December where drilling must stop at 1.00 a.m. until 10.00 a.m. to allow guinea fowls and the monitor lizards to continue their mating - consummation and breeding. (Laughter) So, what he is saying is very true and we have to take cognisance of that if at all we are to protect our ecosystem. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much. I was going to come to that -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, may I be protected.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much for the information. I was actually coming to New Mexico. When it is time for mating, they stop oil exploration so that the animals are at peace. I do not know whether the committee chairman has included that in the  Bill, because we are going to disturb the eco-system. Uganda has been named number one destination for tourism in 2012, and we are also happy. However, if we do not look at these issues, the birds and animals are going to migrate and we will not get that money in that ministry you left. This is a serious issue and as Ugandans, we should be concerned; we should not just rejoice. Leave those ones who are happy – because you know what has happened in Nigeria oil industry – those stealing and the corrupt are very happy, but the Nigerian people are suffering. So, we should take this issue seriously. 

As a country we should guard against the corrupt who are going to steal this money. You can now see the type of vehicles that we have on our streets and the accidents –(hon. Muloni rose_)- Now, imagine I have not even given you the right to come and give your information. What I am saying is that the transportation of the gas –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I am really surprised that you have withheld your good ideas from the committee. The Bills have been here since May and I keep encouraging you to go to all the committees – you may not vote there, but you have good proposals. Now, you are really alarming the country. Let us have complete proposals. (Applause)

4.23
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, I represent a region where the oil sector is being housed. I clearly support both reports, but more strongly the minority report, because it clearly addresses the needs of our people. I wish to highlight a few issues on land rights and compensation. I would like to see not only land compensation, but also land resettlement, because you may give our peasants money, but sometimes they may not know how to handle these funds; they may misuse the money and end up on the streets; but if they are resettled, for instance, if you take my ten acres of land to be used for oil drilling, buy me another place and resettle me in that particular place –(Interjections)- I will give you later, be preparing yourself.(Laughter)

The other issue I want to highlight is on environmental degradation, which is critical to us because we are going to feel its direct impact, not only in terms of affecting our health, but it is also going to affect our culture.

Honourable minister, I do not know whether this law is addressing the issue of protecting our culture, particularly in Bunyoro where people are given pet names. I am Tinkasiimire Barnabas Atenyi. I would want to see all workers coming to this place undertake to protect our culture. We have seen an increase in the number prostitutes; this was unheard of in Bunyoro. We used to live on hard-earned labour and not by selling our bodies. But today, we are struggling with problems of prostitution in Bunyoro.

THE SPEAKER: But are there no buyers? If there were no buyers, would there be prostitutes?

MR TINKASIMIRE: Madam Speaker, of course the buyers are from outside because we are seeing different groups of people and this is why we are demanding that our culture should be protected.

For the security and stability of this country, I am requesting that these Bills take into exceptional consideration our demands, like a share in the jobs, and a share in the business. We are typically an agricultural society. We would want to see our people participating in supplying food to these sectors. It should be promoted and should appear in the Bill.

The national oil company; I would want to see a clause – Minister, I am talking and you are discussing across – I am looking at you -(Laughter)- I am addressing a very important point. In the national oil company, we would like to see the districts which are housing the oil sector having some percentage shares for investment for posterity. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute.

MR TINKASIMIRE: I pray that these Bills will protect the agricultural economy in this area. The oil sector is ushering in the cash economy. We would want to remain with a vibrant agricultural sector after exhausting the oil. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I want to see the functions of the minister trimmed to the approval of Parliament. You have seen - even today, we have a stampede with the Executive. If we did not have power to control particularly the approval of the budget, to control the Executive, we would have problems. (Applause) (Member timed out.)

4.29
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in appreciating the input of both the committee and the minority report. Looking through this Bill and the report, the crucial issue that actually must be addressed by the Executive, is how do we maximise oil revenues without endangering the long-term industry called Tourism? 

And I would love the Minister of Energy, when winding up this debate, to give me the following pieces of information on matters of environment: 

One, what is the position of our neighbouring countries who share with us the resources in the Albertine region, especially on issues of environment?

Two, what is the competence of this organisation we are relying on as our watchdog, called NEMA? How many skilled employees does it have in this industry, particularly in waste management, and where are they deployed? Are they actually doing the job?

Three, the refinery industry itself will largely rely on welders. How many Ugandans are skilled enough to weld these oil pipes to levels of the internationally required standards to ensure that there will be no oil spillage? If we are not there, are we going to import the Philippines? And how many are we going to import? And what will be the social relations of those foreigners in the area where the refinery is going to be built? And what is Government going to do or will do to address those social relations which are definitely a must in the near future?

If you go to the issues of health and safety, what is the health status of the region where this refinery and oil industry is going to take place? Do we have the required staff and the physical infrastructure? 

Yesterday, I was informed that we have one doctor who travels once a month to my district to collect tests from cancer patients, send them to Kampala and the results are returned three months after. Definitely, one of the obvious occupational diseases that will occur is cancer. Do we have adequate facilities for such treatment and eventualities? 

On land rights, you are talking of the refinery, transportation and the like. Does the government have a plan to resettle those who would have been deprived of their land or are we going to give them money which will sustain them for one month and thereafter they are left on their own? 

Most of the land ownership in this area is customary in nature and we will have many families with family heads who have died and people do not know anything about letters of administration. So, you will find most of the families with wrangles, especially, where you have unmarried women with children; will their land rights and interests in the land be catered for? Are you planning for that?    

Lastly, on the National Oil Company, we have many Government companies and yet the PERD Statute was repealed. In Government-owned companies, the shares are being sold. I do not understand how - like Uganda Posts Limited and the like. Is this National Oil Company not one of such companies that Government intends to put in the hands of the mafias and we end up getting problems through corruption? (Member timed out.)

4.34
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report, and particularly the observations on page 9 about openness and transparency. This will ensure checks and balances to mitigate the abuse of office and corruption. I think it is very important that we have openness and transparency. Actually, these debates are in this House and in the country because we have suspicion. This debate is out of suspicion. (Applause) People do not trust the institutions. We are making the laws, but people are still not satisfied. 

Coming to hon. Lukyamuzi, he said the refinery should be discouraged. Really, I would not buy that - because we have the environment; we have the national parks talked about and we have the oil. So, we only need to have a way of utilising these resources we have around us. We do not need to discourage the refinery. We must have it. The moment we have it outside this country, again we shall have complaints. Let us have it here; let us make good laws; and we manage it well. 

Hon. Lukyamuzi cited implementing the ban on polythene material. I agree with him. It is a shame that in 2009 - some of us were in this Parliament - we gave all the necessary power as Parliament to the minister then, to see that she gets rid of the polythene material. Unfortunately, to date, this polythene is still around. It is very unfortunate. I agree with you, hon. Lukyamuzi that we have not given this country what it deserves.

Both reports from hon. Lukyamuzi and the main report talk about the weaknesses in NEMA. This is true, but this is an institution we have. We need to strengthen it, give it money, give it everything; but we must bear in mind that the weaknesses in NEMA are not only about resources. Actually, corruption is one of the problems. The wetlands being destroyed here and there as we know, is not about the lack of money. It is about political interference and the lack of will in the institution. So, much as we want to put resources, we can put billions and billions there, but as long as there is corruption in NEMA, and as long as there is political interference, we shall not have done anything.

When we come to the powers of the minister in appointing the board of the National Oil Company, we need to be very cautious. We are giving the ministers too much power. They can appoint and dismiss at will. This is very dangerous. As Parliament, we need to see how we can go about it because the board will come when the minister feels the board should come and it must work the way he or she wants it to work. Although there are those regulations –(Interjections)- I know them, but they are mainly in the hands of the minister which is not very healthy.  I think we need, especially on the oil company, to have a vetting system like we do with the ministers and Parliament; I do not know how we can do it. Maybe, Madam Speaker, you would guide so that these people appointed on the board of the oil company are vetted by Parliament, because this is a very serious and sensitive matter. When you look at the inter-ministerial linkages, it is very unfortunate. (Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is that in as far as transparency is concerned, as my colleague is raising it, in the Constitution of the Ghana any agreement and any contract which deals with natural resources must be ratified by Parliament. It is embedded in their Constitution. So, there is no way such transactions can be made without the knowledge of the representatives of the people. That is the information I want to give you.

MR KAGWERA: Thank you, my colleague. This is true. The other day we were in Ghana with him and we saw how Ghana operates. Actually, the success of Ghana in all these fields is about transparency; Parliament is working and the Judiciary is working. 

Here, we still have a problem about the separation of powers in this country - the Executive, the Judiciary and the Legislature. In the Constitution, we have it but in practice there is a lot of interference from one arm of Government to the other. If we do not stop this interference, then we cannot do much. You will find the Executive trying to interfere with Judiciary and you will find the Executive trying to interfere with Parliament. We must be very clear on these issues and we must leave the institutions to work independently. If we have created institutions in this country, let us leave the institutions to work and then the country will move - (Member timed out)

4.41
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I would like to congratulate this House, under your able leadership. This Bill is here today because of that special sitting we had a couple of months back. I would like to thank the committee. I think that under the circumstances, the committee has done a tremendous job. I would also like to make a few points. 

I oppose hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s suggestion and my brother, hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai’s, about the issue of refining. It is very important that we have support for the refinery being in Uganda. Why? When we bring out crude oil, this crude oil is refined at different stages. The first that comes out is heavy fuel oil. It is then further refined and you have diesel, which is further refined and you have petrol. The petrol is further refined and you have kerosene, which is further refined and you have jet A-1 fuel.  At every stage, there is what we call residuals, and that is something that I would like to commend the committee for. They have identified that these residuals are capable of producing bitumen, tar, plastics and several other things that are necessary for the development of this country. 

Madam Speaker, like the previous colleagues of mine have raised issues, I want to raise my concern on the issue of empowering NEMA. This Bill leaves a lot to be desired in regard to waste management. Tar is non-biodegradable. That means that that waste will never disintegrate into soil. It will always be there for hundreds of years. So, where and how are we prepared as a nation if we start the refinery to manage that waste?

They talk of transportation in the Bill. Whereas they talk of transportation, Uganda’s oil is heavy sulphur and that means to transport the crude oil, we would need to have heated pipelines. To transport gas, one single leakage and a match stick somewhere can destroy the whole nation. The whole country can burn. So, I think we need a finer eye to look into these matters of health, safety and environment. 

Madam Speaker, I would want the privatisation of the national oil company not to exceed 30 per cent. We must control up to 70 per cent of the national oil company. I would like to amend that the board of that national oil company should be ratified by this Parliament, just like the immigration board is, and we should not leave it to the minister as recommended in the Bill. 

I would like to propose that this Parliament ratifies the creation of a regulatory authority that is going to govern and supervise the various oil companies that are going to be involved in the exploration and processing of oil. We do not have a regulatory authority and the Bill prescribes, “the minister shall”.  I would like to propose that a regulatory authority be put in place for the role of supervising and managing these finer details.

As I conclude, I would like to suggest that while it is paramount that we start processing this oil very quickly, there is the issue of tourism, the element of affecting our tourism industry. We are in the process of passing the budget and we have given the tourism industry one of the lowest budgets. (Member timed out)

4.47
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for according me the opportunity to add my voice to that of colleagues who have contributed to this very important subject. I specifically want to address myself to the recommendation by the committee on page 7 of the report, which reads as follows: “There is need therefore, for this law that we are enacting to cascade openness and transparency and provide sufficient checks”. My interest is in the words, “sufficient checks”. 

There is an issue that has been bothering me since I started internalising and understanding the process of oil production, exploration and now refining, and that is at the level of policy formulation. According to the policy and law of oil production, we are supposed to have what we call recoverable costs. As an economist but also a tax auditor, I concern myself with figures. When we talk of recoverable costs, we are in other words referring to the following: exploration expenditure, development expenditure, capitalised interest expenditure and also investment credit expenditure, among other costs that are recoverable.

Madam Speaker, from the information which we have and all the literature which has been provided on this subject, we are informed that there is an advisory committee consisting of four members where Government contributes two members and then the licensee contributes two members. It is these four members who sit to determine what we call “recoverable costs”. 

When we are talking about the oil industry, we are talking about heavy capital investments and therefore heavy profit generation. As a country, our interests should be focussed more on what profit will be left so that the government shares this, on behalf of its people, by direct involvement in the national oil company but also by taxing that component of profit which will remain after the royalties and the recoverable costs have been deducted. That is the concern for which I am seeking clarification from the concerned minister. 

Why don’t we broaden the composition of this advisory committee in order to reflect on more levels of competency and more levels of skill? Why don’t we make it more representative so that we do not have incidences of what our committee members are observing in this recommendation on page 7? We should provide sufficient checks. That is the issue I want to register with the line minister and the committee chairman to throw more light on. Our concern, first and foremost, should be on what we are remaining with as a profit, which Government will share, which Government will utilise, on behalf of its citizens after the royalties and recoverable costs have been taken care of. I thank you.    

4.51
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have four points to make. The first point is about the local content and participation. I know the committee has proposed an amendment on training and placement, but there is no concrete provision geared at empowering our local contractors and service providers. If you read Section 54 of the Bill, they are saying the local contractors, service providers, will be given priority where they are providing services competently or as far as quality is concerned. It is there; you can read it. But this is not a normal industry and I wish and hope we could empower the local people to service this industry. 

I remember during the CHOGM time, there was special training for even the receptionists in hotels. Hotels were also given affirmative action in terms of equipment. So, I propose to the chair to think of an amendment to include the empowerment of our local people. When I am talking about local people, I am including all Ugandans. So, do not think it is only specifically where the oil is; all Ugandans. 

This is not a simple business – (Interjections) - It is there, but it is not strong enough; there is no specific provision to empower our local people to participate. The provision only says that they will be given priority where they have capacity. If they do not have capacity, what happens? This is our oil, how do we support our people as a country because that is the only way they can benefit? 

My second point is about information. They are referring us to the Access to Information Act. I know there can be cross referencing, but if we do not provide for transparency and put a clause in this Bill to say that the Official Secrets Act will not apply as far as this is concerned, and we disclose information to the public, I can assure you this oil and this industry may not necessarily be beneficial to our people; even when it is, they may not know exactly how they are benefiting.

Finally, about the environment, NEMA is almost a myth to me; it does not have the capacity, and you have also said that it does not have the funds to carry out its mandate. This is a special industry; can we provide for a fund in this Act? I should say “this Bill” but it will be an Act very soon. Can we provide a fund to enable NEMA carry out the environmental impact assessment? They can refund that money but they should not be allowed to carry out their own environmental impact assessment. 

Madam Speaker, I have limited time but I am going to give you an example. Currently, in my constituency, in Budongo - the minister is aware because we discussed it and there is a letter which has been written to her - there is a licence which was given for exploration of silicon. The local people do not know what is happening but things are already happening. 

They have come, quarrelled and quarrelled, but - On top, the streams which have been servicing their wells, their only source of water, have been interfered with. The wells are drying up but NEMA is nowhere to be seen. Even the details - the environmental restoration plan - they have not seen it. The project brief is not there. So, that is just an example - fortunately, it is also in your ministry – to show that it is very important for NEMA to be empowered in a special way if it is going to carry out its duties and ensure that the environment is not very negatively affected.

We, the people who are in areas where oil is located, at the end of the day we are the first to be affected. How do you cater for us? How do you cater for us, honourable minister, as far as the environment is concerned but also as far as the share of this oil is concerned? The royalties are coming but also, in terms of service provision, training and placement - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, the very last one is on the refinery. Many people have talked about it. I am surprised that our colleagues on the other side, in the Opposition, are fighting this. This is something which is almost concluded. We have delayed processing because we had not agreed on this. Those people you call development partners, even the owners of companies, are not interested in setting up a refinery here. It is not because it is environmentally unviable or we do not have enough oil but they are interested in reaping more profit by exporting the crude oil. They are interested in the jobs which will be here. They will be exported as far as this refinery is concerned.

Has the cost benefit analysis been done? I hope it has been done. The regulations will cater for most of the concerns which have been raised. Really, let us support the oil refinery. (Member timed out)

4.57
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I would like to add my voice to the previous speakers on this subject. The question is: has oil just been discovered in Uganda? The answer is, no. If we are talking about transparency and accountability, then there is another question - Where are those areas where we expect the oil to be in this country? Why is it a preserve of a few people in this country? 

Why am I saying that, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues? It is on record that when it comes to land rights and compensation, it is not the ordinary people, the initial customary land owners of those places, who are being compensated. It is the speculators who have used the information in the possession of the state to exploit the population by buying this land very cheaply and eventually have Government pay. 

What do I mean? In all these areas where oil has been discovered – and that was not done today - all those people who have sold land to Government as far as the question of oil is concerned are middlemen. The ordinary people who are supposed to benefit from this have actually missed out. We have had several projects which sound very good at inception; you remember CHOGM where an impression was created that ordinary Ugandans were going to benefit from CHOGM. By the end of CHOGM, it was the usual culprits benefiting from it. When we go to Bujagali in Jinja, an impression was created that actually the local population was going to benefit. But the people who sold land to Government were actually not the locals of that area. 

What do I mean, honourable members? The Bill addresses land rights and compensation but it does not address the benefits which the ordinary locals are going to get. Most often, they end at selling their land. One would argue that there is freedom of contract. However, our Constitution, National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, No. XI provides that: “The State shall give the highest priority to the enactment of legislation establishing measures that protect and enhance the right of the people to equal opportunities in development”. 

When our mothers, the widows in the villages, lose their land to middlemen, they receive very little resources and remain with nothing. Therefore, in this legislation we must ensure that Government gazettes areas where we suspect oil so that even the locals know that they have oil in those areas and as they negotiate with whoever is coming to buy land, they will have that at the back of their minds.

Secondly, I have heard colleagues trying to rubbish the concerns of hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. I am afraid the Minister of Tourism has left, but it is well known to this august House that we collect Shs 40 billion annually from tourism. However, he has not shown us how much we expect to earn annually from oil. 

As we talk now, we are grappling with the agreements which we signed before there was any enabling law to regulate this industry. Now, as they agitate for this, they seem to be saying that the environment does not even matter; they are not telling us the cost benefit analysis. They should put figures on table to show us what we expect to earn from oil. Today, we earn Shs 40 billion from tourism. We also expect the Ministry of Trade and Industry to show us that when we invest more in trade and tourism, we expect to earn this much. That would help us to do a comparative analysis on where we should invest more. We are talking about investment in our resources and in our environment. Without these facts, it becomes very difficult for us to take any decision on this matter.

Finally, it is not true that we oppose oil exploration in this country. We are only saying that as this takes place, there should be sufficient laws to address the concerns of Ugandans as far as this matter is concerned. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.03
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had preserved all the energy for tomorrow’s debate, but I have opted to add on the oil debate. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for seeing me. 

We shall not fear to sleep because we fear to dream. A refinery here is the right way to go. There is no way we can transport crude oil because we shall be losing a lot of money. I partly agree with hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, but I disagree with him on the refinery part. Why do you want us to continue importing things instead of doing the things here? Remember that Kenya just imposed a tax on Ugandan goods and you saw the Speaker struggling with everybody in Government to make sure that Kenyans accept us to bring our goods. Now a chance is here; we have the oil here in Bunyoro and I do not see why you do not want us to build a refinery here in Bunyoro. Why do you want to go to Mombasa again? Have Kenyans died because they have got a refinery? 

Madam Speaker, before I came to Parliament, I was one time in Cape Town delivering a very wonderful speech on diabetes; I saw a refinery in Cape Town, in the middle of the city, actually near the sea. These fellows have their own refinery and I did not see any white having a Carcinoma by the roadside, saying that this is the cancer caused by oil. This is because there was very good handling of the waste products of the oil – (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose) - Let me finish.

Madam Speaker, the issue of the environment is addressed on page 15 of this Bill. It is very clear that the only problem we have is NEMA, which is equivalent to the National Drug Authority of Uganda, where people import drugs that have posho instead of the exact ingredients. Similarly, NEMA is looking on helplessly as people use some machines to put sand in wetlands. In Bugolobi here, they are putting soil in the lake and people are just smiling. When you do some serious investigations, you may capture even one of us seated inside here. 

That is my problem with Ugandans who have developed spiritual anaesthesia - they do not care about the country at all. They want to finish everything without caring for tomorrow, as if their future will be on Mars. So, NEMA needs to be strengthened. I hope NEMA people are watching this. They should be well funded to make sure that if a General or a long-serving minister, like hon. Migereko, puts a building in the middle of the lake, they should destroy it – (Interjections) – I do not mean that hon. Migereko has put up a building in the lake. (Laughter) I saw some building being destroyed near Nakumatt. That was the happiest day in my life because I could see my Government being in charge over somebody who put up a building in the middle of the road. 

Madam Speaker, the Bill gives the minister too much power. The consolation I have is that you are still the Speaker and may God keep you alive for us and for the Appointments Committee. Should we get a Minister of Energy who has a problem in his or her heart, the energy sector will be destroyed because the powers of the minister are too much. I cannot believe it; she is the one who is also supposed to approve the data management systems. Supposing we get a minister who has just finished senior six, how will she manage the energy sector which has a lot of jargon which he or she may not understand? 

My humble prayer is that hon. Muloni, with all your intelligence, this power which you have is too much. (Laughter) The power that you have as far as energy is concern is too much - (Interjections) - I expect the Minister of Energy with all this power will be – (Ms Muloni rose_) – If we get someone who is corrupt, we will get a problem. 

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I want to give the members information. When we talk about “the minister”, we are talking about the Executive and the executive powers are given by the Constitution. So, I think it is important that members understand this.

THE SPEAKER: But minister, it is your Bill; the members are reading from your Bill. It does not say “Cabinet” but it says “the minister”. They are reading from your Bill.

MS MULONI: But that is the meaning.

THE SPEAKER: No. Before hon. Ssempijja comes in, I want to introduce in the public gallery behind there are children of Fairway Nursery and Primary School in Iganga represented by hon. Mugema and hon. Kabaale. We also have residents of Nantabulirwa in Mukono represented by hon. Betty Nambooze and they came to witness their petition being tabled. Can we invite hon. Ssempijja and then hon. Ssimbwa.

MR MIGEREKO: Can I clarify one thing?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR MIGEREKO: As you were introducing the visitors in the gallery from Iganga, I would like to point out that the Members of Parliament from Iganga are not here. They are away on official duty in Iganga where the President is visiting right now. When you introduce visitors when their Member of Parliament is not around, they may start imagining that at times when we are in Kampala - [HON. MEMBERS: “Order.”] -  So, I thought that I should bring it to the attention of the visitors.

5.10
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to add my voice to the voices of the earlier speakers by thanking the chairperson and his committee for the two reports. 

I also want to congratulate the Minister for Energy. So far, she has been - I am saying this because of the fears that some members have about the powers of the minister. Even if we give the minister these powers, the minister is still under Parliament. In the circumstances, if she abuses the powers, we are here. On the other hand, I wanted to say that she has been steering this sector without these laws that we are discussing. This means that she has suffered the turbulence in those times when the gaps where evident. 

On page 7, the committee mentions the economic implications of petroleum, but I would imagine that they really forgot to include the social aspect. It should have been “socio-economic implications” because of many reasons, including those that have just been elaborated by hon. Kabakumba Matsiko about the local share.

The committee goes on to talk about over reliance on oil revenues and they also talk about revenue management dimension. That is what I want to talk about. They refer this revenue management to the Public Finance Management Bill. However, I want us to get used to what the proceeds from petroleum will be used for. Some people think that this money is going to be used for salaries. We need to educate our people to get used to what we think the proceeds from oil and petroleum products will be used for; otherwise, this creates anxiety for nothing. If you are talking about using these resources to construct big roads, hydro electric dams, let us mention this from the word go, so that people know, so that we tame the thinking of our populations, so that we do not create unnecessary anxiety. 

I also want to add to what some other members have said about the local content and participation. I think we need to be very clear whether we think that the locals, or the local government administration or cultural institutions in those areas where we have to extract oil will get a share. You should be very clear about this, and they should also not think that this is going to be shared among themselves. I have heard some of our people in Buwekula wanted part of the district to go to the other side because they think there is a share from that oil. We need to really guide our people on – (Member timed out)  

5.15
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to talk about the issue of transparency and accountability. If we want to mitigate the issue of abuse of office and corruption in as far as the petroleum sector is concerned, we need to have more consultations with other stakeholders. It should not be the activities of only the Executive and Parliament. We should involve all stakeholders in this sector so that they come up with their views and come out with a better law to manage this prestigious resource.

Secondly, we have all along been talking about secretive PSAs and we are also going into another phase of signing agreements with several companies and individuals. I have seen a lot of sections in the proposed Bill talking about gagging people from accessing information. I would propose that this time round, these agreements that are supposed to deal with the transactions, or contracts or undertakings involving refining and gas processing should be ratified by Parliament before they are considered as legal documents so that everybody, even us Members of Parliament, become aware of what is included in these agreements signed between Government and other individuals in the petroleum sector.

Lastly, the proceeds and storage; a lot of authority has been given to the Petroleum Regulatory Authority in as far as storage and everything is concerned. We are aware of what happened with our Jinja storage facilities, were individuals took them over as their own property and up to today, when we have problems of fuel we cannot have reserves because of the problems of the storage facilities in Jinja. So giving all the authority to a minister or the petroleum authority – (Interruption)

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, the honourable Member of Parliament is saying that the Jinja storage tanks have been taken over by an individual. That is not correct – (Interjections) - It is not correct. The Jinja storage tanks are still in the hands of Government and  we have only now engaged a private party to refurbish them so that we can restock them.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, although that is not what I was talking about. I was asking about the procedure used by the private person in accessing those storage facilities. So, if you make all these documents public, it will give Parliament and members of the public an opportunity to know what is going on in regard to the petroleum sector.

The other aspect is about the proceeds, and hon. Vincent Ssempijja talked about it. Currently, we just hear  that money from that sector is being kept somewhere, but at one time somebody might decide on what to do with these proceeds. So, this time round as we pass these laws, we need to be careful and strict on the issues pertaining to the utilisation of this money. The incoming generation should find the proceeds of the petroleum sector for them to utilise it to develop this country, other than an individual using it during this period. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.20
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County, South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A lot has been said, so I will restrict my contribution to page 10 of the report, which I thank the committee for presenting to this Parliament.

The Dutch disease was described in this report. It is about overdependence on the oil sector to manage economic needs of the country as it has happened elsewhere. However, when I look at what the committee observed and recommended at page 10, I noticed something. The committee says that there is need for deliberate and sustained efforts to desist from over reliance on oil revenues and instead use and distribute the benefits accruing from it equitably and sustainably to enhance national unity and cohesion. This does not come out clearly. How did they observe the Dutch disease, and can it be avoided in regard to our country? I think that has also been addressed by hon. Vincent Ssempijja. I hope the chairman of the committee has taken cognisance of it.

People have been talking about the oil refinery and there is just one justification for that; it is about the nature of the crude oil that has been discovered in Uganda. I have been informed by experts that the kind of oil that we have is waxen. So, its transportation, even through pipelines, will need more investment in terms of energy to heat it at certain particular points, which would make it very expensive for production. So, profit out of it will require lot of resources. So, it does not make economic sense to me. I am persuaded to think that an oil refinery is the answer to this question.

Madam Speaker, I have been looking at the health provision. Yes, the committee mentioned something about this provision but I think it did not come out quite strongly in this section of the Bill. When you talk about the licensee identifying health hazards and asking them to make preparations to mitigate the impacts of those hazards and you just leave it at that, you are not being serious with Ugandans. If you are talking about those working with the companies, that is okay. However, what  about those who work outside of those companies but are affected indirectly by what is happening within the oil industry? 

It is just like the way we talk about smoking. The people who actively smoke may burn out their lungs but that effect also spreads to the passive smokers. So, as you propose that the company should be able to identify these health hazards, there is need to undertake a study on what kind of diseases can emerge out of the industry itself to affect not only the workers but also the people outside. It will be on that basis that we can legislate to include a provision on how the licensee should ensure that hazards are limited. (Interruption)

MS ANNE NANKABIRWA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I would like to bring to your attention page 48 of the report, under production and exploration. Indeed, there are very many Acts that must be looked at as we debate this law but we cannot put each and every strengthening aspect of the Act in this law. What we had to do was to refer to those laws. It was intended to cause the relevant ministries to table them here for amendment and strengthening. 

A case in point is the Health and Safety Act, I think of 2006. We have referred to it because it has a number of loopholes. We referred it to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to make sure – Even the main Bill had not talked about it. It is the committee that brought it out but the department of labour is responsible for strengthening and identifying some of those needs. Thank you.

DR LULUME: Thank you very much – (Mr Mawanda rose_) – You are asking for clarification from me, but I am not willing to grant it because it is about my time. Please grant me the time to finish this because I have nothing to clarify on. You will seek clarification from the responsible minister because she is the authority on this. Thank you very much. 

What I was saying is that you need a strong law in the first place. So, when you refer certain sections of the law to other super jet formations of other laws, you make the current law rather weak. That is why I regard that as a weakness.

On page 10 of this report, the committee stipulates that, “considering that the revenue management dimension of the oil and gas sector is enshrined in the Public Finance Bill 2012, the committee hopes that those scrutinising that Bill bear this in mind.” This is the same thing I was referring to – weakening this law by referring it to another Bill. The Public Finance Bill in itself is a weakness to Parliament, and I hope hon. Mudimi was strong enough to educate the members of this committee on this – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, just half a minute.

DR LULUME: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, the Public Finance Bill seeks to ensure that Parliament becomes weak in terms of budgeting and finance. It seeks to repeal the Budget Act, and we are thinking that it should even be thrown out of this Parliament. But here you are making this law referring to it as the strength of the same law. This does not make sense and Parliament must be very careful about it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.28
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for presenting this report. I thank the committee especially for the methodology used. I have seen here that His Majesty the Omukama of Bunyoro Kitara was one of the people who interfaced with the committee and a number of other cultural leaders, which I highly commend. 

We should get ready to see more traditional leaders coming here to present their views about different Bills before Parliament. We should not appear to be MPs who tolerate double standards. The fact that cultural leaders can come here and are given an opportunity to present their views on a Bill before Parliament is something we should all support. So, if it comes to another Bill and we say the Kabaka of Buganda turns up to give his views, I think we should also welcome it. It is my sincere hope, therefore, that the issues, as raised by the Omukama of Bunyoro, were properly captured in the report. 

Apart from that, I want-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze, I do not want you to create the impression that we do not want the cultural leaders to come here. It is out of respect for them that we do not want them to come to the committee; we want the committee to go to them. I have written to all the prime ministers and said if you want anything, just write to me and I will send the whole committee to your palace. It is out of respect.

MS NAMBOOZE: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for that guidance. The minister and professor, whom I do not see here, told us a while ago that we should urgently pass these laws in order to ensure that the oil is harvested- (Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order? I have observed him since he came and he continues reading the newspaper in these Chambers when we are seriously discussing oil matters. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, what are you doing there?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In fact I was reading page 23 of the New Vision, which I want to ask my brother to read. There is a story on the Tullow Group Scholarship Scheme. I was trying to read it to see whether other tribes are involved in this issue of the oil. It is on page 23 of today’s New Vision and it is the same thing we are talking about; it is about oil. So Madam Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: I think he was reading about local participation in the oil industry.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. Thank you very much.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, the Minister for Water and Environment, in his submission a while ago, was urging this Parliament to pass these laws quickly so that we can benefit from oil while we are still in Parliament. I think this is selfishness of the highest order. We are not the first generation to live in this country and we shall definitely not be the last. If we have to do certain things to protect our environment and our resources, it is unbecoming for a whole minister to stand up here and tell us to rush through these laws so that we can benefit from the oil during our term in office.

Away from that, when you look at the Bill, you get a sense that there is an attempt to by-pass Parliament by creating so many opportunities for the minister to make a number of subsidiary legislations. We should not forget that as we were passing our Rules of Procedure, Parliament resolved to do away with the proposal to create a committee on subsidiary legislation. We are now giving away most of our powers to the minister. If you read Bill No.2, for example, clauses 14 and 15, you will find that the word “minister” has been repeated twelve times in only those two clauses, all giving powers and entrenching the powers of the minister in the Bill.

As I read this Bill, I can read the names written there. You can easily know that some of us are writing this law for ourselves but most probably a time will come when the Minister of Energy and the minister in charge of petroleum are not the ministers we know. When the President- (Member timed out)

5.34
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to restrict myself to the issue of the refinery and more so to the minority report presented by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. I will concur with hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi on the issues on the first page - the pages are not named - “Government should answer the following questions on the refining Bill.” I think hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi deserves to be congratulated for putting very good questions forward, and I concur with him. These questions are very important - Where is the equipment? What will investors do? How has the refinery been procured? I really concur with him on the rest of the questions as well.

However, I have a sharp disagreement with hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi on page 2 on why the refinery should be discouraged. I get perturbed by this man who proposes to do away with value addition in our country. It is very absurd, in my view. I think hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi should re-consider and withdraw particularly paragraphs one, two and three. He says Uganda is a small country. In our culture, we have got a saying that even small and short men “build” their families. Short and small men are also allowed to “build” their families. Uganda being a sovereign country cannot subjugate its resources to a second and third party.

Secondly, he talks of NEMA having no capacity. Sometime ago I was dealing with the local government and we met His Excellency the President. At that meeting, a certain district chairman accused parish chiefs and sub county NAADS coordinators for not performing. I wondered what he wanted the President to do if he, as the chairman LC V, had failed to handle parish chiefs. As Parliament, if we cannot build the capacity of NEMA to be able to handle and detect, whom are we accusing it to? I think what the honourable brought out in this report created some absurdity, in my view.

When we go back to page 1, he recommends that this land be put to agricultural use. Are we only condemned to agriculture? Can’t we diversify? What identity will our oil bear when we export it in a crude form and then we bring it back manufactured? Will it be Ugandan oil? Is the sponsor of this report aware of the price that we shall pay when the oil comes back from the refineries? Does he know the difference between crude oil and refined oil? Does he know the opportunity cost, the cost comparative analysis? It should be done.

Earlier on, one of our honourable members had talked about Uganda having good laws and policies. It is my concern and advice to this House that with good laws and policies but with bad people, we cannot get anything good. We ought to be very good people and good people ought to start with parliamentarians. We must have a good heart, good will, good approach and a positive attitude towards everything.

I would propose the following: that the good pieces of this minority report be incorporated to enrich the mother report, the committee report, and the bad pieces be respectfully withdrawn and we move forward. Thank you very much.

5.38
MS SARAH NDOBOLI (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for its report and particularly hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi for the minority report. You have helped to stimulate our minds to get those questions. By putting up those questions, you are helping us to get the answers. So the work is half-way done. I congratulate you for that. 

However, I also want to point it out to you that you have given us some inaccuracies. For instance, you say that there is no country in sub-Saharan Africa which has achieved sustainable growth. If I remember correctly, during our orientation we were shown a film about Namibia as a success story. (Interjection) Yes, Namibia. 


I want to also commend you and the committee for the extensive consultations, not only in Africa but even outside Africa. I count us as being in a better position to have a better Bill and even perform better because of this. We had the opportunity to see those that have failed and we had the opportunity to put the best law in place. So, let us do that right now since it is in our hands. 

As regards the issues highlighted in both reports about health and environment, I concur with the recommendation that a lot has to be done. As all of us are expressing, the oil is good but it can be hell. So I feel that we should empower NEMA and give it all the necessary resources. 

I also want to emphasise that we cannot again subjugate our duty by saying we have no capacity. If we have no capacity, who will come to do it for us? We have to empower our institutions, and if they are inadequate let us name other institutions. The national oil company, for example, is a very good idea. I concur with many of my colleagues that this company be vetted by Parliament. That protects the Executive and gives it higher credibility.

Secondly, on the issue of encouraging private individuals to participate, I also agree. However, it has to be limited, as a colleague across had suggested, to a minimum; otherwise, they can easily buy us off. However, the idea of private investors coming in, particularly at the beginning, is important. We know that we are a bit handicapped for now and that we might not be able to do the preliminary work. So, this is when we need a private investor to participate but we must have capacity to control them.

Regarding local participation, I want to be fair to the areas where the oil is, since they are going to bear the direct impact, particularly on their environment and agriculture. We need to get them protected and put in place clear laws for compensation. I can imagine a situation where their soil will cumulatively absorb heavy metals thereby registering doom forever. So, we need to be fair and put in place good laws to protect them and make sure that they are compensated. We also need to give them the benefit of taking whatever they can, for instance, by promoting their local capacity and industries. Thank you.  

5.43 
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute on this finite resource that requires responsible stewardship. I have had the opportunity to look at the report, especially the observation on environmental management. The committee raises pertinent issues about the capability and competence of the authorities that are responsible for environmental management, and they have made specific reference to the National Environment Management Authority, Directorate of Water Resource Management and Uganda Wildlife Authority, among others.

Madam Speaker, these observations are worrying, and this makes one fundamental question linger in my mind - Are we environmentally ready to manage oil production? The environmental impact of petroleum is often very negative because it is toxic to almost all forms of life. As you may be aware, crude oil is a mixture of many different kinds of organic compounds, many of which are highly toxic and cancer-causing. Important to note is that crude oil and petroleum distillate cause birth defects. There is an element called benzene and it is present in both crude oil and gasoline. Benzene is known for causing leukaemia in humans and it also affects the white blood cell count in humans. This makes people susceptible to infections.

Madam Speaker, the atmospheric particulate matter or soot blackens human lungs and causes heart problems or death. History has shown that release of liquid petroleum hydrocarbons into the environment has ever happened. You can make reference to Kuwait Oil Fire, Gulf War Oil Spill and Deep Water Horizon Oil Spill. You will conclude that we indeed need an enabling law in relation to environmental solutions as we prepare to produce and manage the oil. In very specific terms, the legislation should explain how we can recycle and reuse petroleum. It should also explain how areas can be restored after the drilling. I am also interested in seeing how petroleum operations can be conducted more safely and what we can do to conserve petroleum resources.

A lot has been spoken about transparency and accountability. Allow me observe that the discovery of significant oil and gas provides a unique opportunity for Government to achieve structural transformation to improve governance in the oil and gas sector. My dream, and indeed that of many, is that the revenue derived from oil and gas is used for the benefit of the current and future generations. 

As we enact this law, we need to be cognizant of the fact that one way of promoting transparency and accountability is by making information freely available to the public about activities in the sector. As observed by the committee, there is, therefore, need to amend the Official Secrets Act, 1964, which provides for secrecy in matters of security and defence, and it should be incorporated into the Access to Information Act, 2005. This is one tool we can use as we advocate for openness in the sector. I wish to submit.

5.48
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report and hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi for his minority report. I would like to confine myself to the main report and mostly on the issue of transparency and accountability. 

The committee has highlighted very important issues as far as accountability and transparency are concerned. They have gone ahead to emphasise that institutions need to be strengthened in order for good governance to become a reality. We have continued to refer to Ghana as a very good example as far as transparency and accountability is concerned. We would like Uganda to follow suit as far as transparency and accountability is concerned.

On this note, I urge the government that as we go along, Uganda should become a member of this global association, the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. This will go a long way, together with the law, in making Ugandans satisfied that the Executive is accountable or the government. It is indeed a global institution and countries or governments which subscribe to it are able to publish what they receive in terms of oil revenues or revenues from the mineral sector and they also are able to publish what they pay out. As honourable members have contributed on this one, when we visited the oil wells, Tullow and Heritage Oil told us they are already members of EIPI but Uganda has continued to dilly dally. As it continues to do so, it makes Ugandans become suspicious as to why it is not becoming open in as far as oil revenues are concerned.

Secondly, I would like to thank the committee; it has also highlighted the issue of health and safety. In fact they referred to the Act in as far as this matter is concerned as the Health and Safety Act, but it is supposed to be the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2006. There is a preliminary report which has not been published by the Department of Labour in the Ministry of Gender that has found that there are increasing cases of cancer among the people who are working in the oil sector. So, it is very important as the committee has highlighted. 

We heard, during the budget debate, that this Department of Labour in the Ministry of Gender is not fully funded. Its activities have been hampered by lack of money. So, if this department can be strengthened in as far as financing is concerned, I think it will go a long way in sorting out this problem of health and safety as has been highlighted by the committee.

Thirdly, very many people have talked about the issue of the environment. I would like to add my voice to the issue of environment. You said that NEMA as the in-charge of the environment leaves a lot to be desired. So, I call upon the Members of Parliament that as we legislate on these matters to do with the environment, we should emphasise them as much as possible. This is because the spill-over that will come out of the oil will endanger the environment. Also, since the oil resource is a finite resource, after we have benefitted from the oil we shall have very expensive costs that will accrue, which Government needs to avail, in order to avert these environment problems. (Interruption)

MR WAMAKUYU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give this House is that we met NEMA as a committee on several occasions and they brought up their issues. They have a work plan but the funding is a problem. They wrote to Ministry of Finance specifically to finance those activities in that area and Minister of Finance turned them down and said they had to work within their budget. So, they advised them to work within their budget and also move ahead to request for their monies which are collected.

Madam Speaker, in the NEMA Act, there is a levy that is supposed to be collected by NEMA, but the money is collected by URA and banked on the consolidated account. They want that money but they have not got any access. It is like road fund. Those are two institutions which the law allows to collect user charges at source but the money is going to the other side and is subject to reallocation by Ministry of Finance. That is the information I want to give. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. I have heard the House underscoring the importance of NEMA and the role it has to play on environmental protection in this Bill when it is finally passed.    

The information I want to give is even more worrying. As a committee we were treated to information that even as we talk, there are oil waste dumps arising from exploration. The waste has not been managed. There is a waste dump in Buliisa and there is another one in Nwoya. We had hoped that maybe the Minister or the relevant authority would try to manage that waste without necessarily waiting for the law. But as it is, it is just exposed, not managed, and we do not know what is happening to the communities around those waste dumps. That is the information I want to give.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, honourable members, for that information. I would like to conclude with the point on local content. It is very important that when it comes to this law, we should be vigilant. At the moment Ugandans have been left out in as far as providing services in the oil sector is concerned. When we recently visited the oil wells, it was absurd to find that the drivers of the trucks were Chinese. I believe that in Uganda we can be able to supply drivers. The small tenders of running canteens and small restaurants are being managed by foreigners. Supplies of onions, tomatoes and beans are run by foreigners. Surely, where will Ugandans benefit from? So, I urge members that we should legislate in as far as this component of local content is concerned. (Member timed out)
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to remind you that when we had the seminar in Munyonyo, the Norwegians advised us to be courageous and make sure we demand for what is best for our country. So, do not forget that. (Applause)

5.57
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If you look at the oil industry in the world, you discover that oil is always in the most backward areas or areas which are neglected, and Uganda is not an exception. I went to the Albertine Grabben area and, with due respect to my friend, hon. Mukitale, the area is relatively backward - no infrastructure, no development and people are poor. When you look at oil wells and you look at the neighbourhoods, the people do not seem to be relating properly with that industry. They are poor, they are ignorant and they are deprived. 

I would like to thank the committee for the report and I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, for the minority report. They have been able to diagnose the disease, find the problems but I am afraid the solutions they have offered are not strong enough.

In the case of the people of Bunyoro or where oil is found in the Acholi area and West Nile, I think there is need for a strong affirmative action programme for them. If they were a country on their own, they would be enjoying that oil alone but they are part of us and we appreciate that and we should be grateful, but they are going to suffer lots of problems from this oil. We need affirmative action programmes for them. We should not have Ogoni in Uganda, and it can be there by the way. Ogoni is deprived and the jobless Ogoni people have been fighting Government. They have guns and they fight. We do not want Banyoro and the Bagungu people to fight Government and destroy that industry.

The Acholi in Amuru - hon. Olanya Gilbert is here - I think we need affirmative action for these people so that they can develop and belong to that resource. They should rent that land to the oil companies because oil is going to get finished. Who will take the land eventually? That oil will not last forever. So, we should have had proposals here in the report as to how those people can get more from the oil. 

In Dubai, land is always rented. Whichever investor goes there, you rent the land so that people can have constant income from their land which was given to them by God, because they happen to have been made in that area. That is what I think we should be doing for those areas.

Secondly, we seem to be in a hurry to enjoy these oil resources. I was very intrigued by the minister’s response earlier, even somebody has said it, that we found this oil and we must enjoy it. Did you create it? That oil was discovered in 1926 for goodness sake. It was preserved there because, first, it was not economically viable but it was preserved there. So, to say because it has been found commercially viable under your regime, therefore you have a right to enjoy it during your term in a hurry! Do not be in a hurry, please. 

We are saying that this is a resource for the nation. There are some examples, of course, the committee must have learnt from, like Norway. Can we make this resource sustainable for everybody so that even my grandchild can be part of that oil? This NRM Government of ours, which is so corrupt, once you give them more resources for stealing, they will steal. That is why these days among our NRM colleagues the word “stealing” is not for millions, it is billions. (Member timed out)

6.02
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the committee for the good work done. On page 16, the committee observed, very rightly, about the protection of the rights of people as far as land is concerned. I would like to bring it to the attention of this House that we have very many speculators who knew where the oil was. In Acholiland, for example, when our people were in camps, they were very busy monitoring and doing their research about where the oil is. As we talk now, they have bought most of those areas. Not only that, nowadays areas where oil is, is where some big people in this country, including his Excellency, are saying the area must be given for sugarcane growing to Madhvani. We wonder what is going on. 

One month ago, you witnessed some people who were carried from the lands office to go and demarcate - they are calling it demarcate - Amuru and Adjumani. The area where the minerals were discovered is the one they are saying - the whole area - belongs to Adjumani District. We were wondering what is going on. It looked like some people are not happy to say the oil or any other minerals are in Acholi area. We are not happy with that, Madam Speaker.

Looking at the environment impact, I would like to inform the august House that two years ago waste was dumped in Nwoya District and the people in the surrounding area planted their crops. Their crops turned yellowish and we are wondering what was going on. That means NEMA needs to be empowered. Let them do their work. Right now, we do not know what may happen next. You know, in most cases if you are a good farmer, if your crop turns yellow that is not a good sign; yellow is not a good colour. Once your crop turns yellow, you begin regretting why you planted your crops. Therefore, to safeguard our farmers and to protect them, let NEMA do their work and carry out thorough investigations and an impact assessment. 

I would like to appeal to the government that when planning for the areas that are rich in oil, it should be done collectively. Planning needs to favour all the districts that have got oil; if it means adding infrastructure, let it be done equally and if it is training, let it be done equally. Right now, most of the areas in Acholi are not being mentioned as areas that contain oil. Many people are talking of Bunyoro and some other areas. So we need-(Interruption)

MR LOKERIS: Thank you very much, my neighbour, for giving way. The war in Acholi and now in Nwoya is because districts have been divided and the fields we have been drilling are in the game park. At the same time, whenever we have meetings, we have invited all the people from the areas where oil is. I have been with people of Nwoya all the time including the chairman. One time we had meetings in Buliisa, they were there. I visited Nwoya many times and they are good people. In fact, they are sensitised. If you did not know, you go and ask them. They know it.

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, the oil found in Nwoya - They call it Packwach Basin but Packwach is not found in Nwoya. Packwach is not in Acholiland. Packwach is in West Nile, for your information. Maybe you do not really understand how the geography of the area is. We really need transparency. We do not need  people to be suspicious. Let the government come out very clearly and sensitise people. Let us be transparent.

Finally, we need the Parliament to protect the Acholiland. We need our land not to be grabbed and given away to any investor because of the minerals underneath. I thank you.

6.08
MR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report they have given and for the job well done. On the other hand, I would also like to thank hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi for coming up with a minority report. 

Rt. Hon. Speaker, I would like to call the attention of the members to page 11 of the report. When I read the bottom of this report, I was really frightened and scared and I am still frightened. I rarely get scared and I rarely get frightened but it states, “Currently, the waste from the exploration activities is being stored in temporary locations such as bitumen containers and polythene. Actually, disposal awaits the requisite waste management regulations from NEMA.” Given this, and the information hon. Alice Alaso gave, I think we have cause to get scared and get frightened. This shows how as a nation, as a country, we are really ill prepared to handle environmental issues and concerns. It also shows how we are really ill prepared to handle waste management and disposal issues as we start production. 

At the initial stage of our oil production, just exploration activities, we cannot manage the waste and we cannot dispose of the little waste we have produced from this activity. We have heard whatever activities are going to take place, downstream, upstream and so forth and when we put a refinery; how are we going to handle the waste? I think this reaffirms the fear of many members of this House that we are really not prepared. Therefore, I propose that as we enter into making legislation regarding oil and gas production, we should take it as a priority to provide for detailed and particular regulations regarding waste management and disposal in the oil industry. 

Secondly, a member surprised us with the problems we have with NEMA. I propose that before giving them money or giving them the resources which they need, we need a complete overhaul of this institution, NEMA. We need to overhaul it and reconstitute it because personally, I do not believe that they only lack funds. 

This afternoon, the Committee on Presidential Affairs went to visit sites around Kampala. We went to Kansanga, Bugolobi, Nakawa. Members, you cannot believe what is happening there. So, I do not believe that it is because of lack of funds that NEMA cannot act to stop the encroachment on the wetlands. It is something else. We need to completely overhaul this NEMA. (Interjections) It is not only a question of money; it is a deeper problem. (Interruption)

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you so much, honourable member, for giving way. As a member of the Committee on Natural Resources, we share the same passion with you. However, I want to inform this House that NEMA has a big problem. The issue of giving titles for these wetlands is done by the Uganda Land Commission. Therefore, NEMA is handicapped. Unless we strengthen and empower NEMA, they will not – You will gazette an area, and of course if you say this is a wetland, it is automatically gazetted, but you find the Uganda Land Commission giving out a land title. What happens then? We need to make sure that these Government agencies are highly coordinated and have a plan to execute and do one thing. I thank you, honourable, for giving way.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable colleague for giving way. The information I am giving is that as a committee in the previous Parliament, we also visited the same areas. What is amazing is that in most of these areas, like Bugolobi, the wetlands are occupied by the veterans. Most of the buildings which are being constructed in the wetlands are guarded by the military personnel, to the extent that a whole minister of this sector was chased away from Namanve by the same security. Thank you.

DR OGWAL: Madam Speaker, since enough information has been provided, I also pray to you that probably we have a special session to discuss some issues on the environment. Thank you.

6.15 
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee so much for bringing out pertinent issues of transparency, environment, local content and land rights. I also thank hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi for amplifying the issues in his minority report.
 
I defer from hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi on one item, and that is, discouraging the value addition. We should avoid exporting wealth to other countries. Uganda should enjoy the value chain. I do not think we need a debate on that matter. That is a foregone conclusion.

However, this country has not been introduced to enough investment options. As we speak - I do not want to overstretch the Ministry of Energy, and that is my position - some other ministries like finance, trade and industry and Bank of Uganda have not helped Government to look at different financing options. We need to know who actually is going to own the refinery and what the financing mix is. They have not even tried to look at how we can benefit from the economies of scale of working with neighbours. 

This oil is also across in DRC. Buliisa is just two kilometres away from DRC, in Wasenko in the north of Lake Albert. From Packwach to Sudan, if we were fast to make a road along the river, it is not over 120 kilometres. The long journey is when you go through Nebbi, Arua and Koboko. But if you go along the river using the Rift Valley Road, it is just over 100 kilometres. So, all these areas, we are not engaging in them. 

What is very clear is that the investor is moving faster than Government. Actually, the investor is also lacking a lot of infrastructure because of uncoordinated Government departments. A lot of Government departments are uncoordinated, including that of my good Minister of Lands, who is here, which lacks money to sort land matters in the region. 

So, I come from an area where this industry is rendering my people slaves. All the land in my area is contested because of this national resource. We do not know our ownership. Even, like I said last week, we do not have money for the special planning area for four years. That is a problem; Parliament must support this. When we got the first money from the oil sector through capital gains tax, the money was ring-fenced for Karuma, which project is still debatable. 

I want to request Parliament, if this resource is not going to be a curse to our community, if we are going to build the capacity of NEMA - The experimentation of dumps are in my village; all experiments are being done in Buliisa. It takes me eight hours to reach Buliisa because the roads are completely destroyed by trailers of oil and gas. In our national priorities, there is no funding for the road to Buliisa; it is a dream road. I fail to understand all this lack of coordination. I would therefore like to suggest that from the capital gains money, which was ring-fenced for Karuma which will take some years to build, we use 30 per cent to finance NEMA, the land, finance technical education, and to finance what must be done now so that the oil and gas does not turn into a curse? If we allow the investor to proceed at this pace – he is here to build a refinery, but no one is talking of technical education, nobody is concerned about the tourism roads. 

So, Madam Speaker, let the Prime Minister bring here an inter-ministerial integrated and comprehensive budget line on education, lands, works, tourism and so forth. Without that, we are helping the investor to get to the resource and – (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, hon. Mukitale. I know you are the chairman of the Committee on National Economy and I seek some clarification. You have alluded to the fact that money out of capital gains tax is ring-fenced for Karuma. Can we be told preciously how much money you are talking about which was ring-fenced and from what transaction? Is it from the Heritage–Tullow transaction? Is it from the Tullow–CNOCC–Total transaction or the other earlier transactions? 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, my understanding is that that question is for the finance minister and the Leader of Government Business. So I will not delve into it much as I have some information.

The point I am making is that we cannot only talk of refining and the priorities of those who want the oil and forget the so many sectors in this country including environment, tourism and the infrastructure of that area, which should have been primary. Local content is only possible if Government puts in effort in make it possible. In some jurisdictions, Government does not licence a mineral area without clearly negotiating the land issues with the communities. So, to leave our communities to be laissez-faire is actually trying to make our people slaves. To experiment on waste dumps before knowing what will turn out – Please, can we invest slightly more money? 

Madam Speaker, Parliament made a resolution, and Government conceded, that this country is going to join EITI. How far has the process gone? Can we get a report on whether we have joined EITI so that we can know of the process? 

The institution deficit is a very big problem. Can we have a taskforce, like URA started with Akabwayi taskforce, as we finish the law? Because of this institution deficit, can we have some taskforce so that we begin to discuss? Without going into this, we will have a very big problem. The private sector wants to move but they are complaining of failure by Government to move fast on infrastructure, planning, and even some of our local suppliers are complaining. So, clearly, we need Government to bring an integrated, inter-ministerial, comprehensive plan. (Member timed out).

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, 27 members have contributed but I noted the following members who wanted to contribute: hon. Nandala, hon. Anywar, hon. Lugolobi, hon. Karuhanga and hon. Kabajo. I propose that we adjourn for now and resume tomorrow. We will give the first opportunity to those five members. Also, because a lot of issues have come up touching different ministries, we shall also have to ask the ministries to respond to areas touching them. So, honourable members, House adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow. I hope that after that we shall be able to go to committee stage for the refining Bill. 

(The House rose at 6.24 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 20 September 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
