
Tuesday, 10 September 2013

Parliament met at 11.10 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting. I want to begin by thanking you for the support you gave to our colleague, the late hon. Arinaitwe, and welcome back from Buhweju.						`	

Secondly, yesterday I went to the celebrations commemorating the Eighteenth Anniversary of King Oyo of Toro and the Muhikirwa donated a dictionary of English – Rutoro and Runyoro to Parliament. He gave me one copy and I will place it in the library for those Members who want to read it. 

Today the reports of the sectoral committees will come as follows: Defence and Internal Affairs; Presidential Affairs; Tourism, Trade and Industry; Education and Sports; East African Community; and Natural Resources. 

However, honourable members, I am disappointed that despite the time I gave you last week, a number of committees have still not presented their reports to the Clerk. I want to urge you to do so quickly because I want to complete the report by the end of this week. 

So, I am particularly addressing the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; the Committee on Health; the Committee on Physical Infrastructure; Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development – please do that between now and Thursday. 

But on a sad note, honourable members, I want to inform you about the death of a former colleague, hon. Fiona Egunyu. She was MP for Ngora County in the Sixth Parliament and she was also a member of the Constituency Assembly. She has been a presidential advisor on legal affairs and we have been requested to give her a special sitting. So again, our work will be interrupted tomorrow. So I am giving you notice that tomorrow we shall have that special sitting for the late Fiona Egunyu. 

Finally, I led a delegation to the Ninth Commonwealth Parliamentary Assembly meeting in South Africa. The theme was “Effective Solutions to Commonwealth Development Challenges.” At that conference, I was elected chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Association. (Applause) I want to thank all of you for the support and I look forward to further support during that time I will be in that office. 

Yesterday, when I was in Busoga, people were ringing me and asking, “Now, are you leaving us?” I want to clarify that I am not leaving, I am going to be working from Kampala and I will just be directing things from Kampala city. Nobody should worry that I am leaving the country. 

11.21
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to congratulate you for having brought that victory to Uganda. Thank you so much. But I will not go into details of that; since there are colleagues intending to move a motion on the same, I believe we shall have time to discuss that. 

Madam Speaker, I want to make a request to adjust the Order Paper. The Minister of Foreign Affairs – you remember the committee made a report here and we did not answer the issues that were raised in the report and those raised during the debate. So the Minister of Foreign Affair is present and ready to do so. So could you accord him time on the Order Paper?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, so we adjust the Order Paper to receive the response from Foreign Affairs after Defence and Internal Affairs. 

11.22
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Opposition, let me congratulate you sincerely for having been elected chairperson of the commonwealth association. Of course, your qualities speak loud and when we consider the number of votes you secured, that shows that you are the right person and you will manage to steer that association. 

11.23
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate you for having made Uganda proud; we are so proud of you.

I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the expulsion of Ugandans from South Sudan. The Government of South Sudan has started massive expulsion of Ugandan business persons from their country. A case in point, we have over 600 boda boda cyclists from Uganda who were given only 48 hours to leave South Sudan from the state of Songole and Central Equatorial. 

The youth who went to work as boda boda cyclists in South Sudan are majorly from the districts of Kabale, Kampala, Lira, Gulu, Arua, Amuru, Mpigi, Masindi and other districts. On Sunday, they arrived in my district Amuru from South Sudan riding their motorcycles. On arrival, they lamented about how Ugandans are tortured in South Sudan. They told us how some of their colleagues were killed; others had to leave their wives and children there. They even left all their properties because they were given only 48 hours to leave. 

As they came home with their motorcycles, when they reached Kamdini in Oyam District, their motorcycles were impounded by the police and all the documents they used for buying their motorcycles were taken by the police in Kamdini Police Post. Their motorcycles were brought to Nakawa for registration. When they brought their motorcycles to Nakawa, the URA decided to impound all their motorcycles. 

As we talk now, the youth are still in Nakawa stranded. They have no transport to go to their various districts and worse still, the youth who come from Northern Uganda and those from Masindi and Hoima also had their motorcycles transported to Nakawa. 

Our prayer to the government is to give those boda boda cyclists at least three months temporary permits in order for them to work and get the money for registering those motorcycles. 

Secondly, the government should consider reducing taxes on those motorcycles as they were already being used in South Sudan and now they are very old. The owners should not be asked to register their motorcycles like the new motorcycles within the country.

The third prayer is that registration should be handled by URA offices in the respective districts. All districts in Uganda have URA offices and it is very difficult for someone to travel from Gulu to Nakawa.

The fourth prayer is for URA to release the motorcycles owned by the youth and allow them to travel back to their respective districts. This is because they are stranded at Nakawa. If they are given at least three months to register, they will ride their motorcycles and go back to Mbarara, Masindi or Hoima to work and raise the money for registration.

Finally, Madam Speaker, Government should act very fast in rescuing other Ugandans that are being tortured and punished in South Sudan. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Since the Minister of Foreign Affairs is here, perhaps you could speak on it.

11.28
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Kutesa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the distinguished hon. Member for bringing up this matter. It is true that the Government of South Sudan has taken a decision that all menial jobs and what they term as informal businesses shall be reserved for South Sudanese. They made that decision and the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Southern Sudan issued a decree saying that all boda bodas and taxi drivers from everywhere, and not only Uganda, must leave because these jobs are going to be undertaken by South Sudanese.

Unfortunately, about 85 percent of the boda bodas in South Sudan - in Juba at least - are run by Ugandans so the matter came to us through Ambassador General Rusoke, who is the ambassador of Uganda to South Sudan but based in Juba. Unfortunately, when the minister issued that decree, he left the country and he did not give time for people to leave in an orderly way so some people took the law in their hands.

When I was informed, I tried to reach my counterpart but he had travelled. Our President spoke to President Salva Kiir who then directed the governor of Oriental to take this matter up. It is true that the governor of Oriental took up this matter and the chaos that had started was stopped so these Ugandans have actually returned to Uganda in an orderly way. 

As I speak, the issues that are being raised by the honourable distinguished Member of Parliament, Olanya, are going to be discussed at 11.00 O’clock. There is a meeting in the Prime Minister’s Office to deal with the issues that are being raised - (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and congratulations upon your election. The information I would like to give our honourable Minister of Foreign Affairs and this honourable Parliament is as follows: Some of the boda boda owners who were expelled from Juba passed through Obongi, especially those who were heading for Arua and West Nile from Nimule. They told us that when they reached the border and while still inside Sudan, their motorcycles, money and other property were taken by our brothers from South Sudan. So as you handle this issue, you need to take cognisance of the lost property and monies of Ugandans who were coming in.

Secondly, I received a call from - we still call them our brothers - the embassy of the Republic of South Sudan is here. They have a complaint, which according to them is worse than ours. They claim that when the boda-boda cyclists arrived here, they started attacking South Sudanese families in Kampala especially and they sent me photographs of children who were gathered together under Police protection in the areas of Makindye Division, Kibuye and Nateete. Also along the way in the buses, whoever is identifiable as a South Sudanese would be picked out and beaten. What I am not sure of is whether they have lost lives or not.

Madam Speaker, with due respect, the two governments of Uganda and South Sudan should wake up now and be serious because the ordinary people seem to be taking this issue in their hands. Ugandans, who came from South Sudan, after having lost their property and lives of loved ones, feel that we as a government have not protected them enough and that is why they are taking the law into their hands.

So, I think the complaint of the South Sudanese needs to be taken into cognisance so that the two governments can sit and have a balance sheet of injuries, losses and the way forward. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister complete his response.

MR KUTESA: If I may complete my briefing; what he is saying is true. There was an attempt at retaliatory action by Ugandans in Kibuye and in Zana, particularly, and I think towards Nateete. When Ugandans heard that their own relatives were being harassed, they tried retaliatory action but the Police came in. Gen. Kayihura was informed immediately and the situation is under control and nobody has lost their life.

I want to add that while the meeting in the Prime Minister’s Office is going on to see how these Ugandans who have come back can be helped, and beyond that even to solve issues related to supplies - there are business people who supplied goods to South Sudan and have never been paid. I am travelling to South Sudan on 11th and 12th of October for a Joint Permanent Commission (JPC) meeting. The reason why it has to go that far is that my counterpart and I will not be here because of the general assembly but we are doing it first thing upon return in the second week of October.

This JPC is meant to sort out issues related to payments, confiscation and how our people can continue to work together. Even if they are not allowed to do what are called menial jobs, how else can the business people of Uganda be given assurance that they are safe and their businesses are safe?

I also want to take this occasion to thank Brig. Gen. Rusoke who is our ambassador for his active participation in querying this. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you say you are going away but there are Ugandans who are being ruined financially. Last week, I had to ring the Vice President of South Sudan because of a woman who was dying in my office saying she has so much money sitting in South Sudan. I don’t know whether something can be done in the interim. You know October is a long way away and people are going to sell other people’s property in this country. The banks – UDB and other banks -

MR KUTESA: Madam Speaker, if I may inform the House further, there has been a problem. There are some claims that were verified and the Government of Southern Sudan has agreed to pay. But they also have been facing problems in South Sudan, as you are aware, payments for their oil were blocked and the government said they could not pay immediately. But the good news is that now the pipelines are open with money flowing in. 

However, let me also say this: There are some business people here who inflated the bills. Some of them supplied air and the verification exercise is going on. Those that have been verified and confirmed are due to be paid. Let us not consider ourselves as angels in some of our cases – there are some fraudulent ones. But I think –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to seek further clarification from the Minister of Foreign Affairs. But before I do that, let me congratulate the South Sudan Government for being a serious government because here people are just taking over our jobs and making Ugandans jobless with us just here watching. In the name of investments, we are allowing all sorts of people to invade this country. So, I want to congratulate the Government of South Sudan for being a serious government and we must learn from them.

The clarification I want to get from the minister is: you said the ambassador is fully involved in this process. Can you let the country know, in terms of figures, how many Ugandans were expelled from South Sudan, how many have returned and how many have so far failed to return and are still in South Sudan trying to get their way back? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, may I propose that since the minister is still here, we first finish with Defence and go back to the foreign affairs responses later before he can speak to all these issues. Otherwise, we are going to – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, hon. Sam Kutesa, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, is good at running away. This is a serious matter. But first and foremost, I want to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for becoming the president of the women.

We passed a budget in this Parliament to build a market in South Sudan and the people who work in the market are usually not professionals; they are usually vendors. But now that the Government of Southern Sudan does not want people who are not professionals to operate from there yet we have invested our money in a market in South Sudan –(Interjections)– listen, yes, but I know that we passed a budget here and I recall that. If the money wasn’t utilized, you will tell us.

Two, Madam Speaker, we have got information that when a Ugandan is beaten or killed and you go to report the matter to police, they say, if they hadn’t died, you wouldn’t have come here or you would not have been beaten - that is what is happening in South Sudan.

In Uganda, we have people from South Sudan with buildings. They are staying in those houses enjoying life. There, I am told, you are not allowed - army generals are beating up our people.

Mr Minister - I want to thank hon. Reagan Okumu for bringing up what he said - Ugandans go to South Sudan to look for jobs because there are no jobs in Uganda here. What would have been their jobs have been taken over by people from South Sudan, India, Kenya, China and for them to get jobs, they have to go to South Sudan. I would be happier if you got up and said that since they have expelled ours, we are also going to expel everybody here –(Interjections)– yes.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us postpone the debate on foreign affairs because there are other issues which were raised in the report. Let us first deal with the defence sector before we get back to foreign affairs. So, let us go to the next item on the Order Paper. Otherwise, I have noted your concerns.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to conclude like this: if a president can create jobs, then that is the best president. The worst president is that one who creates unemployment, if you hadn’t known.

Madam Speaker, we give food to the people of South Sudan. If they are expelling us – the people who carry food to Southern Sudan have never gone to school – we should also quickly act by stopping anything from going to South Sudan – (Interjections) – yes, including food. If you are chasing us, why should we give you what belongs to us? We have the labour and food and so why should we give them these items – and especially the food from Mbale.

I think it is important, Mr Minister, at an appropriate time, to take action. The month of October is very far. If you don’t take action now, we shall say you are not serious. Thank you.

PETITION BY PEOPLE OF DUFILE SUB-COUNTY, IN THE PARISHES OF LEBUBU, CHINYI, DUFILE AND ARRA IN MOYO DISTRICT ON THE EFFECT OF WILD ANIMALS

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Tom Aza, but only two minutes.

11.43
MR TOM ALERO AZA (NRM, East Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I also congratulate you for having won an international women’s leadership position.

This is a petition which has been brought to the Floor of Parliament under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. The subject matter of this petition is to highlight the danger posed and the effect of wild animals in particular, elephants, hippopotamus and crocodiles on the livelihood and economic activities of the petitioners.

The above mentioned problematic animals have destroyed crops, caused insecurity, destroyed human lives and disrupted water transport together with fishing and other economic activities. 

“Wherefore, by this petitioners pray that – 
    1. Parliament urges Government to devise means of curbing the insecurity caused by these wild animals in Dufile by increasing the number of armed personnel including members of the UPDF;

    2. cooperate with the Government of South Sudan to enable the wildlife staff and other security agencies of both countries to curb the insecurity caused by these wild animals in the area;

    3. declare Dufile a disaster zone to allow humanitarian agencies supply relief items to the residents due to the low productivity in the area brought about by the destruction of crops by these wild animals;

    4. de-gazette the game sanctuary to allow it become a crop cultivation area;

    5. consider developing the electric power project in Dufile Sub-County in order to stimulate economic development in the area; and

    6. introduce ferry services for the people of Dufile to ease the transport problem in that area.”

However, Government should also consider paying compensation to families that have lost their dear ones and property as a result of the invasion by wild animals in the area.

Your petitioners, as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.

Madam Speaker, I hereby humbly wish to lay the document of the petitioners on the Table for expeditious and speedy action on the part of Government. I thank you very much.   

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the petition will be sent to the Committee on Tourism but also a copy should be sent to the minister so that she can address those which can be handled immediately. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

    I) KAMULI TOWN COUNCIL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

11.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Madam Speaker, may I, as per rules 30 and 31, lay on Table, Kamuli Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the reports and opinions thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

    II) RUBONA TOWN COUNCIL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

11.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay Rubona Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the reports and opinions thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

    III) KYARUSOZI TOWN COUNCIL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

11.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay Kyarusozi Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the reports and opinions thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

    IV) IGANGA MUNICIPAL COUNCIL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

11.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Madam Speaker,   I beg to lay Iganga Municipal Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the reports and opinions thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

    V) BUGEMBE TOWN COUNCIL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

11.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay Bugembe Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the reports and opinions thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

    VI) KIGOROBYA TOWN COUNCIL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

11.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay Kigorobya Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the reports and opinions thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson. They will be sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for scrutiny and report back as soon as possible. 

Let us go back to the supplementary.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2013

11.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2013” be read for the first time. I beg to lay it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for expeditious consideration and report back. 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, in accordance with the rules, I beg to also lay the financial implications certificate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014  

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, if you could present the executive summary. Hon. Members, on this side, I think there are citizens from Dufile who had come to see the presentation of their petition. They are here. That has been done. You are welcome.

Then on this side, hon. Members, are teachers and students of Rainbow International School, represented by hon. Ssimbwa and hon. Naggayi. They are on this side. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you.

11.51
THE CHAIRPESON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Before I present the report, allow me to also congratulate you for having been elected as the President of the CWP. I want to mention that we are very proud of you.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, before I present the report, allow me to lay on Table, a copy of the minutes of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. Also allow me to lay a copy of the report on Table. I beg to lay.

In line with Section 11 of the Budget Act, 2001 and rules 138 and 177 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs considered the ministerial policy statement for the fiscal year 2013/14 for the following votes under its purview: 

    1) Vote 004 – Ministry of Defence
    2) Vote 009- Ministry of Internal Affairs headquarters
    3) Vote 120- Directorate of Citizenship
    4) Vote 144- Uganda Police Force
    5) Vote 145- Uganda Prisons Service

What follows is the methodology which I do not want to go through. Allow me to proceed by reporting on the analysis that contains both budgetary and policy issues and is structured by vote. I begin with Vote 004, Ministry of Defence.  

4.1 is the mandate of the Ministry of Defence. Hon. Members, you can go through that just to refresh your mind. The following table is an analysis of fiscal performance of Vote 004 in the financial year 2012/13 and the budget estimates for financial year 2013/14. I request that I do not go through that.  

The approved budget for the Ministry of Defence for financial year 2012/13 was Shs 913.9 billion. However, due to budgetary pressures, the Ministry of Defence was given a supplementary of Shs 43 billion, hence a revised budget of Shs 956.9 billion. Of the revised budget, Shs 851.1 billion was released to the ministry. The unreleased money was for AMISOM and gross tax. The African Union usually remits funds in arrears of three months whereas gross tax is released by the Treasury only when the ministry has imports to pay taxes for. 

Of the Shs 851.1 billion received by the ministry, by 30 June 2013, only Shs 839.9 had been utilised, leaving a balance of Shs 11.1 billion unspent. The ministry informed the committee that the unspent balances were majorly for AMISOM troop allowances which were received late June and paid out in July 2013. 

It is worth noting that the Government of Uganda is now applying the modified cash basis of accounting. Under this basis, expenditure is recognised when incurred irrespective of whether cash has been paid out or not. Therefore, the total expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Defence during financial year 2012/13 is a sum of Shs 839.9 billion that was actually paid out in cash and Shs 48.9 billion that was incurred but not paid out during the same financial year. This totals to Shs 888.8 billion. 

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Finance should clarify on the government use of the modified cash basis of accounting because at times when we are analysing the policy statements, it becomes rather confusing. 

Madam Speaker, I want to report on the production in the military. Whereas National Enterprise Corporation was established in 1989 by an Act of Parliament as the commercial arm of the Army, the last five financial years have witnessed reports of restructuring without any profitability. The committee notes that whereas the appointment of the new board is a step in the right direction, NEC remains under-resourced with, for instance, only Shs0.6 billion in the financial year 2013/14. We noted that every commercial venture needs capital to grow, without which it faces the risk of extinction. There is need for capital investment into NEC to build its capability and enable it to adequately compete for business.

While UPDF is gearing to engage in projects such as construction of the railway, NEC which should be best suited for some of those ventures remains left out. Instead, parts of the UPDF such as the Engineering Brigade are duplicating would be activities for NEC. This threatens the viability of NEC as a business. The Ministry of Defence should grant NEC business opportunities in the supply of goods and services.
 
The committee was informed that if given Shs 4 billion per annum for the next four fiscal years, NEC will be able to transform its productivity and ultimately breakeven. The resultant profitability will enable it to be self-sustaining and hence relieving the consolidated fund. The committee therefore recommends that NEC be capitalised to the tune of Shs 4 billion per annum for the next four financial years so as to ameliorate its dependence on the national budget.

The committee continues to recommend that as part of its oversight activities for the financial year 2013/14, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs will thoroughly scrutinise NEC activities.

Uganda Air Cargo Corporation

The committee notes that in addition to its existing fleet of aircrafts, the Uganda Air Cargo Corporation(UACC) has fully operationalised the Hercules L100 to a 30 cargo aircraft that was acquired in the financial year 11/12. The corporation is targeting the cargo service needs of the private sector, public sector and international agencies like the UN and WFP.

UACC informed the committee that they do not receive any government subventions as a business and as such, they face difficulty in boosting their capital investments so as to grow the business. The committee welcomes the progressive manner in which UACC is being run and recommends that it remains competitive in the market. The committee recommends the need for Government to provide budgetary subventions to UACC to cascade its business activities.

Off budget support of the military

While Ministry of Defence receives off budget support in the form of donations from its strategic partners, this is largely unreported to Parliament. This implies that activities or output accruing to such off budget support is largely out of the purview of Parliament. The committee will continue to engage the Ministry of Defence in view of acquiring more details on the nature of this support.
The committee therefore recommends that in future, the ministry of defence reports on the off budget support it receives.

The military referral hospital

The military referral hospital has remained outstanding and as a consequence, huge expenditure is incurred on treatment of soldiers abroad. The Ministry of Defence maintains that the establishment of the hospital has been delayed by budgetary constraints. The designs of the hospital will be reviewed to make it more affordable and pave way for the commencement of construction and finalisation within the next three years.

The committee, therefore, notes with concern that in the last two years, the Ministry of Defence has turned up with a similar explanation as to the cause of the delay. The committee therefore recommends that the minister undertakes on a quarterly basis to brief the committee on tangible progress on the construction and completion of the military referral hospital.

The committee will not appropriate monies for treatment of soldiers abroad after the three years within which the military referral hospital is expected to be established.

Desertions from the UPDF

The committee is concerned about the desertions from the UPDF and the financial implications of such desertions besides its effect on force generation and planning. These desertions are attributed to windfalls from peace support operations, unmet expectations and opportunism. They are a major threat to national security as they undermine operations and also contribute to general crime in the country. Desertions are also a huge cost to national resources and as such, they should not be taken lightly.

The committee notes that increased desertions exert a huge cost on the military especially considering the cost of training, feeding, clothing and medical care. The committee recommends that the law on desertions should be enforced and alternative approaches should be explored to attract deserters back into the force.

The committee, therefore, recommends that beyond the study to ascertain the factors driving desertions, there is need to address them from time to time. Retention is an integral part of the management of people resources. The committee has instituted a sub-committee to look into the underlying issues of imbalances, training, promotion and desertions in the UPDF.

Classified expenditure

The budget for classified expenditure has increased from Shs 120 billion in financial year 2012/13 to over Shs 300 billion in financial year 2013/14. The committee notes that the classified expenditure of the Ministry of Defence has doubled from the previous financial year. The Ministry of Defence justified this as the need for capability consolidation in view of prevailing security threats.

The committee recommends that a thorough audit of this component by the office of the Auditor-General in line with the Audit Act be carried out to ensure value for money.

AMISOM operations

The committee is cognisant of the relative calm in the AMISOM controlled areas although the fragility of the security situation cannot be discounted. AMISOM forces continue to register successes.

The committee further notes that monthly $200 per soldier deducted from the emoluments of the Ugandan forces serving in AMISOM continues. Whereas this is meant for force preparation, support supervision and defraying other related costs, the committee is concerned about its general management and utilisation. The committee therefore recommends that these deductions be audited by the Audited-General and a report of this audit be submitted to Parliament.

Disarmament operations in Karamoja

Disarmament operations remain on course in the Karamoja sub-region. However, much as the region has been largely peaceful, isolated cases of criminal killings and inter-clan thefts of animals especially among the Jie and the Dodoth clans which spill over into Teso has continued to be registered. The committee recommends that Uganda Police Force gradually takes over the disarmament process for better sustainability. This will require bolstering police presence in the region, nurturing and maintaining synergies with local leaders, communities and other security organs.

Regional task force

The committee was notified that counter LRA operations have remained on hold despite increased LRA activities in the CAR and DRC. While the looting of food and other items by the LRA in areas of Parage, Nagero, Kiruwa and areas close to the Garamba National Park continues, there is a renewed hope of resumption of the counter LRA operations.

With the extension of amnesty for another two years, the committee is hopeful that if indeed the counter LRA operations resume, there will be an opportunity for rebel combatants to return and benefit from this clemency. 

The Allied Democratic Forces in the Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo
The insecurity in the eastern parts of DRC continues due to historical, economic, social, cultural and geo-political factors. This has left a political vacuum in many parts of the eastern DRC hence providing a safe haven to a multiplicity of armed groups including the ADF. It is worth noting that ADF has transformed itself into a transitional terror organisation with bases in eastern DRC and terror cells within Uganda and other parts of the great lakes region. The committee notes the recent press reports indicating that ADF is targeting and indoctrinating young children in its recruitment drive.

The committee therefore recommends that Government using ICGLR should pursue a sustainable solution to the ADF problem considering that the Government of Uganda is using the same framework to tackle the M23 problem in DRC. It is only prudent that as a country, the same framework is relied upon to resolve the ADF dilemma.

Ministry of Internal Affairs

Under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, we have four votes: Vote 009, Ministry of Internal Affairs Headquarters; Vote 120, Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control; Vote 144, Uganda Police Force; and Vote 145, Uganda Prisons Force.

The table you have, table 1, shows the fiscal performance of Vote 009 and that is the Ministry of Internal Affairs Headquarters and it is there for your analysis. 

However, the Ministry of Internal Affairs received a total budget of Shs 9.36 billion of which Shs 9.058 billion was released. This represents 94 percent budget performance. 

The un-spent balance of Shs 107 million was to cater for the June salaries which were paid in July.

In the next financial year, the budget of the Ministry of Internal Affairs has been increased from Shs 9.63 billon to Shs 10.53 billion. However, despite this meagre increment, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has a huge budgetary shortfall of Shs 17.6 billion. This implies that some activities that are critical to the mandate of the Ministry of Internal Affairs may not take place as detailed in this report.

Arrears to Regional Centre on Small Arms 

The Regional Centre on Small Arms (RECSA) is an inter-governmental organisation established in June 2005 to coordinate action against Small Arms and Light Weapons proliferation in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa.

What we want Parliament to note here is that as a member of RECSA, Uganda is obligated to pay an annual subscription of $ 70,000 which is an equivalent of Shs 188 million. 

However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been allocating Shs 30 million which is an equivalent of $11,171 to the Ministry of Internal Affairs for off-setting RECSA contributions leaving an annual shortfall of $58,829. 

The committee notes with concern that the insufficient annual allocation has led to the accumulation of unpaid arrears amounting to $577,600. This, the committee learnt, has not only severely impeded the participation of the National Focal Point on Small Arms and Light Weapons in activities of RECSA but also bred the looming threat of expulsion from RECSA.

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development urgently provides Vote 009 with the Shs 1.55 billion for offsetting the outstanding subscription owed to RECSA.

Funding of Anti-Human Trafficking activities

This is a big concern in the country but considering that human trafficking is modern day slavery and needs to be addressed, in March 2012, the Office of the Coordinator of Anti-Trafficking Activities was set up to address human trafficking incidents both locally and internationally. 

The afore-mentioned office, which is an off-shoot of clause 21 of the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Act, 2009 requires at least Shs 0.5 billion to enable the operationalisation of the Act. However, in this financial year, the Ministry of Finance has not allocated any funding to this office. 

It is noteworthy that due to the hidden nature and complexity of human trafficking activities, there is a challenge of gathering statistics on its magnitude. However, based on 2009 data, human trafficking is the third largest global criminal industry with approximately 600,000 to 800,000 people worldwide trafficked across national borders. Seventy eight percent of these victims are female, 50 percent of them being children. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides an additional Shs 0.5 billion to Vote 009 to facilitate the operations of the Office of the Coordinator of Anti-Trafficking Activities in the financial year 2013/14.

Funding to the Amnesty Commission

The Amnesty Commission, which is a creation of the Amnesty Act, 2000 is tasked with demobilisation, granting amnesty, resettling and reintegrating reporters and promoting dialogue and reconciliation. 

The re-instatement of amnesty on 23 May 2013 for an additional period of two years; the committee notes that at the time of lapsing parts of the amnesty in May 2012, the Amnesty Commission had registered and granted amnesty certificates to a total of 26,288 reporters of which only about 5,000 have been resettled and fully re-integrated into their original communities. 

The reinstatement of amnesty, therefore, comes with the much needed task of adequate reintegration of over 21,000 reporters. This process will require Shs 15.4 billion and yet the Amnesty Commission has only been provided with only Shs 1.8 billion and this leaves a shortfall of Shs 13.8 billon. The committee, therefore, recommends that Amnesty Commission be given an additional Shs 13.8 billon over the next two fiscal years beginning with an increment of Shs 6 billion on their budget for the financial year 2013/14. 

The regulation of Non-Governmental Organisations 

Numerically, Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) in Uganda have grown from a paltry estimate of less than 200 NGOs in 1986 to 3,500 in 2000. We noted that the tremendous growth in numbers comes with the need for increased monitoring of the activities of NGOs. However, the committee notes that the dismal level of funding and staffing of the National NGO Board has grossly impeded its efficiency and effectiveness. In the financial year 2012/13, it monitored 155 NGOs mostly with support from the Democratic Governance Facility (DGF). 

The committee ascertained that with the Shs 0.191 billon allocated to the NGO board in the financial year 2012/13 for all non-wage activities, only 65 NGOs could be monitored had it not been for assistance from DGF. In the financial year 2013/14, the NGO board has been allocated Shs 184.6 million for its non-wage component, less than what it received the previous financial year. 

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Finance and the Executive increases funding by Shs 0.40 billion to the national NGO board to boost its efficiency and effectiveness. I hope all members are concerned about the operations of NGO’s in the country. The NGO board really needs this money.

The Internal Affairs Ministry headquarters

The state of the building housing of the Ministry of Internal Affairs continues to be of concern to the committee. The building is old and generally the space available is inadequate especially considering that the same building houses the headquarters of the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control as well. This has led to congestion and the urgent need for structural modifications and refurbishment. 

The committee recommends that should the Ministry of Internal Affairs consider staying at the current premises for a longer period of time, immediate refurbishment should be done. As a more sustainable solution, the Ministry of Internal Affairs should be allocated funds so as to secure alternative land in a more appropriate location and construct its headquarters. 

Vote 120: Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control

The table down there shows the fiscal performance and we just need to note that last financial year, they got Shs 58.4 billion and a supplementary provision of Shs 3.9 billion. However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was only able to release Shs 42.5 billion representing 73 percent budget performance.

This financial year, the Directorate requested for a total budget of Shs 192 billon, of which only Shs 38.29 billion is provided for in the budget. This leaves a funding gap of Shs 160.2 billon. Some of the activities that have remained unfunded include: the construction of the immigration headquarters, upgrading the existing passports to e-passports and the construction of border posts. The other unfunded and underfunded activities are discussed later in the report.

The National Security Information System 

The National Security Information System (NSIS) also commonly referred to as the National ID project has led to the distribution of 1120 as at Thursday 22nd August 2013. In as much as the committee commends this, it is noteworthy that over three years after the deadline set by the East African Community Common Market Protocol for all citizens of the region block to have national identity cards. About only 1,120 Ugandans have a national ID. The cards that have so far been distributed are the product of a pilot process, the bulk of the main equipment for the NSIS remains packaged and wrapped in boxes as at importation. This equipment has neither been tested nor commissioned and yet its warranty expired over a year ago. 

The premises housing the equipment at the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation in Entebbe are yet to be refurbished. When the committee visited the premises on the 25 July 2013, there wasn’t much activity going on save for the validation of data and labelling of equipment. The data being validated is that which was captured by the Electoral Commission in the run up to the 2011 general elections. 

The inherent challenge is that this data was primarily meant for political electioneering purposes and some key parameters that are required for the purpose of the national ID may not be existent. This partially explains the 11 percent success rate in the data validation exercise. Of the 214,700 data sets so far validated, only 24,707 have passed the test.

The validation test

The committee notes that the DCIC plans robust data enrolment this financial year 2013/2014 and hopes that this phase of data enrolment will plug the gaps existent in the data initially captured by the Electoral Commission. The committee is also concerned that there aren’t any visible points of interface between the DCIC and other prospective players such as the Uganda Bureau of Statistics and the Electoral Commission yet such data could be helpful in processes such as the impending national population and housing census. 

On the technical attributes, Madam Speaker, you will allow me to read this verbatim because it is very important. Of the national ID card itself, the committee also notes that unlike other countries in the region like Kenya and Rwanda, Uganda’s national ID does not have an electronic chip that can electronically aid the decoding of the biometric data. As such, the verification of data is centralised and could potentially become an adversely bureaucratic process yet with an electronic chip, all that is required is the national ID card reader to be connected to a computer at any designated location such as border points for instance. With foresight, this may be a hindrance to regional integration processes, for instance, if the East African Common Market Protocol provides for common standardisation, common standardised national identification document including the national ID. But so far, only Kenya and Rwanda have taken some credible action on this. This, if not rectified, will indeed cause a threat to the extent to which Ugandans will actually benefit from the intra East African Community trade.

The committee further notes that whereas the EC released the roadmap for the 2016 general elections on 7 May 2013, there is little evidence if there is any collaborative framework with the Ministry of Internal Affairs in as far as capturing of data of Ugandans is concerned. In the view of the committee, strategic partnerships in this regard would be more economical, efficient and effective and yet the bulk of Ugandans who were trained by Muhlbauer, the supplier of the NSIS machinery at the inception of the project, were not adequately absorbed prompting them to seek employment elsewhere. This is an indictment of the planning function of this project.

The absence of the national ID card has led to the difficulty of verifying citizenship in immigrations management. 

Madam Speaker, the committee also notes that this year, the Electoral Commission intends to recruit and train personnel in preparation for the operationalisation of the NSIS project. The Immigrations Office is facing an uphill task since there is no method of verifying citizenship. Many of the applicants of the temporary movement permits rely on valid ID cards signed and stamped by the local council chairpersons who are legally not supposed to be in office and hence their decisions can be challenged in the courts of law.

The committee recommends as follows:
    1. An inter agency approach should be used for the NSIS and other stakeholders. As earlier enumerated, it should be included in the implementation. This will inevitably require reengineering of the implementation plan.
    2. The printing of national IDs should be halted especially considering the high margin of errors in the existing data. 
    3. The process of refurbishing the premises at UPPC where the NSIS equipment is currently housed be expedited to pave way for the installation and commissioning of the equipment. This should be matched with the establishment of an efficient and effective workforce.
    4.  Merit should guide the recruitment and placement of staff onto this project lest the pervasive mediocrity that has dogged many public sector organisations will haunt this project too. In addition, there should be a functionality audit of the equipment to ascertain their efficacy and adequately plan for replacements, if any. 

Decentralisation of immigration services

Madam Speaker, for so long, the committee notes the increased demand for passports and other immigration services which have inter alia culminated into long queues and lengthy waiting hours under strenuous conditions at the headquarters of DCIC. The committee welcomes attempts by the DCIC to decongest the headquarters by establishing regional passport issuance centres in Mbale, Mbarara, Gulu and Arua. In the view of the committee, the establishment of regional offices comes with a need for more space and synergies with other relevant institutions such as the Police and local authorities. 

There is also need for the DCIC to streamline matters of accountability and enhance efficiency and effectiveness at all levels, so that the existing malice in immigration management is not decentralised to the regional offices. 

DCIC headquarters 

Madam Speaker, like the Ministry of Internal Affairs headquarters, DCIC too suffers from the acute shortage of space at its headquarters which incidentally shares the already limited space at the Ministry of Internal Affairs headquarters. Whereas the committee acknowledges the need for construction of a more befitting headquarter for the DCIC and Ministry of Internal Affairs, this should be done jointly so that both entities share common space that is adequate. This is due to the inter linkage between their functions. 

The committee further recommends that the DCIC liaises with the Ministry of Finance with a view of retaining part of the appropriation in aid generation by the DCIC, which is projected to grow from about Shs50 billion in the financial year 2012/13 to Shs70 billion in 2013/2014. This retention will help finance more befitting headquarters. 

Post entry monitoring of aliens 

The committee notes that the post entry monitoring of aliens remains a weak link in immigration management. A lot of emphasis is paid to entry and exit but after entrance into the country, many aliens drift into the local populace and largely remain unmonitored. The committee therefore recommends the realignment of the entire immigration system in Uganda to ensure that post entry monitoring is made more effective.

Secondly, the need to tighten impromptu and general checks on the immigration status of aliens is crucial. The DCIC should sustain high levels of vigilance checks.

DCIC should encourage aliens to regularly report to immigration offices on the status of their stay in the country.

And lastly, generally the DCIC should work on modalities of enhancing post entry monitoring of aliens through streamlining and institutionalising information sharing with the security and intelligence organs.

Security management at border posts

Madam Speaker, the committee notes that there is a multiplicity of security agencies at the various established border crossings such as ISO, ESO, the border Internal Security Organisation, besides other agencies like the Police and URA. This causes a challenge of coordination, information sharing and integrated approaches to managing border security. The committee recommends the need for a proper chain of command with preferably the DCIC taking the lead in the coordination of the work of these security agencies. There is need for a common platform for coordination and cooperation between these various entities at the border.

Uniforms for personnel at border crossings and immigration officers

The committee notes with concern that some employees at DCIC at the various border points and immigration points do not have uniforms yet this is very crucial for organisational management and identity purposes. The committee recommends that to ease identity, the DCIC should provide uniforms and clear identification including numbers and name tags to the immigration officers. 

The absence of holding space for suspects

The committee notes that most if not all the border posts in the country lack holding space for immigration suspects. This implies that suspects either have to be deported at the cost of Government of Uganda or set free. This scenario is not different from the DCIC headquarters. 

The committee recommends that resources be devoted for the construction of these holding facilities with the on-going project to construct befitting immigration offices at selected border points; it is crucial to including holding facilities as an integral aspect of the design. 

Immigration staff welfare

The committee noted the need for attention to welfare issues of accommodation, transportation and health and safety for immigration personnel. For more efficient and effective immigration service delivery, the committee recommends that if this one-stop border post gets under way, provision for staff accommodation should be made. 

There is further need for provision of protective gear such as hand gloves, metal detectors and other equipment at the immigration offices to stem exposure to risk. The committee recommends that DCIC procures and deploys at least one vehicle at each regional office to enhance the monitoring function. 

As the construction of the one-stop border post kicks off, with the ground breaking at Malaba, it is crucial to include staff accommodation facilities as an integral aspect of the design. 

The non-inter linkage of ICT systems at the various immigration points in the country. Madam Speaker, the various border posts and immigration service delivery points in Uganda do not have interlinked ICT systems. The use of Personal Identification Secure Comparison and Evaluation System (PISCES) and Personal Identification and Registration systems awaits expansion beyond its current limited scope. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that there is need to work towards interlinking all the immigration offices across the country. This will inevitably require investment in the requisite ICT facilities and reliable power sources. 

Immigration service delivery along marine-tied borders

The stretch of waters of Lake Victoria that border Kenya and Tanzania are largely devoid of immigration service delivery points leaving such are porous. The committee recommends that immigration service delivery points should be established at strategic points along the borders of Uganda on Lake Victoria. 

Studying the whole perimeter of the Uganda geographical border

The committee notes cases of contention with some of Uganda’s neighbours as to the exact boundaries of Uganda as a country. Considering the increased mobility between nationals of the various communities in the region and compounded by the fact that some ethnic groups along the borders straddle the borders, the committee deems it necessary to study the borders of Uganda with a view of accessing potential areas for location of new immigration border posts. The committee therefore recommends that Government of Uganda liaises with neighbouring countries to undertake this study and jointly consider the establishment of such immigration border points. 

Influx of Rwandese refugees into Ugandan territory

The committee notes with grave concern the reported massive influx of Rwandese into Uganda from Tanzania. Available information indicates that the Government of the Republic of Tanzania has ordered the Rwandese refugees in Tanzania to return to their native country of Rwanda. 

However, these refugees chose to enter Ugandan territory and are now reportedly being resettled in various parts of Uganda by Ugandan Government agencies. The committee questions the rationale for these Rwandese refugees choosing to come to Uganda instead of their native country Rwanda. 

The committee therefore recommends that the Government of Uganda urgently tables a report to Parliament on this matter clarifying the circumstances of this influx of Rwandese, and what Government is doing about this as well as the long-term plan for hosting these immigrants.

Vote 144: Uganda Police Force

The table shows the budget performance for last financial year and we need to note that Uganda Police Force received Shs 285.5 billion. They also received supplementary budget of Shs 46.4 billion which brought the total budget to Shs 320.3 billion. 

The budget performance for Uganda Police Force was 97 percent but out of the released funds, Shs 2.1 billion was unspent by close of financial year 2012/13. This was meant for salaries of June and was not enough to cater for the entire monthly wage bill. The wages were subsequently paid in July when additional funds were provided to UPF.

The cost of policing

The cost of policing continues to rise by the day. An increasing population comes with an increased demand for policing. Currently, the Police strength stands at 42,000 which is far below the ideal of 70,000 and yet the challenges of public order management keep rising by the day.

The committee notes that over the past three fiscal years, the police budget has been inadequate. In the financial year 2012/13, UPF had an overall budget shortfall of Shs 90.8 billion. In the financial year 2013/14, the realistic budget of the Police stood at Shs 595.6 billion and yet only Shs 303.1 billion has been allocated. This has bred the cycle of supplementary budget requests and grossly militates against prudent budgeting. 

The committee recommends the need to work within limited resources and adapting to more cost effective and yet efficient methods of policing such as community policing and soft power approaches to public order management that are less coercive and yet cost effective. 

Recruitment and training

In 2008, Cabinet gave Police the green light to recruit 2,500 personnel annually for five years in a bid to improve the police population ratio in tandem with the international standards of one to 500, and also meet the increased demand for policing in the wake of the proliferation of new districts. However, in the financial year 2012/13, there wasn’t any allocation due to budgetary limitations. In the financial year 2013/14, there is a planned recruitment of 5,500 personnel. But we need to note as Parliament that this remains an unfunded priority in the budget. 

Considering the ever increasing crime patterns and population growth rate of about 3.4 percent coupled with the fertility rate of about 6.7 percent, it is imperative to match with this numerical and technical capability of the police. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Police be accorded the requisite budgetary provisions of Shs 32 billion to enable the recruitment of 5,500 personnel in the financial year 2013/14. 

Rent obligations

On 31 July 2013, Uganda Police Force relocated its police headquarters from Parliamentary Avenue to its new premises at Naguru and we congratulate them for that. (Applause) This is a good step towards ameliorating the high cost of rent of these premises. However, the committee notes that the Police continue to rent most of its upcountry premises. The proliferation of new districts has worsened the situation. The cost of renting such premises and the limited budgetary allocations to vote 144 has compounded the problem of arrears on rent. The rent obligation of the Uganda Police Force stands at Shs 6.1 billion including arrears of Shs 1.2 billion on rent of the former headquarters on Parliamentary Avenue. 

In the view of the committee, if these outstanding arrears are not met, a supplementary budget is indeed inevitable. Much as the long-term plan of the Police is to first construct police stations using the hydra form technology where the Police is building capacity, this too must be matched with increased budgetary allocation. Technology without requisite complementary resources will always fail to actualise into tangible information.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Police should expeditiously retire arrears on rent since the continued non-payment of these arrears taints the image of the Police.

Uganda Police Force should acquire their own land on which they will build and run their own posts. In line with the overall community policing framework and considering the success of the Muyenga community policing model, it should be rolled out.

Public/Private Partnership

The committee notes that while the execution of the Police PPP project is at negotiation phase with the preferred bidder, this seemingly steady progress of the Police in the implementation of PPP is being done in the absence of a legal framework governing PPP. The PPP Bill is still before the Parliamentary Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The committee recommends for the expeditious consideration of this Bill and recommends that the Police halt the PPP process as they wait for the Bill to be passed into law. Police should stay engagement with the prospective bidder and any execution of the negotiation should await the finalisation of the Bill.

Police welfare and the dire conditions in which Police personnel continue to live across the country 
During a fact finding visit to Nsambya Barracks, the committee witnessed gross infrastructural decay, the lack of requisite sanitation facilities, congestion and the general need for a radical re-think and re-information on the welfare of Police. The committee therefore recommends that while PPP is deemed as the ultimate solution to the housing malaise in the Police, there is need for immediate welfare intervention such as water and sanitation.

The transportation of suspects and dead bodies

The committee observed the absence of appropriate and humane transportation facilities for suspects and dead bodies. It is a common sight to witness bare dead bodies dumped at the back of pickup trucks and suspects sharing the same space as well. Decency would have required the use of body bags for dead bodies and appropriate transport vans for suspects. 

The committee recommends that the capital budget of the Police be enhanced to enable the acquisition of decent transport for suspects and dead bodies from scenes of crime. Two, the Police should acquire and appropriately locate ambulances and dead body tender vehicles or vans across the country. 

The Police forensic laboratory in Naguru

Whereas the Police forensic laboratory located in Naguru is in use and has been elevated to a regional laboratory and centre for excellence for the East African Community, it lacks equipment and this has been reported in the ministerial policy statement as a non-funded priority.

Considering the centrality of forensic analysis in investigations, there is urgent need for funding to enable the full operationalisation of this forensic laboratory. The committee therefore recommends that UPF be allocated an additional Shs 2 billion to finance the equipment for this forensic laboratory.

The cost of public order management

The committee notes with concern the cost of public order management both in terms of resources and time. In the financial year 2013/14, UPF has a funding gap of Shs 15 billion for equipment alone and a further Shs 36 billion for feeding in operation. Besides, over the last three fiscal years, UPF has been servicing a Shs 5.3 billion per annum contractual obligation on Police for public order management equipment.

With the 2016 general elections approaching, while there is no end in sight for public agitation, the cost of policing is bound to rise further. The committee therefore recommends that Parliament should institute an inquest into the casual variables for this increased agitation and recommend strategic policing and political initiatives in the interest of unity, consensus and stability of Uganda as a whole. The inquest should further ascertain the outstanding political questions in Uganda today, its impact on the national budget, national cohesion and development.

Secondly, the recommendations of this parliamentary inquest will go a long way in redefining the trajectory of politics in Uganda. The committee further recommends that the Police explore more tact, persuasion and intelligence in forestalling public order threats so as to mitigate the ravages brought forth.

Police review

In the past two years, the reorganisation and restructuring of Police has seen visible reforms in the Police sector. However, the committee is concerned about the lack of policy framework and blue print for these reforms. The committee is concerned that such reforms, if un-institutionalised, will jeopardise the attainment of sustainability of the wider security sector. In the absence of a proper policy framework, the results of reforms will be dependent on the personality in charge since the interventions are not institutionalised.

There is therefore need for proper policy framework governing Police reforms and reorganisation. The committee recommends that Government should conduct an institutionalised review of the Police to redefine the trajectory of policing in Uganda.

Vote 145: Uganda Prisons Service.

The budget performance and allocation for the 2012/13 financial year for the Uganda Prisons was Shs 78.2 billion. They had a supplementary of Shs 13.1 billion hence a total budget of Shs 91.3 billion. The budget performance stood at 98 percent. They had an unspent balance of Shs 2.4 billion and this was returned to the Treasury and evidence to that effect was presented to the committee.

The budget allocation for this financial year 2013/14 amounts to Shs 86 billion against a projected budget of Shs 200 billion. This leaves a shortfall of Shs 113.7 billion. The shortfall has to cater for mainly feeding, transportation of prisoners to court, staff accommodation and farming infrastructure. The details are further discussed below.

The welfare of inmates

There is need to improve welfare of inmates. The need to improve welfare of inmates remains a challenge. This is mainly in terms of congestion in prison, feeding, health care and the often slow pace of prosecution due to a backlog of cases.

Across the country, all prisons are carrying far more prisoners than the intended carrying capacity of the prisons. If I can take an example of the Luzira Upper Prison, this was constructed in 1927 for 668 inmates. Today it carries 3,144 inmates. That explains the congestion and the condition is not any better elsewhere. Members can read through that to get the wider picture of what is happening across the country.

I want to go to page 41 where we have recommendations. The committee recommends that Government should, in the next two to three financial years, beginning with this financial year, avail Shs 15.8 billion to enable construction of the five low security prisons as a step towards the amelioration of the debilitating challenge of congestion in prisons.

To further address congestion, the government should deepen and expand the implementation of community servicing, especially in the areas where it is yet to be implemented, as an alternative model of rehabilitation of offenders. This will help in decongesting prisons.

Given that the inmates attending court go without feeding, it is recommended that the budgetary shortfall of Shs 8 million for feeding inmates to court be provided. The prisons authority should also bolster disease surveillance in prisons so as to boost their response to disease outbreaks.

There is also need for refurbishment of the prisons referral hospital at Murchison Bay, Luzira so as to boost its efficiency and effectiveness.

Bolstering agricultural production in prisons 

Agricultural prisons services remain a strategic part of agricultural production and productivity in Uganda, considering its vast land and labour. The only missing link is the requisite financial resources to aid actual production. This is the pinnacle to the challenge of feeding prisoners. If agricultural production is bolstered, UPS will attain greater food self-sustenance and save up to Shs 16.2 billion per annum.

Currently, the total land acreage is 60,000 acres but only 4,200 acres are being utilised. Given that, the committee therefore recommends that Government should undertake to capitalize on production and productivity under the Uganda Prisons Services through appropriate financing options. 

There is need to have more custodial staff numbers. Currently more than 6,360 staff are required by the UPS to augment the number of custodial staff from the current 5,548 to the required 11,999. This proposed recruitment will enable the attainment of the ideal custodial staff to prisoner ratio of 1:3 instead of the current 1:6.7.

The committee notes, however, that the request for recruitment was declined by the Ministry of Public Service oblivious to the aforementioned reality. This proposed recruitment and training would cost about Shs 3 billion. The committee, therefore, recommends that an additional Shs 3 billion on the wage component be provided to enable UPS plug the manpower gap and ensure the safety, security and smooth running of the prisons.

Access to justice

The committee notes that while a daily average of 1,153 inmates are produced at 213 courts spread across the country, the misalignment of courts has adversely affected timely delivery of prisoners and increased the cost of service delivery. In North Eastern Uganda, for instance, the delivery of prisoners from Kaboong to a court in Kotido involves covering 84 kilometres while those from Amuru travel for about 70 Kilometres. Transportation of inmates to the courts requires about Shs 4.1 billion. Fuel too requires about Shs 2.5 billion yet in the financial year 2013/14, only Shs 650 million has been provided for.

The committee, therefore, recommends that an additional Shs 3.5 billion, which is not provided for in the current budget, be provided to UPS to facilitate the efficiency and effective delivery of inmates to courts. In addition, there is need to roll out the Anti-Corruption Court to other locations other than Kampala alone.

Infrastructural decay

The bulk of the Uganda Prisons Services infrastructure was constructed in the colonial times and has never been renovated. Many such facilities have over the years degenerated into dilapidated structures and are currently unfit for human habitation. It is in this vein that UPS requires an annual maintenance budget of Shs 1.2 billion for the 233 prisons in the country. However, only Shs 201 million has been provided for in the financial year 2013/14 implying less than Shs 1 million per prison and giving a shortfall of Shs 1.029 billion.

In light of this, the committee on page 45 strongly supports the UPS strategy of providing two bedroom houses for the 500 staff per annum spread across 10 years. Each of these housing units will cost Shs 80 million implying about Shs 40 million per annum.

Hygiene and sanitation in prisons

The committee observed with great concern the need for better hygiene and sanitation in prisons. Due to congestion and the infrastructural decay as earlier noted, the water and sanitation facilities have by and large broken down in most prisons. One hundred and twenty eight of the 233 prisons still use the night bucket system, which is terribly degrading and absolutely inhuman.

The committee strongly recommends the phasing out of the bucket system. But this will require at least Shs 30 million for each of the 128 prisons, totalling to Shs 3.8 billion.

Prisoners’ uniforms and beddings

The committee established that over 80 percent of the inmates don’t have appropriate beddings and uniforms yet each prisoner is entitled to two pairs of uniform, a blanket and a mattress. In some prisons, prisoners have no beddings at all and so they sleep on bare floor, if they fail to provide for themselves.

The committee was informed that Shs 3.5 billion is required for the adequate provision of these essentials. The committee, therefore, recommends that a shortfall of Shs 2.5 billion be provided for because the deprivation of prisoners’ rights to sleep due to deplorable habitation conditions is an indictment of a country’s duty to observe and protect the rights of its people.

Rehabilitation facilities

Currently, there is severe mismatch between the sentencing regime, the existing facilities and the prevailing rehabilitation processes. Only 13 of the 233 prisons have an industrial workshop and even then, most of the workshops are ill-equipped. In essence, this urgently calls for the need for the gradual establishment, equipment and staffing of rehabilitation and correctional centres in at least 10 prisons every year. This requires Shs 4 billion per annum. However, in the financial year 2013/14 only Shs 0.1 billion has been provided for, leaving a shortfall of Shs 3.9 billion.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the shortfall of Shs 3.5 billion be availed to the UPS to enable it adequately play the role of rehabilitation and reduce it from the current 26.7 percent.

Profiling and documentation of prisoners

The committee notes the need to computerize and automate the documentation and profiling system of prisoners. The absence of an appropriate data management system compromises the safety, security and tracking of prisoners. The identification, management and control of prisoners through biometric technology is an area of innovation that UPS should embrace. The committee recommends that the capturing of biometric data under the NSIS project should be rolled out to prisons as well.

Prisons Review

In the past couple of years, the reorganisation and restructuring of Uganda Prisons Services has been underway. However, the committee is concerned with the lack of a policy framework and a blue print for these reforms. The committee is concerned that if such reforms are not institutionalized, they will jeopardize the attainment of sustainability and the operationalization of the wider security sector. In the absence of a proper policy framework, the results of reforms will be dependent on the individual’s personality since the interventions are not institutionalized. Therefore, there is need for a proper framework governing policy reforms and reorganization.

Training and capacity building

The committee notes that the transformation of the UPS into a vibrant correctional service requires investment in training and capacity building. The need for restructured and progressive training is therefore integral to this transformation process. The committee recommends for the establishment of an elaborate and progressive training scheme through the establishment of training colleges and institutions of learning. Such training should be practical and operational.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the Parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs proposes that the House adopts the report with the following budgetary estimates for the sectors under its docket. These estimates are cognisant of the corrigendum adjustment No. 1 to the budget of financial year 2013/14, which was tabled in this House on Tuesday, 27 August 2013. The budget proposals are:

Vote 004 – Ministry of Defence; Recurrent budget of Shs 658,257,026,000 and development budget of Shs 357,847,283,000; that makes a total of Shs 1,016,104,309,000.

Vote 009 – Ministry of Internal Affairs Headquarters; Shs 9,845,161,000 for recurrent budget and Shs 1,071,059,000 for development budget. That makes a total of Shs 10,916,220,000. 

Vote 120 - Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control; Recurrent budget of Shs 8,134,558,000 and development budget of Shs 53,286,488,000. That makes a total of Shs 61,421,046,000.

Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force; Recurrent budget of Shs 253,580,716,000 and development budget of Shs 61,663,769,000, which gives us a total of Shs 315,244,485,000.

Vote 145- Uganda Prisons Service; Recurrent budget of Shs83,140,882,000 and development budget of Shs 11,064,209,000 that gives us a total of Shs 94,205,091,000

Madam Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Chair, for that comprehensive report. Now I will allow hon. Fungaroo seven minutes but the report will be reflected in full on the Hansard. So, you just get the highlights in seven minutes.

(The entire report to appear in the appendix of the bound volume of September, 2013)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe I would also like to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs what he has done about the passport-making machine at the Washington Mission because it nearly burnt our mission. So we shall want some answers.

12.59
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Hassan Fungaroo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I salute all of you. I am giving some responses and suggested alternatives as per the Ministry of Defence and Security. This is not to the committee report; this is to the minister’s statement. So my problem is with the minister - (Interjections) - yes. This covers Vote 004, Ministry of Defence. I see copies being distributed. I am not going to read page by page but I will refer to some of the key areas, in the interest of time. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on Table, the response and alternative policy statement of the Opposition on the budget and the ministerial policy statement of Vote 004, Ministry of 
Defence, for the financial year 2013/14. The copy is already there.

I would like to request the Members who have got the copies already and those who are going to get to go to page 5 on the current security situation of Uganda. You will read the details. But there are security risk factors grouped into two; internal and international. 

Under internal factors, we have military factors - you will get the details there - political factors, social security factors and economic factors. The details are there for you to read.

I would like, however, to draw your attention to page 9 on budget analysis. In the ministerial policy statement presented by the minister, we have identified some problems and repeated problems of budgeting and budget control - the problem of budgetary commitment control systems in the Ministry of Defence. The approved budget of the Ministry of Defence was Shs913 billion - the details are there for you in the interest of time. However, our problem here is that the minister spent less than the approved budget and yet came to ask for a supplementary. You came here, requested for money and it was approved. You didn’t spend the money approved and then asked for supplementary but the money you spent is less than the first one approved for you. Why did you ask for the supplementary?

There is another problem of classified expenditure. First of all, in a democratic society - that is page 10 - public sector planning and budgeting processes need to contain properly functioning institutionalised and transparent mechanisms for initiating, recording, monitoring, auditing and controlling income and expenditure of public funds. The Ministry of Defence is an income generating ministry. We shall go to the details in the report here. There are a lot of problems as follows: shrewd increases of classified expenditure, year in and year out. There is also something called classified training, not only hiding financial but also hiding opportunities for training abroad. Why hide opportunities for training? 

There is also a problem of giving stories of accountability without actual transparency on facts and figures. The details are here. They will tell you, “We did this and we did this,” but on what and how many things? These are hidden.

There is a problem of undisclosed revenue. For example, some private telecommunications and radio companies have erected masts at the Ministry of Defence land in upper Mbuya, Bombo, Katabi, Masaka, Kakiri, to mention but a few. However, lease agreements between the Ministry of Defence and the telecom companies, including the radios, have never been made available to Parliament. Further still, the Ministry of Defence did not disclose any revenue accruing from these leases and rentals and yet this land belongs to Government and therefore any revenue accruing from there should be declared. Where is the money?

Undisclosed non-tax revenue arising from the hiring of Ugandan military equipment by AU for use in AMISOM. Madam Speaker, if you get the Memorandum of Understanding signed between Uganda and the AU, there is a clause talking about hiring or refund of equipment including uniforms, belts, bullets and guns. Everything that Uganda owned before the mission of AMISOM started used by our UPDF is paid for. But this money has never been disclosed to Parliament from the beginning up to now. Where is the money?

Problems related to international defence and security and problems with financing and management. This one goes to both the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Defence. Through our network - nationally and internationally - of the alternative government, we have discovered that the AU is complaining of payments of membership fees and annual subscriptions by AU member countries.  So, we would like to find out from the two ministers here, has Uganda paid the membership fees and annual subscription as a member country of AU? It is very important for us to uphold our dignity as an independent country and also safeguard Africa from being re-colonised through external funding mechanisms by former colonial masters through the AU. We hereby, on this particular matter, recommend that Uganda should pay her membership fees and if there is any kind of subscription, we should pay it to the AU because we are an important country in AU activities. 

Undisclosed funding and donations by foreign countries to the ministry of Defence and I will not enumerate them in the interest of time. We know there is a joint venture between Uganda and the USA on the operation lightning thunder in Garamba, Central African Republic. The USA has given us 100 Special Forces troops. What have they given in addition to that? Who is funding them, us or they are funding us in that operation? We also have military equipment and support coming from the USA foreign military financing programme. China and UK have been supporting us. It is very important for us to know what has been given to us so that this minister will not come to ask from Parliament for money to cover things, which have already been donated for free.

That is the problem; you come here and ask for money to buy guns when you have been given for free. Uniforms have been given to you for free and you also ask for money for uniforms. Are you building another army somewhere?

Another problem of this undisclosed income is that EU has offered to fund activities of AMISOM including allowances, operational running costs, transportation, medical expenses, housing, fuel, communication and other things yet you are aware of the deduction of money from the pay of soldiers. They deduct $200 from every soldier and we are told that this money is for administrative purposes to prepare the soldiers to go abroad. Yet this money has already been given to you. If you can be given money for a belt, why don’t you ask for money for say telephones, photocopying and other administrative expenses in preparation of these troops going abroad? Why do you have to deduct from them?

We went to Rwanda as a Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. Rwanda is one of the African countries that participated and still participates in international peace keeping but they do not deduct money from the pay of their soldiers and this money has never been accounted for properly here. That is a big area of fraud.

Multiple claims for buying food and other things, diversion of funds and food; food for AMISOM has been diverted and it is on record that some soldiers have been apprehended but we would like to know how far the investigation has gone. If food can be diverted, what about money? 

There is also a problem of commitment system particularly for payment of utilities. Payment of utilities like electricity and water takes years –(Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: Finish.

MR FUNGAROO: Let me go for the recommendations. The problems are here and you will read them. Our recommendations are as follows: Uganda’s participation in all AMISOM activities should be suspended to pave way for a thorough auditing so as to identify and eliminate all the loopholes that pose budget leakages in the Ministry of Defence and AMISOM related activities in the Ministry of Finance. Not only financial auditing but also human. I have received complaints - actually we are preparing to bring a petition here by injured soldiers and their families who have never been compensated according to the Memorandum of Understanding. Soldiers who made us proud, limping coming here, permanently deformed and not compensated for - this should be done in the auditing!

The AMISOM Memorandum of Understanding should be brought to Parliament for review - my sister, you know what Uganda has been committed to. In that Memorandum of Understanding, I recommend that the element of higher compensation funds for equipment of Uganda used in AMISOM should be deleted so that Uganda goes there with your own equipment and we know that your money is expected from this because money coming from here is not reported to the Treasury. This is because we want to delete that link of eating money.

Budget tracking radar; this is very serious, a new innovation for you, go to the annex. We have come up with a budget tracking radar to detect and prevent the unnecessary movement of money so that direction is not lost. In annex 3, once the ministry comes here to ask for money, what are the things that we should look for? We have tried to put these in this data capturing table, for national defence, for AMISOM, for operation lightning thunder and anything.

Comprehensiveness

The budget must encompass all financial operations of the military, off budget expenditure and revenue should be prohibited. If anything is to be spent in the Ministry of Defence, the channel is here through Parliament. You go there and speak to somebody in the name of Uganda then money is given, equipment given which cannot be audited or followed; this must be stopped.

Financial discipline

Financial decision making must be restrained by the realities of the resources over the medium term.

THE SPEAKER: How many recommendations are remaining?

MR FUNGAROO: Only 12 are remaining. I will read the headings only. Financial discipline is very poor, improve. Legitimacy; without parliamentary approval, all military expenditures are not legitimate.

In emergency situations where the –(Interruption)
 
MR MULINDWA: Madam Speaker, hon. Fungaroo Kaps is a Member of the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee. He attended - are we going to adapt the report of the committee or what he is saying now? Why didn’t he bring this when the committee was sitting?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think we agreed to go multiparty; we have the Government side and the Opposition side. I have given him to give the highlights of his position.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for your wise ruling, Madam Speaker. That is why every Ugandan will respect with you up to the dot.  

Flexibility; we are aware of emergencies where the situation demands flexibility in the issuance of resources but the minister should not excessively exceed the limit of using money without parliamentary approval. All monies must be approved by Parliament. 

Predictability; all revenue and expenditure should be predictable. For example, the issue of electricity, how much electricity do you use in a year? Without putting a factory, the bill should be scrutinised. If you have not put anything which consumes too much electricity and the bill changes suddenly, you need to observe that area because there seems to be a link between ministry of defence and Umeme.

Contestability; the money we are asking is also being contested by other ministries including education, teachers’ salaries, health workers; so be fair in your asking.

Information; do you have information as required? We have a problem with the issue of classified expenditure. We would like to have this term “classified expenditure” to be abolished in the budgeting system. Whatever you need to be classified is not money; you classify materials which you have bought. The tanks where you keep them, we will not ask you. The soldiers and where they are, we will not ask you. The plans and what you want to do. Those are the things which must be classified but not money.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, go straight to your recommendations.

MR FUNGAROO: Lastly, Madam Speaker, transparency and accountability is a problem. The structural problem of UPDF needs to be audited by Parliament also.

There is a new arm of the UPDF called the Special Forces Command. It is not in the documents, Constitution or UPDF defence policy. It is not also on the White Paper on Defence Transformation, 2004. But there is a new force that has been created just like the Land Forces, the Air Forces with the full command and commanded by a Brigadier – a Brigadier is a one-star General. But this force is not constitutional. This force does not have a budget here and yet it is a force called special and therefore with a lot of need. Where do you get the money to fund that force? (Applause) Why do you keep that force outside the control of Parliament? Is that an army of Uganda or it is a private army? 

So, Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to the need to manage our forces properly because when we take over Government, we do not want to inherit a sick force – (Laughter) - we want a prepared and properly managed UPDF so that when I become in charge as Minister for Defence, I make sure that the army is managed properly. Look at the radar - we shall organise a workshop to share with you the concept of the budget radar for the Parliament of Uganda. Look at the annex. 

I thank you very much for giving me the opportunity and I salute my colleagues for giving me the support in the process of preparing this. (Applause) One Uganda One People!

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I will give hon. Kyanjo five minutes to highlight his report and it will also be reflected in the Hansard. Five minutes and then we have a few comments.

1.18
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS AND HUMAN RIGHTS (Mr Hussein Kyanjo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity that you have accorded me. I will try to summarise my report.

I wish to state that after reviewing and analysing all the information, I associate myself with some of the committee recommendations but we have some disagreements with the main committee report and the ministerial policy statement as submitted and presented before Parliament. 

I, therefore, wish to present policy alternatives in those areas where I consider Government needs to re-examine for effective implementation of the sector mandate for the good governance of the country. 

Shortcomings in the funding
The following areas have been grossly underfunded and since this sector deals with internal affairs and security matters for the people of Uganda, we do not need to rely on external financing. These areas where we need to rely on financing by Government include the following:
    a) The construction of Directorate of Immigration and Citizen Control Headquarters.
    b) The construction of the police headquarters.
    c) Construction of border posts.
    d) Facilitation of the NGO Board to register NGOs.
    e) The remuneration of staff in the entire sector.
    f) Water and sanitation systems in the prisons.
    g) Accommodation of Police and Prisons staff.

Key policy issues / alternatives and recommendations

Vote 145 - Uganda Police Force

Human Resource Management Policy

Under human resource management, I wish to make the following observations and recommendations:

Personnel management policy; the Uganda Police Force up to now has remained so rudimentary to the extent that most of the records are kept in the manner not befitting a professional police force. Whereas all Government departments have computerised, the Police records are still manual. There is urgent need for computerisation of the records in the Police force.

Promotion of police personnel; I will give the recommendation that we recommend as the Opposition for proper and streamlined promotion policy, which is fair to all policemen and women irrespective of any prejudices because there have been reports consistently in the committee reported by different police officers that there is inconsistence in promotions in the police force. Our request to get all the cadres as promoted has not yielded results yet.

Recruitment and training policy; it is reported that this financial year 2013/14, Police will recruit over 5,500 police personnel but there is zero allocation for this activity. We appreciate the critical shortage of police personnel but we can’t allow a recruitment to take place without securing the funds first. Madam Speaker, we recommend a forensic audit of the Police training and promotion policy.

The education policy in the Uganda Police Force is also discriminatory as some officers are allowed to train or go for further studies including training abroad while others are sidelined. Those denied the opportunity can remain on same ranks for long which has created internal passive strife in the Uganda Police Force. We recommend that there should be a manpower and staff improvement policy and plan that should address the skills gaps in the entire Uganda Police Force.

Welfare policy including remuneration; our recommendation is that there should be a comprehensive salary review of all security related personnel. 

Institutional reforms; Private/Public Partnership: For three years now, Parliament has recommended that the UPF halts the implementation of the PPP programme. However, we were shocked to hear and see the continued undermining of parliamentary resolutions by the Uganda Police Force.  

As we talk now, Naguru Police Barracks has been erased to the ground and the site given to a private investor who is not known by Parliament. We need to know who this investor is and we need to inform Parliament of the policy, which is guiding us in this direction.

I will rush to the national ID project, Madam Speaker. I think Parliament should stop discussing the issue of the national IDs until Government pronounces itself as to whether they are interested in Ugandans having national IDs. So far, over Shs 250 billion has been spent on a project but no single genuine national ID has been produced –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Can you conclude?

MR KYANJO: I was saying that the recent public information about issuance of national IDs was a real hoax because when we went on ground at Kololo, the IDs issued were similar to student IDs with no security features at all. So you cannot correlate a card or produce your card and that card is correlated with information in Busia or Kotido. We recommend that no single shilling be approved for this non-existent project. Instead, a fresh process should start for issuing a credible regionally acceptable national IDs. 

Madam Speaker, for lack of time, I can stop there.

(The entire report to shall appear in the appendix of the bound volume of September 2013)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much. Now hon. Members – 

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, allow me to lay this report for inclusion in the parliamentary records.

THE SPEAKER: I believe that the committee has done a good job. The Opposition has also done a consolidated job on their issues and so we shall just have a limited debate. 

But before we go to that, I want you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Testimony Christian Primary School from Kapchorwa represented by hon. Phyllis Chemutai and hon. Steven Chebrot.

I had omitted to inform you about our colleague who had an accident last week. She broke a right arm with deep cuts. In fact, the bone between and the elbow is broken and she has just gone back for examination and then we shall be updated about her condition. She is coming in from outside and she is now going to be evaluated so that they see how to treat that problem. So, give her a call when you are able to.

Then, I shall be amending the Order Paper to allow the Minister for Finance to lay corrigenda relating to the Ministry of Gender. So after this debate, we shall do that. So let us have limited debate. By the way, honourable members, members of the committee should not tempt me by standing up. There has been a habit of members of the committees also standing up to contribute to their reports. So, we shall only use 30 minutes. 

1.27
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I really want to support the report but allow me to bring these observations that I have identified and maybe some recommendations. 

I know that the UPDF has been engaged in construction. They started construction in Kyegegwa District for the Liberation Technical School, which they abandoned at foundation level. Since last year, when they started the construction, not even the District Local Government has had any communication about the way forward. 

I would like to comment about the welfare of the inmates, basing on the observation from page 44. The gender aspect in the welfare of the inmates is completely out of the programmes I think of the prisons services. I celebrated Easter with my prison inmates at Kyegegwa but the sanitation facilities like shaving machines, sanitary pads for the women and even knickers - Madam Speaker, even when you go to prison as a woman, you do not abandon your womanhood. Your womanhood will require specific and unique facilities. They need to be provided because there is nobody else that will provide this. I would like to recommend that the gender aspect be mainstreamed in the budget of the prisons services so that such gender requirements as pertaining to either men or women are also addressed when they are looking at the welfare. 

Orientation should be provided for some or all staff of the prisons services so that they oversee – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: You have got half a minute to conclude.

MS KABAHENDA: I know that we have a policy on the children who come with mothers to prisons. I would like to know; do these children become prisoners? What is provided in their welfare because in the prisons services, I do not see anything provided for the children who come to prisons with their mothers? 

Water tanks for the prisons inmates to have safe water and healthy livelihood should be part of the recommendations. 

I would like to thank you for this opportunity. 

1.30
MS SARAH MATEKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work. I have two or three issues to raise: First, I appreciate that the UPDF is really giving us enough security that we need but we have a problem where the UPDF goes to occupy land of the local people. They stay on the land and they do not pay any penny to the owner of the land. Moreover, the owner of the land is not allowed to access this land. So, what plans do you have because this is a problem I have faced especially in Kisoro District? I have a place where somebody has complained for the last 10 years. The UPDF has been occupying that land and he is not allowed access to the land and he is not even given any penny. So, I would like to see something done about that. 

Secondly, I have heard about the national IDs. Nothing seems to be coming up and we are wondering – (Interruption) 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. I would like to give you information that the project has not only taken long but it was one of the most expensive projects this Government has undertaken. We have so far spent more than Shs215 billion but there is nothing on the ground. That is the information I wanted to give you. 

MS MATEKE: Thank you for that information. I want to see something done. We are wondering what is happening. 

Finally, I can’t leave the Floor without talking about the UPDF. I heard my colleague talk about the women; it really hurts me especially in areas where we have not built barracks. It has been a problem because –(Interjections)– I am talking because I have experience. We have been staying with the UPDF officers in Kisoro and there are those small houses - it really hurts to find that this officer has to stay there with the wife, and at times with the children and this is very bad and that is why we see most of them deserting. So, I request that something be done. If it means building so that and you can leave your wife and visit her once in a while, then I think that will be in order. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.33
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would like to comment on three things and one is desertions from the UPDF. The committee recommends that new approaches should be done to attract deserters back into the force. When a deserter leaves the UPDF, I don’t think they have any interest of really going back. I would rather recommend that maybe as an alternative, rather than attracting them back, we should give them opportunities to do things to generate income for them. This would be better than attracting them to the force. That means they are already tired of serving in the army.

Madam Speaker, on disarmament operations in Karamoja, the committee recommends that gradually, it should be given to the Police. There are warriors in Karamoja and these are people who use a lot of force and ammunition and leaving them in the hands of the Police will be asking for too much. I wish the Army could just continue with the disarmament in the Karamoja region rather than giving it to the Police. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on the issue of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, especially, the condition of the headquarters. The situation of the Army offices is not only bad in Kampala but even in districts like Moyo. You will not believe that it is an office where these very smart policemen fit. They are very smart on the streets and they dress very well. I want to conclude that more funds should really be given to the Police because in situations like Moyo, even when women are detained, they just sleep in the open space. There is no room where they can be accommodated. So, more funds should be given to the Police.

My colleague, hon. Fungaroo, the issues you raised especially about the undeclared revenue is very important. I think this Parliament should look further into it. We need to get those details so that we can get proper use of such funds. I thank you very much. 

1.36
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also congratulate you for making us proud. I will just go straight to the recommendations on page 6 because they hold water. On recommendation one, I would like to quickly add a condition that for this Shs 4 billion to be given out, it must be on a business plan with a competent management team in place. We saw what NEC did before and the losses we incurred because of the incompetence of those who were running NEC. So if there is money, they must be able to multiply this money and not cause loss of colossal sums of money as we experienced through the shoddy deals of the past. 

I would also like to touch on the ID project. When you look at the recommendations from the committee, they do not bring out the frustration we have faced as a country. When I look through these recommendations, I realise that for a project of such a magnitude, there must be a well illustrated design that must be followed, illustrating the details of the competent staff who are to be recruited and the management. All these processes must be in place for Government to release billions of money. 

So, I do not see why we should continue giving such recommendations without bringing out and putting strong controls to this project where we can investigate and call it to order.

There is a recommendation on page 33 that talks about the PPP Bill. But I would like to quickly add a third recommendation that Parliament expedites this PPP Bill to enable the programmes and projects run. Otherwise, we are stranded because of this Bill.

1.39
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to say something on regional security along the lines of great lakes perspective. As a Pan-Africanist, I am concerned about the security situation in this region as hinted on pages 9-11 of this report and it is very paramount that we talk about security. 

I am aware that there is a pact that we signed in 2006 and within that pact, there was a protocol on mutual defence and non-aggression, which countries in this region have used to make sure that they counteract the negative forces. But along the way, there were disagreements and suspicions. My appeal to the regional leaders is for them to sort out the suspicion which has brought about halting of these operations. As you may be aware, these helped us very much in fighting the LRA. 

I would also like to touch on AMISOM; I want to thank our soldiers for the work they are doing and the other countries that are participating. AMISOM has to continue because it is the only way out now. I am aware that we used the AU arrangement within the peace and security framework – there is a provision for regional standby forces. But those forces have not yet been operationalized. As such, we need AMISOM to ensure peace within our region and the continent at large. 

However, we must ensure that what is due to the soldiers is given to them. I appeal to the Ministry of Defence and the government at large to start negotiations on how this administrative force can be handled within the main finance mechanism as an incentive to the soldiers because they sacrifice their lives and should benefit from that work. 

1.41
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for always allowing me to catch your eye – (Laughter) – I want to thank the committee for doing its work. However, on page 29, the committee notes with great concern the influx of Rwandese coming into Uganda. I would like to inform the members of this committee and the ministry which originated this policy statement that they should turn to the Constitution of Uganda, particularly the third schedule which talks about Ugandans indigenous communities as of 1 February 1926. The Banyarwanda are the twenty third; they come even before some of the tribes. 

I am not the maker of this Constitution and therefore I want you to revisit that and correct yourselves. This recommendation, at a time when we are talking of the East African Federation – how can we have a committee talk about a people who are well protected in the Constitution of Uganda – (Interruption) – they should withdraw their recommendation for attacking a tribe – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are misdirecting the House. They are talking about Rwandese expelled from Tanzania. Instead of going to Rwanda, they have come here – that is the subject of the committee. 

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, I am talking about the Constitution – (Member timed out_)

1.44
MR ACHIA TERENCE (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. On development programmes in Karamoja, I do agree with the committee that the Army and Police should be able to work hand in hand with the community. 

And before I go further, let me thank the Government for the successful disarmament programme in Karamoja which has brought peace in the region. However, what now remains is to sustain that peace and consolidate it. So I recommend that the peace committees which have now been established in the region should be supported – they need support from the Ministry of Defence, Internal Affairs and any other peace programmes in Karamoja. The Minister for Karamoja Affairs has already pronounced such support, but it is important that other ministries also come in to support the community initiative – (Member timed out_) 

1.46
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I congratulate you for the sweet victory you had. On defence, the geo-politics of the region we are in, however much we try to hide it, is a question of when conflicts will erupt in the neighbouring countries and Uganda as well. It is not a question of what if but when. Because of that, I would think that much emphasis should be put on the construction of the national referral hospital for the Army because unlike some of us who will get malaria and so on, the Army suffer from serious life threatening wounds whenever there is conflict and I think that should be an issue of urgency.

As regards withdrawing from Somalia, I think that will be a very strategic mistake. If possible, we should even send more forces there because the cost of leaving them here will be very catastrophic.

On citizenship, we need to also revise the policy because when you look at most illegal immigrants that are outside the East African Community, they are basically Indians and probably Chinese and these are people who get their visas at the airport. When you say that they should get visas from the airport in Entebbe, you risk bringing people who are unserious. If somebody wants to invest in Uganda and yet he cannot even afford an air ticket to go to Delhi or - (Member timed out_)

1.48
MR DAVID OCHWA (NRM, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the committee and the team from the Opposition for showing us the right way. I want to start with the issue of classified expenditure.

Many times, we have seen a lot of money being allocated under this but I feel like it is a cover up because a lot of dirt is going on. People are stealing a lot of money under classified expenditure. I want to agree with the committee that we should have a thorough audit done so that we have value for money other than some few individuals using this money under that cover.

Madam Speaker, when you look at desertion of the UPDF from the Army, my colleague said it clearly. When you look at the remuneration of the Army, where they sleep - up to today, we are boasting that the Army now has educated people but when you look at what is happening there, people are sleeping in “Mama ingiya pole”. It is so embarrassing.

When we went to Ethiopia, I saw how their army is professionalised. They are the ones running the industries, they can manufacture and repair their equipment and here we do not have any of that. If we were doing that kind of thing, I would know that we are really professionalising the army but just recruiting educated people into the army without them knowing what they are supposed to be doing there and still we have them sleeping in the “Mama ingiya poles” - we do not have any barracks at the region or district where you can see decent accommodation for our officers.

Today, I meet lieutenant colonels, captains, majors –(Member timed out_)

1.50
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee chairperson for this report as well as our shadow ministers for their responses. On page 8, desertion from the UPDF, this issue was raised some time back on the Floor of this House and I would like to find out from the Minister of Defence whether the people deserting from the Army were properly recruited into the Army. If that is so and since this issue was raised, what has the government done to let the public know because I remember some questions were asked, and it seemed it was not known where these people who desert the Army go. 

The report the committee is talking about is attributing it to insecurity. We have seen a lot of insecurity going on especially in my district of Masaka. We need an explanation. If it is known that these officers are deserting the Army, let us know who they are, how many they are, where they came from and their origin so that everybody is responsible for probably giving some information if it is known.

Regarding off-budget support to the military, if these are donations, let us get to know where this money is coming from and what it is meant to do because I think this is public money - (Member timed out_)

1.52
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also use this opportunity to congratulate you upon your election to that very prestigious position. I want to thank the chairperson of this committee and also our shadow ministers.

On page 32 of the committee report on rent obligations, I would like to know the government policy as far as housing the Police is concerned. This is because in some districts, you find individuals housing police posts. Now what do you expect when it comes to matters of security and transparency? If this person who is housing the Police commits a crime, do you expect the Police to arrest him? If it is based on the community policing model of Muyenga where a community comes together, I have no problem with that but regarding individuals housing Police - I want the government to tell us their policy as far as housing Police is concerned.

In our constituencies and areas where we come from, the government is not paying rent for most of these police posts. Rather, it is individuals paying rent. Now if this is the case, our security is compromised by these very people. This is what I want the government to explain.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, the report captured many of the things you want to talk about so we want to close. I will give the Leader of the Opposition three minutes and then I will invite the Minister of Defence to reply. After that will be Internal Affairs but I shall want to know from Internal Affairs why you have not considered investing in solar energy for lighting the barracks with all this sun we have every day free of charge.

1.55
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As Parliament, we last received an audited report of classified expenditure for the year 2004/05. That clearly shows that for the last nine years, no report has been submitted to Parliament. This is very dangerous yet the thing is increasing yearly. 

I went out to search on the Internet and I found out that the jets, which the Ministry of Defence bought, are three and a half times the price of those in Senegal, Algeria and the rest. This is because they were bought under classified expenditure. That clearly shows that the term “classified” is aimed to classify other people to become rich at the expense of all other Ugandans and this is very dangerous. 

I would propose that classified expenditure should become declassified because there is nothing classified in this item as our Ministry of Defence says. World over, ministries of defence always have the best hospitals, which can treat even the President of that country but in Uganda, the Ministry of Defence has nothing. When we tried to have Kisekka Hospital, they run and sold it. That clearly shows that we are not interested in the health of our people, especially those serving in defence. This is very dangerous.

Madam Speaker, let me say something about NEC. This company has been around and we have given it budgets and budgets. You will also recall that recently, one of the MPs and who was the managing director at one moment –(Interjections)– you remember the DURA case – went away with Shs 50 billion! But now, here we are planning to give it another Shs 4 billion per annum, yet, this should be a profit-making company.

I do not agree to the proposal that we give it this money. First, they must account for the monies we have been giving to them for the last periods.

The Ministry of Defence gets a lot of money, which hon. Hassan Fungaroo, the Shadow Minister of Defence has talked about, but they are not accounting for it. It is important that we urgently deal with that.

Madam Speaker, let me now talk about prisons because today, I am interested in talking about prisons – (Interjections) Kiprotich – but let me say this: when the whites in South Africa were about to lose power, a question was asked to the Minister of Internal Affairs on what they wanted to do with their budget. He said that the first thing they would do was to put all their energy and money in building good prisons because, according to him, all of them were potential candidates in those prisons.

It is, unfortunate, that the Rt Hon. Gen. Moses Ali has gone away. One time he used to say that prison was useless, but when he went there, he got to know what prison is. I can tell you, colleagues, you may sit there as NRM and just wish that you will ever get into prisons. But I can tell you that you will one time be there!

Madam Speaker, on page 39 the committee said that the population – no, that a prison that used to house 14 people is now housing over 141 people and was built in 1960. The population in 1960 was about only 3 million Ugandans. Now, it is at 35 million but with no infrastructure changing. This is very dangerous and I want to inform my brother, hon. Sam Kutesa - you better put money in prisons because this is where we are all potentially heading to. (Laughter) Yes, because if we are going to get inmates in a place where the room is meant for only 14 and now, we have over 200, that is very dangerous. 

MR KUTESA: Madam Speaker, I am neither in charge of prisons nor am I in charge of finance. And as far as I know, I am a very law abiding citizen. But I do not understand the honourable Leader of Opposition when he suddenly points at me and says that we should put money in the prisons, and also saying that we shall all end up there.

Madam Speaker, I know that the Leader of Opposition is fond of doing some very dry humour. But is he in order to insinuate that I am headed for prison when actually the hon. Mafabi knows very well the eminent things that are about to happen to him? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think he wanted you to inform the Minister of Finance, who is your friend that he should improve those facilities. (Laughter) Please, conclude, Leader of Opposition.

NANDALA-MAFABI: That is why I am saying I am not worried about going to prison. One year ago, in the Times Magazine and hope you read it, there was a gentleman who had stayed in prison for 39 years. But after that period, they confirmed they had arrested and prosecuted the wrong person. You could go there as a wrong person. (Laughter)

Anyway, yesterday, I had the opportunity to meet some people from the prisons in the evening. They told me prison has a lot of non-tax revenue like the money generated from carpentry workshops, they produce food using the land they own. What happens is that the food they produce is sold by the prisons officers to the public and later the authorities will buy for the prisoners’ bad beans and posho. This is very dangerous. The recent most corrupt place that had been confirmed is prisons.

It is important that we quickly think about prisons. It was told to me that in upcountry prisons – and they do not do this to prisoners in Luzira because we would see it – they take prisoners to work in people’s gardens and get paid Shs 5,000 per prisoner. But they only retain Shs 500 and the balance is pocketed by the officers. If, for example, they take out 1,000 prisoners, that is an income of Shs 5 million, but they keep only Shs 50,000 and the rest goes into the coffers of those officers. This is always being done with the knowledge of the Commissioner General of Prisons. This is bad because instead of paying the people who have used their energy, the money is taken by a few people. But here they are asking for more money yet they are generating money, but which they are pocketing.

On sickness, I was told that when an inmate falls sick and wants to go to the hospital, the officers will say, “The prisoner is not sick.” They want them to work until they fall down. It is said that on average – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:I know why they do not want to hear this but you are going to be there one day – 25 prisoners die every day because of sickness and they are not treated. In Ntungamo where hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana, who sits somewhere, knows and I hope he knows the prison I am talking about – there is the worst prison. There are two holes where people go to ease themselves but they are cleaned once in a week – (Interruption)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I know the Ntungamo Prisons very well. I think Ntungamo is one of the few districts with brand new prisons headquarters and buildings. Is the hon. Member in order to insinuate that Ntungamo has the worst prison facilities in this country, when there is a brand new prison with all that goes with prisons?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have not been to any of the prisons there. (Laughter) So, I find it difficult. I do not know which is which. Please, conclude. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you have heard what he has said. Prisons headquarters, not the jails. It is better you go there, you will see. I will plead with the committee that it is urgent for you to do a field visit to all prisons in the country, starting with Ntungamo, and then you will come and tell us what we are saying - these prisons are bad and need urgent attention.

In conclusion, it is urgent that we do more investment in prisons. But before we do that, we need a forensic audit in prisons because there is a lot of non-tax revenue. You have talked about non-tax revenue in Defence but there is more non-tax revenue in Prisons, which is not being accounted for and yet, they are generating money and coming here to ask us for money. Money is ending up in people’s pockets at the expense of the people of Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.08
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, I also start by thanking you for the great honour you have brought to our country Uganda by being elected Chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians. (Applause) I also thank the committee Chair and the members of the committee for the very excellent meetings that we had with them, and the thorough review that was made of our policy statement.

Before I start responding, I would like briefly to explain our absence in the House last week, on Thursday, when we should have carried out this business we are doing today. I was in Arusha on duty and my brother, hon. Gen. Jeje Odongo, was due to come and represent the ministry. Unfortunately, at around midday, he was taken sick with a bout of Malaria and had to be admitted. That explains why we were not able to come here; our regrets for the inconveniences that we may have caused. 

In responding to the committee report, including the report from my brother, hon. Fungaroo and also the supplementation that colleagues have given, I will take three chapters: One, I will address main issues in the main report briefly and also address the exceptional issues that hon. Fungaroo has raised and conclude by addressing what colleagues in the House have raised.

So, let me start with the main report- the committee report. First, I would like to address the issue of what has been called “off budget” or “non-declaration of income”. Let me start with the major issue, the issue of earnings from AMISOM. Madam Speaker, for three or four years now, this House has been appropriating. The money comes into the Consolidated Fund and it is declared and comes here to Parliament for appropriation before we spend it. I will quote from the current policy statement. Colleagues who may have copies of this document, if you go to page 20, you will find that in table 6.1, row 3, it says “Development” and says “Government of Uganda” and then says “External financing”. You will see that in 2012/13, there is Shs245.273 billion and in this year, there is Shs244.452 billion. That is the money coming in as a result of our participation in AMISOM. And if you go to two or three other policy statements, you will find that line reflected. So, that money is declared and appropriated.

But let me also take this opportunity- (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, we do not know where the minister is reading from. We do not have that book, so, we cannot even refer to the page you are talking about. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I believe that when the minister brought the policy statements, he brought 300 copies and they were distributed to all the Members - Yes. All the Members received these copies.

DR KIYONGA: Yes, hon. Wamanga-Wamai. It is the statement that was distributed to all of us. But the point I am making -  (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, do not lose focus. What the minister should provide for you is the details of this external financing. It is external alright but on what? - Because AMISOM has got different sections of financing. Is it only AMISOM or Operation Lightning Thunder? This is also external financing. What about the UN, the EU, the donations? Give us the detailed breakdown of this.

DR KIYONGA: I have not finished. I am just starting. (Laughter) The first point I want to make as far as in-flows from our service to AMISOM are concerned is that this money is being reflected in the budget and it is being appropriated. 

Hon. Fungaroo has raised a point and this was also raised in the committee itself. Let me take this opportunity to outline to you the heads under which this money comes- and we made this point in the committee.

Part of the money comes as troop allowances. Part of the money in the past, for the first two years, came for the purpose of preparing the troops before they went. We get money when we lose our brothers and sisters there in mission. We get money when our brothers are injured in battle. We also get compensated for our own equipment that we go with in the mission. And in order to - (Interjections) - just a minute, if I can first sum it up then I will take the clarification.

If you take the period since we went to Somalia to-date, under these heads, Uganda should have received an inflow of approximately $334 million since 2007. As I speak, Uganda has received $297 million, reflecting about 76 percent of the money that we should have received. (Interjection) I can take the clarification, Madam Speaker, with your permission.

THE SPEAKER: Let that be the last one. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the minister, having given us the figures, explain to Ugandans and to the UPDF why    since those who returned from Somalia, seven months down the road, they have not received their salary and those who went there, it is now four months, they have not received any single salary. Can you explain to us why it happened like that?

DR KIYONGA: I think colleagues, it will help us and we will save time – (Interruption)

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to be clarified about the use of the $ 200 that the ministry deducts or the government deducts from the soldiers who are in Somalia. What is it for?

THE SPEAKER: I think that question has been asked and I expect the minister to respond. Let him respond first before you stop him.

DR KIYONGA: I agree. I thank you for that guidance, Madam Speaker, because these are issues I am trying to handle. As I have said, money due to us since we went, we have to-date received only about 77 percent of the money. The practice is due to bureaucracy and also, difficulties of money, the AU as hon. Fungaroo implies, does not have their own money. We the Africans are not able to fully fund the AU and particularly, when it comes to missions like AMISOM. On our behalf, as Africa AU Secretariat goes around asking for help from organisations like UN, European Union and countries like USA or UK.

So, there is a process to ask for that money and the money to put into the accounts of the AU. There is a process for that money to move from the accounts of the AU into our accounts. There has been an occasion when I have come here to explain these delays. The allowances always come three months in arrears. So, it is not surprising that you have soldiers in the field for three or four months or soldiers who have come back and they have not received those particular allowances.

Let me underscore here that although these payments come in arrears, we would be happy if they could get their cash straight away but it poses no special difficulty. Why? Because the salaries and allowances to which our soldiers who are in missions are entitled to continue flowing even when they are on mission. Then the UN in the case of Somalia is providing the day to day necessities such as food and health.

So, in terms of individual convenience, it does not pose a major problem but the delay is there and I have explained. It is true that for the first two, we had not formalised the flow process, that is, money coming and coming back to Parliament for appropriation but for the last three to four years, the Auditor General has been auditing these funds and I can quote here from one of the audit reports. There is a document here which says, “The Government of the Republic of Uganda reports and financial statements for Ministry of Defence for the year ended 30th June 2011.”

I will quote a specific paragraph here: “The highlights of the financial statements are: In the initial budget for the Vote of the financial year 2010/11, the ministry received Shs 98,46,4118,900 from African Union for the UPDF peace-keeping support operations in Somalia. This funding has been captured under project memorandum schedule attached to these accounts. Separate financial statements for AMISOM will be prepared in accordance with the regulation.” So, the auditing does take place and indeed, we do get queries. For the first two years, the Auditor-General queried why this money was not being audited. As I said, we caused a correction. Now, the money flows and it comes here for appropriation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The clarification I want to seek is; if you look at the document of hon. Fungaroo, there is a table there called “budget”. There is AMISOM funding. It was Shs 245 billion, then you released Shs 149 billion. Isn’t it money which they give us to spend and we are now budgeting for it in our system, yet, it is already catered for expenditure? We pay arrears but we are supposed to be paid. What is this budgeting for Shs 245 billion about?

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Minister of Defence, I appreciate the explanation you are giving us about the contributions of the UN and AMISOM, but what did not come up earlier, which I really would need an answer to, is the question of the helicopters that crushed on their way to Mogadishu, are they being replaced? We budgeted and paid heavily for those helicopters. So, are they being replaced by AMISOM?

The report has never appeared. Do you intend to give us a report on what happened before we think of probably budgeting again in future? I think it is important that you help me come on board on that matter. 

DR KIYONGA: I would request that colleagues give me time to make progress on the statement because there is an assumption that I will not say certain things. I am hardly quarter way down the line - why don’t we be patient and we see how I flow?

That is the first point regarding the issue of inflows from AMISOM. The second point, which has been made, is that we get off budget money and there is a risk that we may be double counting.

I want to refer colleagues to the budget policy of 2010/11. I stated in that policy statement as follows: “In the coming year, the defence budget remains tight. No specific provision has been made for the operations against the LRA. It is our expectation that partners in the war against LRA will be more supportive to the joint task force efforts. Pursuing LRA is now a regional affair and so, it is reasonable for us to count on other partners for support. In this connection, it is pleasing to note that Government of USA has put in place an Act of Parliament to support this effort”. Year in, year out, at least at the level of the committee, we have been reporting that we are supported in regard to fighting the LRA.

The difficulty that we have been finding with friends in USA in this regard, we have asked year in, year out, that we are grateful that they  were giving us help in kind because when we need tents, they bring tents, if we need to be flown to place X, they hire a plane and our troops go. We have asked them, this is in writing from me to the Ambassador that for purposes of accountability, I would need this monetised. I want to tell the House that up to now, I have not got such a response from the Government of USA because I find it reasonable that, indeed, we should not only get help but we should put in figures so that it can enter our budgeting system. 

But the point I was making here is that we get some help like in this case from the USA. Twice, we have got some help in kind from the Chinese and also some help from the UK. I want to undertake to the House that we will continue pursuing to ensure that our partners accept to monetise the assistance that they are giving us because I believe that even in their own countries, this must be reflected in money terms. 

Finally, on the question of declaration, the issue of masts by these telephone companies has been raised and I thank the committee for this observation. I confirm that those five sites that have been named in the report are indeed sites where the telephone companies have put their masts. But we are required to work with the Government Valuer to get the rate established before we can take any money from these companies. I want to confirm to this House that the Ministry of Defence has not taken a shilling from these companies and there is communication between us, the Government Valuer and the telephone companies towards making sure that the payments are quantified and then availed.   

The third point in regard to the report, and here, I will handle what both hon. Fungaroo says and then also the main committee; the question of the $200, which has been raised many times on the Floor of this House. There is a MoU between us and the African Union and this memorandum defines obligations on the part of the Government of Uganda and on the part of the African Union, which is our employer in this specific case. So, what is expected from us under this Memorandum of Understanding? 

Number one is that, we provide troops. These troops have to be mobilised and prepared for deployment. Number two, we have to vet the troops including providing them body protection like anti-bullet vests at our cost. We have to provide some equipment as I have said for which we are compensated. We have to supervise our troops including from home. We have to do intelligence, which is a consequence of waging war and then, we have to maintain our own equipment for which subsequently we are compensated.

Now, as hon. Fungaroo has stated, we are then paid some money and I want to read for you verbatim what the memorandum says because I think that is where we are not following one another. So, those are our obligations and then – [Hon. Member: “You read.”] the memorandum goes on to state as follows: “The Government for the services offered, the Government will be reimbursed as follows by the African Union until such a time when the reimbursement rates are revised:
    1. US$ 1,028 per person per month of which $200 shall be retained by the Government.” I am quoting the Memorandum of Understanding.
    2. The African Union shall compensate AMISOM personnel for death and disability while performing official duties.

    3. US$ 50,000 shall be paid as debt compensation to the Government of the Republic of Uganda.


    4. Disability payment to the beneficiary shall be a percentage of the base compensation amount depending upon the degree of injury....” And those are the only lines along which we get paid.

So, the $200 that we have been talking about is clearly agreed and negotiated. The soldier is issued a unit of payment and it helps the government to undertake the specific tasks that I have just given you above – (Interjections)-  just hold, please. 

I like comrades who are making comparisons and we should do so but I would ask comrades that we do the following. You do not want to go to one country and you come back and make conclusions. You need to also look beyond. For example, we are in this mission with the Republic of Burundi. When we initially went, Burundi thought that for them, they could pay all this money to the troops. They did not last three or four months and they came back to our formula. 

In some of the countries, once the troops go, the benefits at home are withdrawn but this is not the case in Uganda. In some of the countries, depending on the level of income, once you go on this mission, you just continue with your regular pay and the rest of the money goes into the Consolidated Fund. 

Now, in the case of Uganda, as I have explained, our line –(Interjections)– please, let me make - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, you had time in the committee and you had your own report. You leave the minister, please.

DR KIYONGA: So, we have taken the line and this was in line of appreciation of our financial difficulties. When we passed the resolution to go to Somalia, Parliament was very clear during the debate that we go and help our brothers and sisters in Somalia but, please, let this operation be budget neutral. So, if we did not have this $200 and we still have to carry out these activities, then it means in net effect, the Government of Uganda would be paying out towards that mission.

So, Madam Speaker, that is the basis of the $200. 

I will now go to the statement of hon. Fungaroo –(Interjections)- let us follow the guidance from the Speaker, please.

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, you and the hon. Members in this House do travel abroad and are paid what is called per diem. My understanding is that what our troops are getting in Somalia is the equivalent of the per diem. Is the Government, therefore, in order to continue taxing per diem that has been agreed upon and it is very minimal – $1,000 per month and nobody would ever take that? Would the Government, therefore, be in order, to continue taxing per diem outside the required law of the country? Is the minister, therefore, in order to continue justifying the illegality of deduction of $200 per diem from our troops who have been deployed outside the country? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I am trying to check whether the MoU for Somalia was laid here. I seem to recall that it was laid and we asked a committee to look at it. I have sent the clerk to check whether it is here. 

But I think that we need to study what was in the agreement. What did they agree before we can say “yes” or “no”. At the moment, I do not think that we know what was agreed upon.

Now, hon. Members, who of you has seen that MoU? I want to know - have you read it? 

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, the MoU has been kept private. What we had here was the approval, which was okayed after the troops went and we said, “It is okay, we have allowed you, you can now go.” But the MoU has been kept a secret and – please, lay it on the Table and we proceed from there. 

One other thing is you, as Uganda, had a MoU with AU but according to our laws, the soldiers cannot go for a partial contract with the government. A soldier cannot be allowed to take the government to court for injuries incurred but there are people who have sustained injuries and they have not been compensated. 

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have seen the Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of Uganda and the African Union Commission and in that memorandum, there are a number of provisions, which include a deduction of $200 payable to the individual soldiers for purposes of pre-mission forth preparations. We did ask the Ministry of Defence to explain the circumstances under which this provision was made and the ministry informed the committee, not once but twice actually, that when they came to the House, one of the conditions of the House was that the budget for supporting AMISOM should be zero and for that matter, preparations for the mission, so to say in terms of administrative costs, which includes training, clothing, training materials and instruction and so on, would be catered for outside the Consolidated Fund and that was to be covered by the $200 detectable. So, simply put, Madam Speaker, the $200 is the money detected as provided for in the Memorandum of Understanding, per month, per person. So –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us not continue with the memorandum. Unless it is tabled and we all study it, I think let us leave it. Minister, please, conclude.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will now quickly make responses to the specifics that hon. Fungaroo raised. Just like we did in our policy statement, we have indicated that there is no rebel group in our country. However, we have shown that the ADF and the LRA are in our neighbouring country. We have also indicated that there are issues of security concerns in the Eastern DRC, for example, where you have armed groups that are not only Ugandan. There is the FDR from the Republic of Rwanda but also a multiplicity of armed groups, which are domestic to the DRC and all these are engaged in war, which not only has impact on us but has the potential to spill into our country.

Hon. Fungaroo agrees with us that the situation in the South of the Sudan should be our concern; that the continuing tension between Southern Sudan and Sudan should remain to be our concern because it has an impact on our security. 

We agree with hon. Fungaroo and the committee, that terrorism is a reality in today’s world. The only difference we have with hon. Fungaroo is that he says, because there is no rebel group in the country, the regional situation and terrorism notwithstanding, we should not prepare accordingly. Our opinion is that we must prepare and make sure that we should not be found wanting, should the country face a situation either of serious terrorism or attacks from without. So, it is just really a difference in opinion on how to manage that particular situation. 

Hon. Fungaroo raises the issue of compensation for dead and compensation for injuries and the answer is what I said before - the delays. Up to now, up to 80 percent of our people either who have died in battle there or have been injured have been paid but I admit that the 20 percent is still outstanding. It is a matter of time and we are sure that this money will be forthcoming and where the committee and hon. Fungaroo call for special audits, Madam Speaker, we have no problem.  We are in the open. When the money comes, it is declared and if this Parliament feels a special audit for this money should be done, let it be. We have no problem. In any case, the Auditor-General is already doing that. 

I will now quickly go to the specific key points raised by individual honourable members. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Ochola have made very serious statements on the Floor of the House. Hon. Ochola says that under classified, money is being used by individuals unfairly. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said that we paid three times the amount paid by other people on the jets we bought to protect this country. What I request this House, Madam Speaker, is that we need to go deep into those statements. They should not pass unclaimed.  We must go into them and really, see who is telling lies to whom. It is very important and I am glad we have a consensus on that and I hope that there will be consequences for who will be found to have told lies to the country. 

Our colleague is not here –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, my brother, the Minister of Defence from the other mountain, hon. Kiyonga, is saying that we should go deeper into allegations on the issue of classified and especially, the jets, which we talked about. I thought he would say, “The price on the international market is x with specifications, this is the value, this is how it went and this is what we are saying and you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi have lied.” I thought that was what he would say. 

Is he in order to come and threaten me, a man from the mountains of the sun, who is circumcised and knows all this? Is he in order to come and threaten me? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we shall take time to ascertain that. However, I think the minister was saying that he is open to scrutiny. He is ready and that if there are lies, which have been told and the scrutiny takes place and there are found to be lies, there should be consequences. I think that is what he was saying. Please, conclude. 

DR KIYONGA: So, this issue of classified is worldwide; it is not just in Uganda. Secondly, in the case of Uganda, there are institutional arrangements to ensure that classified expenditures are audited but in a special way, by the Auditor-General. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi was a Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee and knows that the Auditor-General has a special committee to audit classified and within the Public Accounts Committee, there is also a special subcommittee to handle classifieds. 

So, the mechanism does exist. So, you need to ask the Public Accounts Committee and the Auditor-General because I am not the one who does the auditing. So, that is the first point on the specifics. (Mr Sabiiti rose_) – Ndugu Sabiiti, we are under clear guidance by the Speaker – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is true, I was the Chairman of PAC and it is true the Auditor-General has a special committee, which audits classified expenditure. I am happy, the former Speaker, who is currently the Vice President, is here – this is what happened. The only audited report, which we ever got on classified expenditure, was for the year 2004/05. Is the Minister of Defence procedurally right to say PAC has a report yet it is not true?

THE SPEAKER: Can you clarify what you said?

DR KIYONGA: The point I made in the hearing of everybody is that there is an institutional mechanism for auditing classified accounts. It is not for me to report on behalf of PAC or the Auditor-General. If Parliament feels the Auditor-General has not done his work, he must be questioned but not me. 

So, the second point made by my sister, the MP for Kisoro, I plead guilty on that point, and there are many Members in this House who would raise similar points like the Member from Kisoro. It is true that in some parts of the country, we have negotiated with land owners for us to stay, but we have not paid in good time. That is true and we are doing everything possible to ensure that such payments are done as soon as possible. 

As far as desertion from the army is concerned, I want to assure this House that we are taking very active steps. Some of the soldiers have come back on their own; some have been arrested and others are being searched for. So, I assure the House that this matter will soon be a thing of the past and will no longer be a source of problem. 

As far as Karamoja is concerned, colleagues support us. The issue of Karamoja disarmament is basically a Police issue. Where we have reached, there is no problem for the Police to take over once we facilitate them. I do not think we should leave the army to be tied in disarmament in Karamoja, which in any case has made massive progress.  

I agree with my brother, hon. Cadet, that it would be a big mistake to say that our soldiers who are helping their brothers and sisters in Somalia should return for no reason; I have explained all the issues raised on the Floor. 

So, in the interest of time, I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and I rest my case. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, on the question of classified expenditure, if the Auditor-General has not been reporting, it is our responsibility to tell him because he reports here. So, I would like the Clerk to write to the Auditor-General and confirm whether he has not filed accounts since 2004. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. The Minister of Defence has responded very well on most of the issues. So, I think the Speaker would ask the Minister of Defence to table a copy of the memorandum between the Government of Uganda and AU, and Government of United States on our troops mission abroad so that we can pass it to the Auditor-General or the relevant committee.

Secondly, let the minister also table before Parliament details of specifications on the procurement of this jet so that we can establish the truth and know whether the information at our disposal is false – it is said that the cost of the jet was three times higher. We say this based on other three African countries like Nigeria, which procured a similar jet. But we cannot know whether Government of Uganda made different specifications, unless the minister tables the details in this House so that we can have the facts. So, I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, because the minister says it is not true. 

Finally, the minister should table to this House the total domestic date the Ministry of Defence has acquired. Even before we finish passing this budget, the Ministry of Finance has authorised the Ministry of Defence to borrow money from commercial banks. As we speak now, the total domestic date locally is more than Shs 4 trillion and that is without parliamentary approval. 

THE SPEAKER: But is that for the Minister of Defence or the Ministry of Finance to answer? 

MR EKANYA: There is an item where the Ministry of Defence sought the authority of Ministry of Finance to borrow money from commercial banks before we approved the budget. Therefore, we need the budget. 

THE SPEAKER: Still, I think it is the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance, not the consumer.

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, on the matter of the jets, first of all, they are saying “table it”; but they are not tabling anything themselves. I would suggest that we submit ourselves to the Auditor-General. You bring your evidence and we bring our cost. The Auditor-General, who is empowered to audit classified, will make a judgement on this issue. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, he has not talked about the helicopters, which clashed. 

DR KIYONGA: I am sorry, it had escaped my mind. We are in negotiations with the UN on the issue of compensation for these aircrafts and at the appropriate time, we will let you know the results of these negotiations. (Interjections) You see, what hon. Fungaroo was saying – in the Constitution and the laws, you do not find a specific structure of UPDF. There is a law, which facilitates for creating additional structures or even collapse them. So, hon. Fungaroo was misleading the House to say that structures, which have been created under UPDF are illegal and that they are not constitutional. 

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Defence, Dr Kiyonga, stated that there is a law called the UPDF Act, which defines what the UPDF is and the components of the Army should be; the Air Force and the Land Forces.

The minister knows that in the UPDF Act, there is no provision for Special Forces. Is he, therefore, in order to come here and tell the people a lie when he knows that the law does not create any room for the creation of the Special Forces? Why don’t you bring the law to be amended first? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Is he prohibited from creating other structures in that Act?

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too would like to join others before me in congratulating you, Madam Speaker, upon your election to the presidency of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Association. Actually, what was very impressive for me was the margin of defeat when you floored the other fellow. It was very impressive!

I would like to thank all the other hon. Members of Parliament who accompanied you to South Africa. I think they did a great job. I saw many of them on television, thank you very much.

Let me also thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. Personally, the report they issued has been one of the best I have seen presented before this House on the work of Defence and Internal Affairs. Their recommendations and observations were spot on and I really want to thank them for a very commendable job.

The committee went further to make suggestions to us in the sector; additional measures we should take, for example, asking us to continue monitoring aliens who we have allowed to come into the country. This is something we need to intensify and I welcome that recommendation.

There is also the recommendation, that we should establish ICT linkages with our borders using the PISCE system. I think funds permitting, we will try to follow this one up.

Regarding the express concern about the welfare of our service personnel in Police and Prisons, obviously, this is a very good gesture and very indicative of the plight we face with these prisons officers and policemen who are living in deplorable conditions.

What the report tells us as a whole regarding the Ministry of Internal Affairs headquarters Vote, the Directorate of Immigration Citizens Control, the Police Vote and Prisons Vote is that we have always been getting inadequate funding and if you get inadequate funding, you are not likely to deliver as expected and this is what we have been going through. Give us the resources and we will do all that is required to deliver. Take the Police for example. Out of a budget of almost Shs 600 billion, they have got a half and you expect the Police to perform? It is not possible.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Minister, from the Ministry of Internal Affairs budget, which was appropriated by this Parliament, Shs 107 million was sent back to the Consolidated Fund. From Prisons, Shs 2.4 billion was sent back to the Consolidated Fund. When we know that prisoners are living in terrible conditions, why was this money sent back and you are now asking for more money?

MR BABA: The chairperson, in her presentation and during deliberations before the committee, it was stated that all that was returned was due to salary arrears, which were availed late and they were now paid in July. That is why these returns came about. Please, go back and read those reports or consult the chairperson of the committee.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, it is very clear that Prisons sent back Shs 2.4 billion. It is in this report and Shs 107 million from Internal Affairs went back.

MR BABA: It is to do with salaries - (Mr Wamanga-Wamai rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wamai, please, take your seat.

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, let me also thank hon. Hussein Kyanjo, the shadow Minister in charge of Internal Affairs. Hon. Kyanjo, as expected and as usual, offered very constructive observations, which I welcome. This is to do with the need to computerise the Police and he is absolutely right. 

Regarding the need to streamline our training and promotion, I could not agree more. I also agree with him that we should implement the Police Private/Public Partnership project when the Bill has been passed. So, really the onus is on this House to pass that Bill as soon as possible so that all the other sectors in Government can utilise the provisions of that Bill. Therefore, you are absolutely right and I welcome your proposals.

Hon. Members raised issues of gender mainstreaming into our policy framework as far as women ailments are concerned. Obviously, at the moment, what we have focused on is availing separate wards for women inmates and that is the best we can do. The other elements will have to come on slowly, depending on availability of resources.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you suggesting the sanitary towels will come later?

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, you do not expect a prisons department to offer sanitary services. We do not have the budget.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, your predecessor came here in the Eighth Parliament and pledged, on the Floor of this House, that they would provide sanitary towels for the women. We are aware that you provide razor blades for the men. Why do you afford razor blades for the men and you cannot afford sanitary towels for the women? What do you want them to do?

MR BABA: I am informed that in some prisons, they do provide, maybe not in all of them. Maybe, we should now roll it out to all of them. I will have to check this as I do not have that information but it is an important point that we should look into and especially the issue of gender mainstreaming in all the activities of the prisons department as far as women inmates are concerned. That includes women who go there with children. Some of these women are imprisoned when they still have very young children whom they have to look after. We are trying our best to provide for these children since they have to be with their mothers until such a time as when they are old enough to be taken care of by other relatives.

The ID project –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from the hon. Minister because he seems to be too general and in a hurry. The first clarification I want to get from him is, what is it that you are providing to the children? You cannot come to this House and say, “We are providing.” What are you providing? Because the issue raised here is that these children go to prison and the question was, “Are they prisoners?” If they are not prisoners and you say you are providing, what are you providing?

Secondly, you were also too general on the sanitary pads. Initially, you had stated very clearly that actually, you do not have a budget. When the Speaker raised the issue that the matter was brought here earlier on, you shifted your goal posts and said that in some places, sanitary pads are given out and you will now roll them out. 

Which one should we believe - the earlier information that you do not have a budget or the later statement that you are now going to roll it out? And if you are rolling it out, where are you rolling it out because you say in some places, there are sanitary pads? Can you name those places where the sanitary pads are being provided and where you are going to roll out the programme since you do not have a budget because this is what you have just said? Where did you get money to buy those other sanitary pads that you now want to roll out?

MR BABA: Obviously, the budget is not enough to roll out to all prisons – (Interruption)

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. As a committee, we carried out some field visits and it is very true that in some prisons, sanitary pads are being supplied. I can quote the example of Nakasongola, Masindi and Luzira prisons.  However, due to budgetary constraints, Government of Uganda is giving very few sanitary pads. So, they are being supported by NGOs. The committee recommended to the Ministry of Internal Affairs that let this be cascaded to all the prisons that we have in Uganda.

Secondly, if I can give information on children in prisons – those children are treated to special meals and education to a certain level. (Interjections) I am just giving information, hon. colleagues, basing on what we gathered from the field –(Interruption)

MS ABIA BAKO: Madam Speaker, it is not my habit to raise points of order here. We are talking about a very pertinent issue. These are sanitary towels for women and in all prisons, there was information to the Minister of Internal Affairs about the prevalence of Hepatitis B. This is one ferocious disease and we know one of the ways to get it. And here are women in these congested prisons - in this House, it was clearly put to the Minister of Internal Affairs that there must be provision for sanitary towels for these ladies.

But in the budget that we just scrutinised, Madam Speaker, there is no reflection on the provision of sanitary pads for the women. But here is the chairperson of the committee trying to raise the picture. She would have demanded for sanitary towels when she was doing the field visits. Is she, therefore, in order to defend and even suggest that Government of Uganda should be facilitated by NGOs? Is she in order to do so moreover as a woman who goes through the menstruation cycle?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think if you have not been incarcerated, you will not know the deprivation of not being able to get the things you need, not once but for a long time. So, the question of sanitary towels is important; it is necessity.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I am a medical doctor by training. The issue of sanitary pads in prisons where some have been given while others have not - but also that those that have, got them from NGOs and not from Government – those prisoners in prisons without these pads will be exposed to a variety of infections including what hon. Christine Abia is talking about.

This is matter of life and death. I want to move a motion that let Parliament refuse to even pass the Budget of Ministry of Internal Affairs, if they cannot give the women in prisons sanitary pads. These are very cheap things. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I second that motion. We need to get the ministry and the chairperson together with all the members of that committee to go back and find out from within the expenditure that is wasteful and reallocate it to the sanitary towels item. I would like to inform the chairperson of the committee, who is also a lady, that the matter of sanitary pads is very important. 

Like the Speaker has said, if you are a woman and you are in prison, you cannot engage in any income generating activity nor can you look for any other cloth within your home to use as a sanitary provisional towel to facilitate you in that aspect. I think we all understand that. So, I wish to request the chairperson of the committee and the responsible minister to identify for us areas where they can reduce on the budget for this; they should do it now. If not, we give you the time within which you can come back to us with a provision of how many Government prisons are there and how many women, approximately, are in prisons and the budget line. I beg to support the motion. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is people who have been in the prisons who will understand that. Rt Hon. Gen. Moses Ali knows what I am saying. I am sure that even my brother hon. Rukutana knows what I am talking about.

Anyway, what I want to say is; I wish calamity fell and some of these female frontbench ministers are taken to Luzira for 30 days so that they can go through the experiences we are talking about. The women in prisons usually have no income. They are just there. They have to go through that period and so, what do you expect them to use? Possibly grass? That is not being fair. This does not need any debate. Let us ask the responsible minister to go out with the chairperson of the committee and come back with a report for us to appropriate money for this urgent matter.

If they cannot provide sanitary towels for women, how about those prisoners who suffer from diarrhoea? I have not seen any female frontbench members get concerned. Maybe, they do not know what we are talking about.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what do you say? You know your predecessor, hon. Matia Kasaija one time came to the Floor of this House and pledged that he was going to provide money for that in the first session.

MR BABA: As I said, Madam Speaker, the issue of female inmates – first we have been focusing on their wards to have appropriate wards constructed for them. And secondly, we are committed to roll out this issue of sanitary pads and now that it has come to this height, I take it from now that we will work out modalities with the prisons authorities to make sure every woman inmate is availed with sanitary pads from today onwards. I can offer that commitment, Madam Speaker. From today onwards, we will undertake to do that.
As for the children, I want to say that we are providing them with meals at least – (Interruption)

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We all agree that there is a motion on the Floor, duly seconded, and the process was duly followed. The minister honestly knows that what we are talking about is of paramount importance to all of us. All of us here, in one way or another, have a female relative who is an inmate. This level of deprivation cannot be allowed to continue. We want the minister to commit himself. Saying that he is going to take it on from now onwards is not enough. What we want from the minister right now is to make a proposal on the Floor on this matter and then we see where you are going to get that budget. 

Madam Speaker, I urge that the budget of the Ministry of Internal Affairs be stayed until we get a proper pronouncement on this particular issue of the sanitation facilities for the women right from the police cells. Because of inefficiency, there are cases of women who stay in police cells for far much longer than the stated mandatory period. So, you should show cause both at the police cells and at the prisons where these women are incarcerated. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very important matter. I am even shocked that it looks like some members of the Executive do not know how serious this matter is. 

Going by what we have previously experienced in this House, a similar statement was made here and nothing was done and no provision was made. It simply meant that there was no follow-up of this matter financially. We are very lucky that this time round, it is coming when we are actually dealing with matters of appropriation. It is okay that the minister and the chair have said they are committed, but a commitment which is not accompanied by finances is no commitment at all. 

Now that they are committed, can’t the minister go back and come back tomorrow, with his chairperson who understands how horrible it is to bleed and pick grass to try to use it. That is what these inmates do; they pick leaves when they are going to those gardens where they dig from morning to evening, and that is what they pack and use as sanitary towels. Now that the chair understands how horrible it would be, and the minister is very sympathetic, can’t they go and come back tomorrow with a figure, which we will all be glad to support them on, so that our ladies, even when they are in season, at least have some form of decency? Otherwise, Madam Speaker, we will have to discuss this matter the next financial year again if we leave it at only at statement level, if we go only by that statement. 

Moreover, chairperson, the sanitary towels you saw are donated and you do not know when the next donation will be made. I personally participated in a visit to Luzira where we had to buy Always and carry it to the women’s wing of Luzira. So, I know it comes in as donations; it is not from the taxpayers’ money. 

Madam Speaker, I beg you to let the minister and the chair go and come back with a budget provision, which we will adopt as a House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have been approving the reports without the figures because we are waiting for the Committee on Budget to get back to us on the corrigenda. So, it is important that we give you time between now and the time the corrigenda comes back because that is when we shall approve the figures so that we deal with the issue. Really, it is very important. 

MR JAMES BABA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you.

MR JAMES BABA: On the issue of the national identity cards, this matter has been before the House since the Eighth Parliament, and the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs deliberated on it. I even recall you set up a special committee to look into that project and a report was presented here and recommendations were made. However, the long and short of it is that we have now embarked on serious implementation of this project. 

We had started with a pilot project. We said we would use the data that was collected during preparations for the 2011 elections - 5.5 million, which was collected by the Electoral Commission - and we begin issuing national IDs to Ugandans. We had set up an interim pilot centre at Entebbe using some of the equipment that was bought. However, the problem was the integrity of the data that we got; it was not well gathered. The Electoral Commission gathered data for their purposes but for us, we want data where there are fingerprints, –the biometrics - eye pupils, faces and most of these were missing. So, we have said we shall stop this pilot. We are now going to go under full registration of all Ugandans. 

We are working together with the Electoral Commission again, the Uganda Bureau of Registration Services and the census people because all of them are targeting the same population for registration. Under a multi-sectoral taskforce, a programme has been worked out. In the next two or three months, we are going to start mass registration and by the end of the year, we shall have begun issuing the national IDs and this is to be completed by 2015. That is the timetable we have set ourselves and that is what we are going to do. 

I beg you, honourable members, to give us this opportunity. We are trying our best so that Ugandans can get IDs based on data that is well verified, that they are citizens of this country through this mass registration.

On the issue of issuing visas at the airports, the reason we are issuing some visas at the airports is because we do not have embassies all around the world. The ideal would be that people who want to come here go to our embassies and get visas from there before they come. However, because we do not have representation globally, even with consular offices around the world, the provision was made that where we do not have embassies, the people coming here will be availed these visas at the airport. Unfortunately, it is being abused. Everybody comes here –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Proceed. 

MR JAMES BABA: So, this is something we have to deal with at the moment until we find a better way of issuing these visas. 

On the issue of police housing and whether there is a policy; of course, hon. Nsubuga, all this amounts to money - the budget process. The budget we have can only cater for a few police stations and yet we all want police stations in all the sub-counties and districts. So, we try to get from the private sector to accommodate us. Some of you have even offered us land. Some of you have even offered us premises to house the Police. We even have arrears in payments for the rent. This is a budgetary issue but we have to have Police representation at the district, at the sub-counties and so on. 

Madam Speaker, you were right about the solar for lighting our barracks. If we had the money, that would be the best thing to do. It is a good proposal and we will look into it. 

About the passport printing machine in Washington, this has been brought to our attention and the procurement department is looking into it so that Washington can be availed a new machine for issuing passports to Ugandans in the US. For the information of honourable members, there are some missions which the Government has allowed to issue passports to Ugandans, given the large numbers of Ugandans in those countries. Washington is one them, London is another and then South Africa. Where the machine has broken down, obviously it needs to be replaced. 

The Leader of the Opposition raised the issue of infrastructure. He is absolutely right; the infrastructure that was built in the 1960’s or earlier is definitely inadequate. One by one, we are trying to expand them, modernise them but again, this is budget limitation. We cannot do much until we avail the resources required to improve infrastructure.

As for the food, actually the food grown by the prisons department in Namalu, Ibuga, Kasese, only caters for 60 percent of food requirements in the prisons. The food is not enough. So, inevitably, more food has to be bought from outside. If the quality is not good, that is a different matter, but the food they produce is not enough and it can only meet 60 percent of the requirements. The food they produce is distributed to all the prisons in the country. The food produced in Moroto or Kasese or Adjumani is sent to other prisons where it is not possible to grow food, and that only caters for 60 percent. The other 40 per cent has got to be bought. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think the prisons service is the only institution with enough land to produce food. The argument I am putting up, and I want the minister to understand, is that they produce very good food like maize and beans but instead of giving these prisoners, it is sold out and they get poor quality for the prisoners. 

Whoever has visited Luzira will agree with us that this is what is happening. Most of the prisoners eat one meal in 24 hours. This is being unfair to these people, despite the fact they could have committed crimes or they could be there wrongly; as I said, my brother hon. Kutesa could be there wrongly.

MR  JAMES BABA: On the issue of NTRs, I agree we could have a forensic audit on the NTR collections although I do not think that is much. From the prison labour that is used, some of the money is meant to be paid to the prisoners and this money is paid to them after they have served their term. When they are leaving, that is when they are paid the money. That money is there and it can be audited and investigated, but every prisoner who offers labour outside is entitled to some payment and it is in the policy.

Also, I would like to make an appeal because the Prisons Service has one of the biggest capacities of any Government institution. They have very large pieces of land, they have the labour but they do not have the capital to develop all these available pieces of land. Otherwise, they would be able to meet all their food requirements and even in addition, they would be able to provide quality seeds for this country in terms of planting materials especially cereals such as beans and maize. The Prisons department is very capable of producing these but we have been asking for capitalisation, tractors and harvesters. In all budget processes, it has remained an unfunded priority. 

I would like to thank the honourable members for their contributions and the comments they have made. Once again, I intend to deal with the issue of sanitary pads for the women inmates in prison.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs is noted. We shall complete it when the corrigenda comes and also after the minister has given us his strategy for supplying sanitary towels.

Honourable members, we had handled the report on foreign affairs. The debate had been concluded but there were areas, which were not satisfactory, which needed the minister’s explanation.

3.31
THE MINISTER FOR FORIEGN AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Kutesa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you rightly said, on 27th August, the Committee on Foreign Affairs presented a report to the House on my ministry’s policy statement for this financial year. Unfortunately, my colleagues and I were all away. I was in Mombasa attending a tripartite summit; my minister of state, hon. Oryem, was in Netherlands; and hon. Kiyingi was sent as a special envoy to Egypt. So, we were not able to answer some of the questions.

Our members of staff were present and they were able to note those areas that remained unanswered. I am pleased to handle those few areas, which were: missions’ properties abroad, reported harassment of Ugandans in South Sudan, reporting of heads of missions, foreign service allowance and education allowance, and why the ministry has been agitating, and the committee has been supporting,for its movement from the administration sector to economic sector.

I am sure many honourable members have travelled abroad and they have seen the kind of conditions some of our properties are in. We have appealed many times to be given resources to repair them. I had even agreed that we could find ways in which we could develop and build to own them rather than keep paying rent, but money has not been forthcoming. The only money that we have received is for the properties we have renovated. 

Renovations have been completed on the chanceries of New York, London, Paris and Copenhagen. Renovations have been completed on official residences –(Interruption).

MRS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was in New York and I returned this week; I visited our embassy in New York and found that the building was under renovation. All the doors at the ground level had been removed and it was clear that work had just begun. Is it in order, therefore, for the minister to stand here and tell this House that work has been completed whereas work there has just begun?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you tell us what the status is? Are you starting or you have completed?

MR KUTESA: Madam Speaker, it appears to me that the hon. Nambooze stopped at the gate of the building. (Laughter) The renovations have been completed. Renovation on residences has been finished in New York, - and you can go there again - London, Abuja, Copenhagen, Dar es Salaam, Cairo and Washington DC.

Madam Speaker, there are properties where civil works and procurements have commenced. The construction of a chancery in Kigali has commenced. Procurement of contract for renovations for the official residence in Pretoria, the chancery in Kinshasa and the construction of a chancery in Juba will be completed by end of September 2013.

Let me take this opportunity to inform the House on this. Earlier on, when we were discussing the issue of harassments of Ugandans in Sudan, mention was made about a market that we are supposed to build in South Sudan. It is true; originally, we were supposed to build a market but with the approval – (Members rose_) - I will give you –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let him first finish.

MR KUTESA: I will give you way –(Interjections)- I am giving you a status report of properties where we have finished renovation of chanceries, where we have finished renovation of residences, where we are procuring and constructing –(Mr Wafula-Oguttu rose_) Let me finish this statement and I will come to you and give way. Please, hon. Wafula-Oguttu, I will give way.  

I was mentioning that when I was informing the House about harassment of Ugandans in South Sudan, mention was made of a market that was supposed to be built in Juba. We came to this House subsequently, after they had approved money to build a market, and told them that we were not getting the land title in Juba because we had just got a lease without a title. With the approval of this House, it was then agreed that we should build a chancery rather than a market –(Interjections)-Yes, with the approval of this House, with the authority of Parliament. So, we are now building a chancery and not a market and that is how the money was switched from the market to a chancery – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I remember that it was in I think 2006/2007 – (Interjections) -Yes. The chief culprit who supported that issue was hon. Geoffrey Ekanya. When we objected to it, I recall at the time of passing the budget when we said that we remove the money, the Minister for Foreign Affairs stood and said, “the one-third that you gave us has already been committed on the market so you cannot remove the money”. I recall all this because I was here. 

When we were saying that we remove the Shs 1.4 billion from the budget because we cannot build a market in a foreign country, the Minister for Foreign Affairs said that the one-third that we gave them was already spent on the market and they could not really accept this. Now, you are coming and saying that we came back and changed! I wish I had come with the Hansard when you said that one-third had been spent. Now, when did you change from the market of the one-third expenditure and come to the chancery?

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Minister for Foreign Affairs to come and tell lies? These lies are the ones that I am talking about, which are going to be very dangerous for us in the future.

THE SPEAKER: I am trying to remember whether we actually did that. I think that we may have to check. I do not recall that we switched. I think we have to check the Hansard.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Minister. I notice that we do not seem to agree with some of the things that the minister is presenting to us, and I will still go back to New York.

Hon. Betty Nambooze said that she just came from New York this week. She says that she was at Uganda House, which is the chancery I hope. She says the ground floor has no doors and is under renovation but the minister has said on the Hansard that the work has been completed. I would like you to clarify; are we talking about the same thing with hon. Nambooze?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, I feel terrible that I really convinced this House and we appropriated money for a market in South Sudan. I did this because of what I witnessed Ugandans going through - the Kenyan government builds warehouses and all the facilities for Kenya. We approved this money, and I have been following up this matter with Maj. Busho who is our representative in that place. 

The information I got is that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs did not transfer the money but it was diverted. It is surprising that the minister is saying that this House is the one that gave the authority. I have been putting pressure, and I can tell you that I am a neighbour to the Ugandan representative to South Sudan – the house opposite mine - in Buziga. I have been following up this matter every time we talk. So, maybe the minister should table the evidence that this House diverted the money to building the chancery.

THE SPEAKER: Please respond, honourable minister, and conclude.

MR KUTESA: Thank you. This is a question of fact; it was either transferred or I am lying. We shall table that evidence.

Madam Speaker, as I said, the properties where we are procuring to repair residences are Pretoria, the chancery in Kinshasa and the construction of the chancery in Juba. We are planning in 2013/2014to renovate the official residences in Addis Ababa, Nairobi and Ottawa and the chanceries in Pretoria, Dar es Salaam, Nairobi, Paris, Cairo and Brussels.

We have had an understanding now with the Committee on Budget, the chairman of the Committee on Budget and the Ministry of Finance. From now going forward, in order to be able to find resources to renovate and build our properties, the NTR which has been received and taken into the Consolidated Fund will be put on a special purpose account for us to be able to use it to renovate our foreign properties abroad or to build and buy others. This is an undertaking that we have welcomed.

Over the years, we would have liked to renovate these properties, buy new ones and build on the sites that we have been given but we have always lacked money. However, an agreement has now been struck between the budget committee of Parliament and the Ministry of Finance that the NTR that we collect through issuing visas and whatever will now be put on a dedicated account and used for this activity.

The other issue that was raised when I was not here was the harassment of citizens in southern Sudan. I had referred to this earlier in the morning and I had told the House –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank hon. Sam Kutesa for allowing this clarification. You sort of jumped the issue of new buildings and plots to be acquired in the other financial year. 

I would like to seek clarification from you, minister. Last November, the Public Accounts Committee had a delegation that went to Beijing and Guangzhou and we discovered that all our neighbouring countries, including even the most recently stabilised countries like Rwanda, have got very prime land that they acquired from the Government of China. For us as a country, when we tried to inquire through our ministry we were told that by the time we were shown this land, Uganda had no money to pay for that land. 

Now you are here telling us that you plan to acquire. Is there anything down in writing from the Government of China to show that they are still going to leave that plot for Uganda, as if Uganda is the only country that is in need of that plot, for you to project that in the next financial year, you are going to acquire that land? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please respond and conclude. 

MR KUTESA: Thank you very much for raising that concern. If I may respond – (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a long debate on these issues. We have other reports to handle.

MR KUTESA: Can I continue? I want to thank the honourable member for bringing up the issue. Precisely; we have been missing out on very prime properties because when we come seeking for resources, the resources are not available. They are always called unfunded priorities, and eventually we lose prime plots. However, we have got another plot in Beijing and in Washington, which we want to develop with NTR. We have other plots in Guangzhou, Addis Ababa and Riyadh, which we want to develop with NTR in the three years to come. 

It is not exactly the same plot that we had before because that one went; we did not buy it because we asked for money but the money was not there. So we did not buy it but we have identified another one, which we want to use NTR to purchase –(Mr Nsubuga rose_)- Hon. Nsubuga, you seem to be dying; you have your time. 

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: You are my former Sectary-General, so you should give way. Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Foreign Affairs. He talked about the new buildings and plots to be acquired; in Riyadh, the plot I am talking about was given to Uganda during Idi Amin’s days. It has been lying there and you are talking about acquiring it. What do you mean? I was in Riyadh two years ago and Aziz Kasujja was the Ambassador then; we were shown that plot of land, which was given to us during Amin’s time, undeveloped up to today. Now you are talking about acquiring; what exactly do you mean by that?

MR KUTESA: Honourable member, the point I am making is that there are many plots that have been offered to us in the past and we have failed to pay for them in time because of lack of resources. So we look for other plots and that is what we acquire. That is the point I am making. If you give us resources today, we can pay for those plots and go ahead. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to finish. Honourable minister, please, conclude.

MR KUTESA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will move to the next issue, which is the harassment of Ugandans in southern Sudan. I had submitted on this matter before, and indeed I did tell this House that it was the President of Uganda who intervened with the President of South Sudan. An order had been made that Ugandans should not be doing what they call “informal business”. 

Hon. Reagan Okumu did ask for, and I submitted to the House, the numbers of Ugandans who were there, those who may have come back and those who have not. Unfortunately, I will not say it is a comprehensive list because not all Ugandans that go to South Sudan or any other country for that matter register with our missions. For those who we know, I will tell you the numbers who have come back or those who have not.

I want to inform the House that actually, this exercise was fairly sordid. The report I have from my mission, and I will cite a few examples for you, honourable members, shows that there was a lot of harassment of Ugandans. That is why we are seeking a formal meeting with the Government of South Sudan to talk about compensation. 

I will give you a few examples: On 19th August, a boda boda cyclist, Abenaitwe Asuman, on tel. no. 0921357612 was tortured and his motorcycle, reg. No. CE64657M was taken. When he reached the police headquarters to report, he was asked to pay 700,000 Sudanese pounds. On the same day, Boaz Ahimbisibwe, who was riding back home to Uganda on motorcycle No. C4837A, following the ministerial orders, was stopped when approaching Nimule and his motorcycle taken from him. On the same day, Tukakwatanisa, who was operating from Mariekiya stage, was attacked and his motorcycle was taken. The same day, Abbas John was also tortured and his motorcycle taken and on 20th August, another cyclist, Moses Kazibwe’s motorcycle was also taken. 

THESPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you handled that issue in the morning.

MR KUTESA: Yes, I handled this issue in the morning but the point I am making to the House, and the reason I am citing these cases, is that we have comprehensively listed the abuses and the losses of Ugandans that have been reported to us and we are taking it up with the Government of South Sudan to claim compensation. 

The other issue that was raised in our absence when the report was approved was about the late reporting of ambassadors to their missions. It is true that there was a delay in ambassadors reporting to their missions, and this was largely because there were no funds and the appointments were made in the middle of the financial year. However, I am happy to report to the House that as we speak, Ambassador Abraham Ismat, who had not reported then, has now reported to our mission in Khartoum. There is still Mr KintuNyago, the Deputy Government Representative, who will be going to New York but – (Interjections) – hon. Nambooze, are you excited about your recent trip to New York? (Laughter)

MRS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Madam Speaker, when you send out Members of Parliament to do some work in the Diaspora, the expectation is that those people will come back with reports and the reports are supposed to enrich debate here. Is the Minister of Foreign Affairs in order to insinuate that I am so excited about my travel, when I have been there many times before and when I am enriching debate here by giving information about what I have seen? 

He has in fact failed to answer issues of clarification on whether the consulate is under renovation or has been completed. He is trying to hide information from this Parliament. The position or the vacancy he is talking about has already been taken by a one Muhumuza and Mr Kintu Nyago has no job to report to. Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, at least, the Parliament Appointment Committee has not met a one Muhumuza. The person we cleared was Mr Kintu Nyago and that is what I know. So, I do not know about a one Muhumuza. 

MR KUTESA: Madam Speaker, just for clarity’s sake and if we bring down the excitement – the facts are very simple. There is an officer called Mr Muhumuza. That officer has acquired the Rank – just move ahead on this, Madam Speaker, there is an officer called Muhumuza who has been promoted to Grade One officer, which is ambassadorial work. But that does not make him the deputy ambassador. The Deputy Ambassador is Mr Kintu Nyago who will be proceeding to New York to take his position.

The other mission that we have is Kuala Lumpur. I want to report that we have not got resources to open a mission in this country. In the circumstances, there is someone who has been appointed, Ambassador Mubiru, who has not taken his place yet. In this budget, we have received Shs 1.7 billion and we will open our mission in Mogadishu and the ambassador will take his place.

The other issue that was raised was about foreign service and education allowances. I would like to say that for the education allowances, we have been arguing with the Ministry of Finance so that Foreign Service officers could be given their allowances. That negotiation is still going on; we have not received that money yet. We also have an agreement –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know I have other reports. Please, conclude. We had a lengthy debate on this matter.

MR KUTESA: Okay, Madam Speaker. The other issue is about the foreign service allowance because of inflation. Our agreement had been that every two years, we would review foreign service allowances so that they are in tandem with the inflation rate. We are still negotiating with the Ministries of Finance and the Ministry of Public Service on that matter.

The second last issue was about moving from administration to the economic sector? I want to say, this is because of the nature of our work. We promote regional and international peace and security. We promote trade and tourism and attract investment, in addition to facilitating technology transfer. We also mobilise resources; for example, we have been part of the mobilization of €452 million for the ADF 11 to be replenished.

We, therefore, think that we are a resource gathering ministry and so, we should be moved from administration where you find RDCs and presidential advisors. We think that this ministry should be put in a different sector.

There was another issue raised on whether we have reached an agreement with the United States about spouses being employed. I am happy to say that we already agreed with the United States; we exchanged the last minutes. So, spouses of our officers in the United States can now get employed there just like the spouses of the American officials can also work in Uganda.

Lastly, let me talk about the issue of trafficking of women and children. These concerns were heightened recently by reports from Malaysia, Kuwait, Qatar and even India. We are working with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. This is really in accordance with the Anti-Human Trafficking Act of 2009, which is under the mandate of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. However, we are members of this taskforce and we are sitting together to find ways of making sure we follow up on where our Ugandans have gone. 

The problem is that when some of those people get there, they do not report to our missions. It is a very underhand job. The traffickers and those who are trafficked do not report to our respective missions and so we do not get to know them. When we get to know them later, what we do is to intervene with the host governments to see what can be done for us.

Madam Speaker, those were few issues that were raised. I wish to conclude by expressing my appreciation to the Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs for the useful recommendations that they made in their report. I hope that when they are adopted, they will be implemented. Some of the shortcomings in the ministry are not due to lack of good recommendations from the committee; they are as a result of the non-availability of resources to implement them. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: What is remaining is the funding, which will come when we bring the corrigenda. 

Now, please join me in welcoming children and teachers of Kalongo Girls Primary School in Agago. They are represented by hon. Amos Okot and hon. Judith Franca Akello. (Applause) You are welcome.
Honourable members, I want to propose that we suspend the House for one hour so that the Hansard team can also rest and have some lunch. I want to ask the chairpersons who are coming to present their reports to present just the executive summaries because we have spent two hours listening to a report. So, the remaining ones should only present executive summaries. Maybe let me ask the minister to present the corrigenda before we suspend for an hour.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to lay on the Table Corrigenda No. 2 for the financial year 2013/14 budget, to enable the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to be able to implement the Youth Livelihood Programme. That money will be transferred from the Ministry of Finance. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance to study and report back to this House. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we have passed the report and I have no objections to that. However, I am a member of the Appointments Committee and we approved Ambassador Mubiru, but on page 2 the minister says this is an unfunded activity. So, is the Appointments Committee just there to approve people to earn salaries that are not even accounted for? Is it really right that we can pass a budget with such an unfunded activity yet we already approved the ambassador?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will deal with the monies when the corrigenda come. We have only been approving the reports without the funding; the recurrent and development budgets will come after the Budget Committee has reported. I had made a mistake to send that corrigenda to the Committee on Finance. I am now sending it to the Committee on Budget. 

The House is suspended for one hour. We return at 5 O’clock.

(The House was suspended at 4.05 p.m.)

(On resumption at 5.09 p.m., the Speaker presiding_) 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/14  

5.10
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, I also would like to take this opportunity to thank and congratulate you for the position you just attained while in South Africa. On behalf of my family and on behalf of the Committee of Presidential Affairs, I congratulate you. I know I represent the young people of Eastern Uganda and so on their behalf, I congratulate you.

Last week, I made a presentation up to page 3 of the report. I want to start at the Office of the President. For those who have copies of this, I implore you to turn to page 3. I am only going to read out the executive summary. 

Vote 001 - Office of the President

Observations and Recommendations

1. 	The committee observed that the accumulated arrears for ISO personnel amount to Shs 12.7 billion. In addition, in July 2012, the President pledged Shs 0.80 billion as a retirement package for the RDCs and deputy RDCs who were retired last financial year. However, the above two items have not been provided for in the current budget.

	The non-payment of the ISO arrears can negatively affect the performance and morale of ISO personnel, hence compromising national security. The committee, therefore, recommends that Government considers the possibility of clearing these areas in the medium term. This will help in curbing the legal suits brought against Government. The Office of the President should rationalise its budget to cater for the Presidential pledge to retire the RDCs and deputy RDCs.

2. 	The committee further observed the poor state of the RDCs’ offices. They are dilapidated and pose a health risk to the occupants. Though Government has embarked on constructing new offices, so far the ones built have been poorly constructed and the quality leaves a lot to be desired.

	The committee recommends that the Office of the President endeavours to fast-track the rehabilitation and construction of RDCs offices countrywide, and to strengthen the monitoring unit to enable frequent inspection of contracts underway and services being provided. Further, the committee recommends the blacklisting and publishing of those companies that do not adhere to the set standards.

3. 	The committee observed that the promotion of patriotism leaves a lot to be desired. Some activities implemented are not harmonised with those of other departments of Government. Promotion of ethical values and anti-corruption strategies are being duplicated between patriotism clubs and the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity. Besides, the scope in which patriotism is being promoted is not defined.

	The committee recommends that the President should harmonise and consolidate the activities of patriotism clubs together with those of the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity to avoid duplication and redundancy of scarce resources. The committee further recommends that Shs 850 million be internally reallocated from patriotism clubs to the Directorate of Economic Monitoring, the Media Centre and political mobilisation.

Vote 002 – State House

Observations and recommendations

1. 	The committee noted that the Presidential Scholarship Fund of Shs 30 billion had been shifted to Ministry of Education and Sports in the financial year 2012/13 and reverted to State House in the current financial year, 2013/14. The committee was informed that that decision was arrived at after the President was accosted by many beneficiaries claiming they were not getting satisfactory services under the Ministry of Education and Sports, and the bureaucracies involved were lengthy and tedious.

	The committee recommends that the scholarship fund be streamlined to warrant transparency and be rolled out to capture all regions in the country. 

2. 	The committee appreciated the presidential initiative of implementing model villages as one of the ways to eradicate poverty through the Poverty Alleviation Project (PAP). However, the committee observed that the villages were more concentrated around the central, western and eastern regions of Uganda with only one identified in the northern region of Uganda, (Mucwiny, Kitgum District) and there was none in the West Nile region. The committee further noted that the criteria used for selection and accessibility of funds under PAP was wanting. 

	The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should adopt more comprehensive selection criteria that will cover all regions of the country and a scientific method of funds disbursement that will ensure equitable allocation of resources.

	The committee further recommends that Government fast-tracks the rolling out of model villages and other related presidential initiatives like the millennium villages, to cover all districts and regions of the country that have not been selected or identified for this programme. This is due to the fact that high poverty levels seem to be prevalent in most districts.

Vote 107 - Uganda AIDS Commission

Observations and Recommendations

The committee noted that as of 31 May 2013, the development budget performed by 51 per cent due to the fact that the Ministry of Finance did not release any development budget funds in the fourth quarter. This negatively impacted on the planned output and ultimate performance.

The committee recommends and urges the Ministry of Finance to always endeavour to release funds in time and as approved. Where there are unexpected delays or non-releases, they should communicate to the affected institutions in time to allow for the modification of the available budget.

The committee also urges Government to always endeavour to adequately fund the Uganda AIDS Commission if it is to effectively achieve its goals. Further, the committee recommends that Government urgently endeavours to clear the wage bill component under the unfunded priorities to cater for staff that had been prior recruited and other sectoral arrears.

Vote 112 – Ethics and Integrity

Observations and Recommendations

The committee noted with concern the rampant corruption countrywide amongst both government officials and political leaders. There is, therefore, an urgent need for the enactment of stringent laws to punish the perpetrators and further lead to the recovery of proceeds from the crime.

The committee hence observed that though for the past two financial years the directorate continued to budget for the development of two key laws, namely, the proceeds of the corruption law and the quintum law, their formulation is yet to be finalised. The committee recommends that the directorate fast-tracks the formulation of the two anti-corruption laws as this will go a long way in the fight against corruption and the recovery of government resources.

The committee observed that workshops and seminars will amount to Shs 1.5 billion, which is 36 per cent of the total recurrent budget of Shs 4.17 billion of the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity. This will cater for the advocacy, capacity building and training in local government schools, teacher training colleges and the community. This is in addition to making the anti-corruption legislations and establishing district integrity promotion fora in all districts as a platform for carrying out awareness and sensitisation of issues of ethics and integrity. 

However, the impact of the role of the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity still leaves a lot to be felt, given the highly deteriorating moral standards in the society.

The committee further notes the absence of guidelines stating the country’s generally agreed upon moral standards and values. The committee, therefore, recommends that the directorate develops national guidelines that will encompass the country’s agreed position, agreed moral standards and values.

The committee further observed that the outputs that were funded in financial year 2012/13 are featured again yet they should have phased out. Such outputs include, review of the Leadership Code, development of the proceeds of corruption laws and the quintum law etc. Most of the budget lines have significantly increased in the funding with no respective increase in the planned outputs.

The committee recommends that Shs 350 million be re-allocated to the Office of the President (Directorate of Economic Monitoring), to strengthen the economic monitoring function of Government.
                 
Vote 159 - External Security Organisation (ESO)  

Observations and recommendations

The committee observed that ESO has accumulated leave arrears worth Shs 1.87 billion between 1987 to 2002 and classified arrears worth Shs 1.20 billion respectively, and yet no budget has been allocated to clear them.

The committee recommends that Government develops a comprehensive plan to clear the various staff arrears accumulated by the External Security Organisation before they become unmanageable and consequently pose a security threat to the country.  

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) Observations and recommendations

1. 	The committee observed that the OPM lacks a strategic plan to guide the institution towards performance and realisation of its statutory mandate. 

	The committee, therefore, recommends and urges Office of the Prime Minister to urgently develop a strategic plan that will guide planning and resource allocation to all its planned activities.

2. 	The committee observed that the planned outputs for Teso Region lack the ability to create the requisite impact in accordance with the needs of the affected people. 

	The committee recommends that a needs assessment, in consultation with the various stakeholders, be conducted prior to planning in order to effectively strategise for better service delivery and minimise resource mismanagement through misconceptions by the affected stakeholders.

3. 	The committee noted with concern the slow response towards disaster management rescues. This is attributed to various factors, which include lack of constant monitoring and evaluation of areas most prone to natural catastrophes, lack of adequate resources, and lack of co-ordination with the local leaders. 

	The committee recommends that the Ministry in charge of Disaster Preparedness Management and Refugees be allocated a vote of its own. This will enable it strengthen its monitoring and evaluation unit, which will go a long way in detecting and hence averting impending catastrophes.

	The committee further recommends that the populace be sensitised so as to increase their risk awareness levels, and trained on life saving techniques that may come in handy during times of disaster.

4. 	The committee further noted that although the National Policy for Disaster Preparedness and Management was approved by Cabinet in April 2011, it has up to-date not been disseminated or implemented. This is hindering the vital process leading to the development of an Act on disaster preparedness and management.  

	The committee further recommends that the OPM fast-tracks the dissemination and implementation of the National Policy on Disaster Preparedness and Management countrywide, and consequently the Act on disaster preparedness and management.

5. 	The committee observed the lack of a risk, hazard and vulnerability map/profile. This can be used to determine how vulnerable a particular ecosystem is to climate change, species extinction, habitat destruction and other destructive forces, or a particular location's susceptibility to a natural disaster and hence gauging government preparedness.

	The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry in charge of Disaster Preparedness fast tracks the development of a risk, hazard and vulnerability map/profile.

6. 	The committee observed the absence of district disaster management teams to aid in the monitoring of the welfare of IDPs and disaster prone areas with the view of averting or curbing the re-occurrence of catastrophes.

	The committee recommends the fast-tracking of the implementation of district disaster management committees as this will ease the burden borne by the centre during times of disaster management. 

	The committee further recommends the empowerment of the district disaster management committees through adequate training, provision of contingency equipment and adequate funding to aid in the effective delivery of services.

7. 	The committee further noted the high levels of food insecurity in most parts of the country. This accrues mainly from severe climatic changes leading to prolonged drought; poor farming methods; and attitude of the populace towards agricultural production, preferring instead the pseudo-gratification attributed to rural-urban migration.

	The committee, therefore, recommends that Government intensifies the sensitisation of the populace towards the importance of agricultural production; the introduction of modern farming methods; and provision of fast maturing seedlings in a bid to increase yields. This would curb food insecurity and archaic farming methods that are not sustainable in the developing world. Better farming methods will also improve on household income and consequently, lead to poverty reduction.

8. 	The committee further noted the increased influx of children on the streets of Kampala, especially from the areas of Karamoja region. The committee further noted that these children keep returning to the streets even after they have been repatriated to their homes or centres of safe abode.
 
	The committee was informed that research has shown that some unscrupulous adults are behind the exodus and placement of children on the streets of Kampala and other towns, with Kampala being the most lucrative. The committee was further informed that most of the children are from Karamoja region with specific reference to Lokopo, Matany and Lopeei sub counties in Bokora County in Napak District.

	The committee recommends that the respective government departments/ministries (OPM and KCCA) responsible for the affairs of Kampala come up with comprehensive plans and policies to keep the children off the streets.
	
	The committee further recommends the sensitisation and involvement of the local leadership and other relevant stakeholders in the formulation and implementation processes of plans and policies to keep the children off the streets.

	The committee also recommends that an element of counselling be included in the rehabilitation programme for the children and parents who have just gotten off the streets, preferably counsellors from their respective home areas. These should also be adequately trained in the effective delivery of this service.

	The committee further recommends that Government considers coming up with stringent penalties for those caught giving handouts to the children placed to beg on the streets, and a law to deal with the perpetrators behind the exodus and placement of children on the streets.

9. 	The committee observed that the appointment of the new UBC board is long overdue and this impacts negatively on its performance. 

	The committee was, however, informed that the UBC board could not be appointed due to the fact that the former board that was suspended had lodged a case in the courts of law that was still pending judgment. The committee was further informed that a new board would be appointed by December 2013 when the term of the current board under suspension is expected to expire.

	The committee recommends that the Minister for Information and National Guidance fast tracks the constitution and appointment of the UBC board if better and effective performance is to be realised. 

10. The committee observed that under the PAP and PFA programmes for Northern Uganda, Teso and Karamoja regions, focus has been placed on procurement and advocacy of non-viable farming tools and methods. Given the modern trend the world is taking of mechanization, emphasis has been placed on procurement of ox ploughs and oxen, hydraform machines and hoes. 

	The committee reiterates its earlier position and recommendation that Government puts emphasis on training towards modern agricultural practices if the objectives of PFA and PAP are to be achieved and if the farmers are to be enabled to compete favourably with other regional counterparts, given that we are operating towards achievement of an all-encompassing regional integration.
     
Vote 122 - Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA)

Observations and Recommendations 

1. 	The committee observed the omission from the ministerial policy statement of Kampala City Council Authority the stock of KCCA NTR arrears for the financial year 2012/13.

	The committee was informed that KCCA had inherited a bloated book figure of Shs 97.47 billion, which had so far been reduced to Shs 92.79 billion. Though given the absence of a clean and up-to-date database, the process of reconciliation was hampered.

	The committee was further informed that the biggest portion of arrears was from property rates accruing from exemption of payments by residential owner occupied properties. 

	The committee recommends that KCCA fast-tracks the construction of a database in order to establish a factual position of its arrears portfolio and consequently come up with comprehensive recovery strategies.

2. 	The committee further noted that though physical planning and development control is a vital vote function under the mandate of KCCA, and given the current physical state of the city, it has remained an underfunded priority right from the previous financial year 2012/13 up to the current financial year 2013/14 at Shs 7.690 billion.

	The committee recommends that Government considers adequately funding this vote function in the mid-term, given the important role it plays in the city’s development and the current jumbled state of the city, and the need to urgently transform it into a modern capital city in line with other global cities.

3. 	In addition, the committee also noted the narrow city roads accruing from buildings being constructed in road reserves and lack of vehicle parking in most buildings hence leading to heavy traffic jam in the city. 

	The committee was informed that the monitoring and inspection unit is grossly understaffed with only one inspector per division. This hinders effective monitoring.

	The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Government strengthens and adequately funds the Monitoring, Evaluation and Inspection Unit in KCCA in order to enable effective functionality. 

	The committee further recommends that KCCA, in consultation with the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, develops a comprehensive plan to decongest the city, curb traffic jam including construction of periphery roads, organisation of boda bodas and matatus from the city centre, and placement of traffic lights at road junctions which will also ease on the traffic jam. A modern centralised centre for traffic management should also be considered plus construction of flyovers. 

	Kampala City Council Authority is further urged to undertake a study to improve on the transport network in Kampala.

4. 	The committee observed the absence and lack of a budget line for the minister in charge of KCCA. This constrain hinders the effective performance of the mandate entrusted under this vote function by the respective minister.

	The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development establishes a budget line under this vote function to enable the minister effectively and efficiently perform the duties entrusted unto him.

	The committee further noted that the minister’s dependence on KCCA staff tantamounts to conflict of interest since he supervises them and hence, he is bound to receive varied information which may affect his performance. 

	The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Public Service formulates a suitable staffing structure to cater for the office of the minister in charge of KCCA, in order to enable the responsible minister function effectively and independently.

5. 	The committee noted that due to lack of possession of land titles by most government ministries and departments, unscrupulous individuals have used this avenue to illegally sell Government land to private investors, which has made Government liable to various lawsuits and ultimately, uncalled for compensations.  A case in point is the illegal sale of Nakasero Primary School playground which is being investigated by the CIID.

	The committee recommends that KCCA and other government ministries and departments aim at acquiring and having within their possession land titles of all their properties as this will go a long way in hindering corrupt government officials who use this shortcoming to their advantage. 

6. 	The committee also noted the increased crime rate in the city and the vandalism of government property like street lights and poles, pavement manhole covers and disposal bins.

	The committee recommends that the responsible government department, that is the Police, and the local leadership take up the mantle and sensitise and encourage the populace of the need to embrace ownership of public goods and services. In addition, the populace should further be trained and sensitised to adopt neighbourhood crime watch as a means to try and curb vandalism of government property and crime in general. 

7. 	The committee was informed that the technical arm of KCCA operates as if it is independent of any other city leadership, contrary to the law. This accrues from the fact that decisions fronted by the various division councils are never implemented rendering the councils hapless.

	The committee was further informed that the resources collected from the respective divisions are not declared to the respective divisions to guide budgeting towards priority activities. In addition, the committee was informed that budgeting at urban divisions is done without indicative ceilings, rendering the process useless as is evidenced by the lack of respective division resource allocation in the KCCA ministerial policy statement.

	The committee observed that there is need for transparent accountability between the Authority and the divisions.

	The committee further observed that lack of participation of the local leadership at any stage of planning or development, especially for their respective divisions, leads to poor revenue collections, poor service delivery and consequently, poor performance. This is because the local leadership should be at the forefront and the key implementers of government programmes due to the fact that they basically know the priority requirements for their constituents as they are bound to have carried out a needs assessment through various consultations and interactions.

	The committee, therefore, recommends that KCCA actively involves local leaders of the respective divisions through sensitisation, training and consultation during the planning processes. This will help in enhancing revenue collection and service delivery hence better performance of Government programmes.

8. 	The committee observed the lack of regulations to operationalise the KCCA Act.

	The committee, therefore, recommends that the minister in charge of KCCA urgently develops and disseminates regulations to operationalise the KCCA Act. This will limit the regular conflicts caused by varying role ambiguities.

	The committee observed the constant conflicts between the technical and political leadership of KCCA caused mainly by role ambiguity. This has led to KCCA not being able to function fully. This can be evidenced in the non-functionality of the ward, village and street urban councils, plus the absence of a city public accounts committee two and a half years subsequent to passing of the KCCA Act. The committee further observed that disharmony of any kind consequently leads to revenue loss and poor service delivery. 

	The committee, therefore, recommends for a review and subsequent amendment to the KCCA Act in order to streamline the varying sections. This will consequently lead to the smooth operation of KCCA.

10. 	The committee observed that both the votes under KCCA and the Presidency are too diverse and unique, hence the need for a separate minister to handle KCCA solely. 

	The committee recommends for a fully-fledged ministry to specifically handle issues pertaining to KCCA.

11. 	The committee was informed of irregularities and challenges that were faced by the Authority subsequent to the recruitment exercise that was conducted by the Public Service Commission. 

	The committee observed that the Public Service Commission is responsible for recruiting KCCA staff yet the Authority has a fully-fledged and functional Directorate of Human Resource.

	The committee, therefore, recommends that KCCA be given the mandate to recruit, develop and discipline its staff like other statutory authorities. 

12. 	The committee observed that KCCA’s budget is scattered in all government sectors, which in turn fragments its reporting in the output budget tool. As a result, KCCA reports to various sectoral committees of Parliament hence overwhelming the Authority.

	The committee recommends and urges the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development to consolidate the KCCA budget under one vote 122 in next financial year’s budget. This will help in harmonising the reporting mechanism and curb duplication. 

	Madam Speaker, the committee has proposed inter-sectoral re-allocations. The Directorate of Economic Monitoring and Research presented a report to the committee on the implementation of the Poverty Action Fund (PAF), NAADS, SACCOs, national and district roads and Prosperity for All programmes, with strong recommendations to various stakeholders for implementation. 

	The committee observed that the RCCs and Resident District Commissioners’ capacity to monitor and report on the performance of government programmes is still a big challenge. The follow-up mechanism on the implementation of monitoring and evaluation recommendations generated from monitoring and evaluation activities has remained unfunded. 

	Consequent to the above, the committee recommends that the Shs 750 million - Shs 400 million from patriotism clubs and Shs 350 million from ethics and integrity - be allocated to the Directorate of Economic Monitoring and Research to:

a) 	Strengthen the technical capacity of RDCs and RCCs in monitoring and evaluation in order to empower them to effectively perform their functions at district and city levels.

b) Enable the Director of Economic Monitoring to track implementation of recommendations generated from monitoring and evaluation activities through regional meetings with the RDCs and RCCs, political leaders and civil society leaders.

Political Mobilisation

The committee observed that the political mobilisation function is grossly underfunded compared to its planned activities for the financial year 2013/2014. Its current budget is Shs 60 million for the entire financial year. The committee recommends that Shs 300 million be internally reallocated from patriotism clubs to strengthen political co-ordination and mobilisation functions.

Media Centre

The committee observed that for the last financial years, the Uganda Media Centre has failed to acquire the technical equipment required for effective execution of its function. The committee recommends that this equipment be acquired in a phased approach. For the current financial year, Shs 150 million be reallocated from patriotism clubs to Uganda Media Centre. The details are attached in the report.

In conclusion, the Committee on Presidential Affairs, during consideration of the ministerial policy statements of the Presidency, Office of the Prime Minister and Kampala Capital City Authority, noticed that in order for government ministries/  departments to be able to fully register high performance in delivery of planned outputs in their respective vote functions, there is need to generally:

a) 	Streamline the monitoring units in government departments as it was noticed that poor or lack of monitoring or inspection played a key role in the underperformance of most vote functions in the delivery of services.

b) 	Create effective synergies among government ministries/departments. These will go a long way in enhancing the performance and delivery of outputs while fully utilising the scarce resources.

c) 	Consider sharing office buildings by various government departments/ministries given the huge amounts budgeted for office space/office rent.

d) 	Appreciate the different roles played by both the political and technical arms of government in order to reduce on conflict, which hinders delivery of services and stagnates the process of government projects/programmes.

Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, in light of the above and as far as the corrigenda is concerned, our committee is not so affected. So, I would like to beg, with your permission, that you allow me to proceed to appropriate for the vote function. I thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and your committee for a wonderful and comprehensive report. It has been signed by the necessary one-third of the members of the committee. You are now free to debate, but very briefly. Who are the shadows? Is that you? Okay, you have five minutes but I also direct that the entire report of the Chairman be produced in the Hansard in its entirety. You have five minutes. Give the highlights and then we can have your report on the Hansard. 

(The entire report shall appear in the appendix of the bound volume of September.)


5.44
THE SHADOW MINISTER IN CHARGE OF SPECIAL REGIONS (Mr Stephen Ochola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee. I am presenting on behalf of the Opposition. I am the Shadow Minister for Special Regions, which handles many special programmes in the Office of the Prime Minister. Most of the special programmes include Karamoja, Northern Uganda, Luwero, Rwenzori, Bunyoro, Teso Affairs and Kampala, which we have also taken as a special region.

Madam Speaker, the concept of special regions under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy No. XII provides for balance and equitable development and requires the state to:
1. 	Adopt an integrated and co-ordinated planning approach.
2. 	Take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the various areas of Uganda, taking into consideration rural and urban settings.
3. 	Take special measures in favour of the development of the least developed areas.

The above directives form the basis of the special regions’ approach - providing affirmative action for the specially disadvantaged areas and regions of this country. The directives also presume the establishment of the disadvantaged as factual in relation to other regions. A development indicator shall be obtained and compared.

Prior to consideration of the special regions, individually can the Prime Minister - I looked at what he presented - give an assurance to this House that the internal funding of the Budget by 80 per cent will not greatly affect the budgetary allocations of special regions’ activities? This is as per this financial year’s Budget Speech. This is because most of the donors have stopped or withdrawn some of their funding.

I want to talk a bit about KCCA. When you look at the funding which has been allocated to urban planning, security and land use sectors, it is so meagre and yet the aspect of security of the people and their property is very important in the city. There have been media reports indicating the death of over 33 people, which we also saw in the fire at Namungoona, which incident I want to regret. 

I want to ask the minister to tell this House about any proactive measures in place, especially when you go to Banda on the Jinja highway, where there are huge Mogas fuel tank; I am worried that we may have similar occurrences. Yesterday, the locals were also agreeable with our position on this. So I think the minister needs to give us assurance of our security especially regarding those tanks in Banda.

Madam Speaker, I want to comment on the teso affairs department. This year alone, we have had challenges and we believe, as the Opposition, that we need to construct dams for the preservation of water and for the promotion of agriculture and pastoralism. I am happy to realise that even in the NRM manifesto, this came out as key. However, two years down the road, we have not seen anything on the ground. It is evident that the climate patterns are becoming very unreliable hence constructing dams are a positive direction in strengthening the economic activities in the Teso sub-region and also other sub-regions.

Madam Speaker, much as Busoga is not under the special regions, when I passed there, for the first rains this year alone I think they have not had any harvest. For us, we remain relying on prayers to our God to give us rain. I think it is getting out-dated. So, it is not only Teso that is affected by that but the whole country.

Apart from the government effort to compensate people whose cattle were rustled in the late 1980s, the restocking exercise has to be carried out in the whole region of Teso. This will enable revival of the economic glory which the Teso sub-region used to have.

The marketing challenges also in Teso, which are faced by the farmers, can be alleviated by the construction of the fruit factory at Soroti. (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude.

MR OCHOLA: Madam Speaker, I hope that in this financial year the issue of the factory comes to light. In the last three financial years we have been hearing of the allocation of Shs 5 billion but on the ground there is nothing of that kind.

Madam Speaker, for the case of Karamoja, the disarmament has been successfully conducted to some extent. Total security of people should be put in place within the region and the neighbouring Turkana of Kenya. 

The practice of irrigation also, through the construction of dams in Karamoja, will make the pastures grow and reduce the movement of the Karimojong to distant areas in search of pasture. Engagement of the Karimojong in economic activities such as agriculture will yield an indicative role in the improvement of their livelihood. I believe that even the issue the chairman was trying to tell us about - the street children coming from Karamoja - will definitely be reduced.

Madam Speaker, we have seen the challenge in Bunyoro where we have discovered oil. There are many people in Bunyoro who are getting displaced, but then I have not seen in the policy where a strategic plan has been put in place to handle these people who are going to be displaced. How we are going to compensate them? How we are going to handle them within that period when we are extracting oil? After that, how do we handle the urbanisation which the discovery of oil is going to put in place in the area of Bunyoro? This needs to be brought out. 

I think the Prime Minister and the Minister for Bunyoro Affairs should be looking into these issues. When you look at what is in the policy, it has not brought out these issues clearly. It is my humble request that this is handled so that these people do not get displaced and they do not misuse the money given in compensation for the land lost. They may misuse this money and at the end of the day we shall have street children again and many issues which come with urbanisation in that particular area of this country.

Madam Speaker, I think those are some of the few questions I want to put to the Prime Minister. The country should be given clarification about them. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ochola. 

MR OCHOLA: Madam Speaker, maybe what I will need to do is to lay this on the Table. At the time when we were laying summaries on the Table, I was not around; I was out of the country. May I beg that I take this opportunity to lay the summary on the Table. Thank you very much. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It will be transcribed and put on the Hansard. Honourable members you know we need to share the opportunities. So, those who contributed in the other part will speak on the third report. 

5.55
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. I restrict my submission to page 27. However, before that I want to thank Government for having pacified the Karamoja region. Karamoja is now peaceful. What we have to do as Members of Parliament is to encourage our people to now engage themselves in agriculture. 

Madam Speaker, if you go to Karamoja right now, the people in Karamoja are depending on food aid. I think Government should consider reducing the food aid going to Karamoja such that the people can engage in agriculture. The dams have been constructed and these dams will help them produce crops and stop the trafficking of children from Karamoja to Kampala. 

Recently, we were in Karamoja with the Committee on National Economy and we saw fertile soil, but the people of Karamoja are very lazy –(Interjections)– because they know that at the end of the day - (Interjections) – Yes, Madam Speaker, this is a fact. They are very lazy because all the time they are lining up in centres –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you very much honourable members. I am aware that the people of Karamoja have been fending for themselves since time immemorial. We are aware that the people of Karamoja are cattle keepers, and they keep a lot of cattle. We are aware that the people of Karamoja have been transitioning from cattle keeping to sedentary life farming. 

The honourable member, hon. Isabirye, has made a categorical statement here that the people of Karamoja are lazy. We are aware that they are not lazy. Is the honourable member in order to accuse the entire people of Karamoja of being lazy when he does not feed them and when they have been surviving on their own since time immemorial? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think he was explaining that they get food rations and that is when you stopped him. That is what he understands - that they get food rations – and he was telling us. 

MR ISABIRYE: Madam Speaker, I thank you for the wise ruling.  Madam Speaker, even the leadership of Karamoja – we interacted with the chairpersons LC5 – agreed that the people of Karamoja are lazy. They actually said that Government should make sure that it provides enough dams –(Interruption).

MS ALASO: Rt. Hon. Speaker, this time round hon. Isabirye has come up very seriously to assert that he actually said that the people of Karamoja are lazy. I happen to be a granddaughter of the Karimojong and I know that my uncles live under the most hostile circumstances and environment in this country.  I know that Karamoja can take months and months without rain. I even wonder whether the Committee on National Economy had carried some rain with it when they went to Karamoja. 

Madam Speaker, this is a pastoral community forgotten by almost all governments that have governed this country. It is a pastoral community that depends entirely on nature, where everybody extracts the good out of Karamoja and does not remember to give them what they need to exploit that environment. For this community to be described as lazy by my honourable brother who only visited them on that one day - Is the honourable member in order? Maybe if he had made exceptions, - maybe one chairman knows one villager who is lazy - but is he in order to insist that all my uncles, the Karimojong, are lazy? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: If he cannot substantiate, he can withdraw. You substantiate if you can.

MR ISABIRYE: Rt Hon. Speaker, I want to insist that the people of Karamoja need to be helped. If they are not lazy, why do we have food aid always taken to Karamoja? I said in my submission that if you look at the land, the soils in Karamoja are very fertile. The committee report suggests that Government should provide good farming methods to the people of Karamoja. So the reason as to why I am saying that the people of Karamoja are lazy is to make them work harder.

MR OCHOLA: Madam Speaker, I grew up as a small child in Teso and the Karimojong, who are our uncles, used to stay with us before the cattle raids started. They cultivate, they dig and look after cattle. I know they are so active. Even today as I speak, I can testify that if we went to Teso now, we would get the Karimojong digging. They are hardworking people. They dig in our gardens, and they get cassava and other foodstuff in exchange. 

Why we are saying that they cannot produce is just because of the weather patterns there. When it rains in Karamoja, it rains and you will see the water that time and after it has flowed, it dries up. We need irrigation for Karamoja. My honourable colleague is insisting on saying that the Karimojong are lazy and yet they are failing to dig because of the weather patterns they have - the rains there cannot save and sustain their agriculture. Is the honourable member in order to insist that the Karimojong are lazy yet he has failed to substantiate when he was asked to? 

I think the honourable member should just withdraw the statement. Is he in order to continue insisting that the Karimojong are lazy because of the rain patterns and that is why they are failing to produce crops?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you leave out the word “lazy”; in fact, he was advocating for more resources for Karamoja.

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Schools have been built in Karamoja but they are empty. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: No, he has finished. Hon. Kaahwa.

6.06
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman representative, Hoima): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members. I want to thank the committee for coming up with this good report, but I have concerns from page 21 where they have mentioned Bunyoro affairs.  

We thank the government for giving us a minister for Bunyoro affairs but when you look at the activities that took place last year, they had five consultative meetings and four co-ordination meetings. They are only meetings; I do not see any tangible thing that took place in Bunyoro. When you look at the allocation of this year, I do not see any money allocated to our minister. I do not know how our minister will run activities. 

Secondly, I want to talk about resettlement and compensation of our people in Bunyoro area. In support of the shadow minister, it is a serious problem, and I have not seen it here. Our people are running up and down, especially in Buseruka where they are going to put the refinery. We want to get a real plan because we have received many petitions from our people. I thank UWOPA because they went there as women to support our women who are running up and down with children. After knowing that they are going to get a lot of money, the men are running away from their wives and picking up younger girls. That is a serious problem. 

Thirdly, I want talk about the physical planning of the Albertine Graben. This has been a song, that Bunyoro will be planned for and that it will grow into another city. There is no allocation for this physical plan; I would like to find out how much money was allocated for this plan because for us we are waiting to see a well planned and developed Bunyoro. 

Finally, I want to talk about state sponsorship. Bunyoro has been missing out on this opportunity. I do not know the criterion that is used to select children that are given money by State House. I would like to (Member timed out_)

6.09
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you so much for the opportunity. My concern is about KCCA. Kampala City Council Authority has been losing a lot of tax recently, but the recommendations here before us do not come out explicitly to guide policy with regard to streamlining KCCA. I, therefore, would like the minister to come out very clearly and tell the world and the country how he intends to solve and sort out the problems of KCCA. 

From the experience I have heard with local governments, I think there was a problem in as far as the Act that put in place KCCA is concerned. The committee did not actually comment about this and I think they should have come out very clearly and strongly to ensure that if need be, this Act be brought back for amendment to streamline the affairs of KCCA.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to talk about scholarships. The issue of scholarships has been a thorn in the flesh of many Ugandans; everybody talks about state scholarships. I am not against anybody getting these state scholarships, but in my constituency, I do not know of anyone who has benefitted from this facility. So, I would also like, most sincerely from the bottom of my heart, to know how these people are selected – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: I want to thank you – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you standing up? (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I have listened to my colleague very well and he says that the issue of State House scholarships is not clear even to him and yet he subscribes to the NRM. The information that I want to provide is that the scholarships from State House are for the Rwandese who are in Uganda. Ugandans are not benefiting from them – (Interruption)
 
MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Parliamentary privileges are given so that we use them to execute our duties and inform the country about what is important for development. Is it in order for an honourable colleague to blatantly abuse the principle of parliamentary privileges and come to the Floor and make unsubstantiated allegations that scholarships are for Rwandese, as if he holds so much hate for the Rwandese? Can he substantiate? Is that the kind of leadership he provides in his position as shadow minister? Is that the whole rationale of parliamentary privileges?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, earlier, we had a small debate here and one member seriously submitted that the Rwandese are in Uganda and are even there under the Constitution. That is what was talked about. There are Rwandese in Uganda. 

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that guidance. As one person who is lucky to have participated in the making of the original Constitution of this country, I know certainly well that the Rwandese are part and parcel of the body politic of this country, whether you like it or not. The Banyarwanda are in Kisoro, Ntungamo, in Buganda here and they are everywhere just like any other Ugandan is in any part of this country. However, that notwithstanding, my question was about the procedures which they go through to get the scholarships. That was my question.

6.13
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the committee for the report. 

On page 20, the committee report clearly spells out the special programmes under vote function 1303 and there are around eight programmes highlighted here. Among those, we have Karamoja affairs, Northern Uganda, Teso affairs, among others, but there is no single programme for Busoga. Out of the 112 districts we have, 99 are from other parts of the country but the 10 districts that make up Busoga are not mentioned anywhere –(Interjections)– This is page 20 and 21, under “Management of special programmes”. 

I want to appeal to the Prime Minister because there has been a commitment made to this effect - a programme for affirmative action that is being drafted specifically for Busoga. It is my prayer that we get interested in having a special programme captured here for the people of Busoga. 

Madam Speaker, I think the committee fell short when it came to the issue of the new buildings. We have the twin towers here. They should have either saluted or appreciated the Chinese Government which donated to us this structure. They should have also gone ahead to include that money that we had been spending on rent because now the Office of the Prime Minister and his ministers are housed here, implying that there is a saving on rent. So, that money should have been captured here or they should have told us what the saving that we made is going to do. It should have come out in this report, but there is no mention to this effect –(Member timed out_)

6.16
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. 

My first concern is from page 9, the selected outputs for the financial year 2013/2014. One of the outputs here is to pay school fees for the sponsored students. I would like to thank Government for the scholarship scheme under State House. However, there are a lot of challenges with that scheme. The institutions where these students study do not receive the fees on time and so, these students are chased away and sometimes they miss exams. I call upon Government to at least pay their fees on time so that the students are not sent away. If they are not able to do it on time, then there is need to communicate to those institutions so that they can be patient with them. 

Also, the component of accommodation is not there. These students suffer under the hands of the landlords or the land ladies. There is need also to consider that element so that it is really made meaningful. 

On the issue of street children, it is true that they have been taking these children to their homes. However, the strategies have not been realistic because these children are taken away from the street and they are just dumped there. 

Hon. Iddi did insinuate that the Karimojong are lazy. Madam Speaker, it is not true. I grew up as a girl there and I used to work myself –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, in half a minute, let us hear from the warrior. (Laughter)

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I used to work and I know that these people work. It is only nature that sometimes frustrates the efforts of the people of Karamoja. It is not that they are lazy; they have their cows and they have their gardens but it is just nature. I thank you.

6.19
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Honourable members, I want to thank the committee members for the work they have done. However, for any organisation to perform, you have to look at its structure and systems. I believe that unless the structure and systems in the Prime Minister’s office and the President’s office are changed, you cannot speak much. Look at page 19; what the Ministry of Information and National Guidance is doing is basically to produce a newsletter and register media houses. So, what is that ministry for? 

There are regional ministers now – there is the Minister for Bunyoro Affairs, Minister for Karamoja Affairs, and we hope that soon we shall get a minister for Kigezi sub-region because the culture now is to have regional ministers instead of ministers of state who are functional. If you are going to have a ministry in the President’s office – You have State House, President’s office, a commissioner for ethics, the economic monitoring function – The economic monitoring function should actually be in the Ministry of Finance; what is it doing there? This creates institutional conflict. 

If you have a PS reading a document from the AIDS Commission and KCCA, how do they perform? I sympathise with the people who are working as ministers because you are not actually performing because you are incapacitated by the structure. Look at the Office of the Prime Minister, there are thirteen ministers. The fourteenth might be hon. Bahati as Minister for Kigezi maybe. (Laughter) How can you have 14 ministers including regional ministers or commissioners and all of them having one PS? In management, that is impossible and you should not blame anyone. 

As I conclude, look at the reallocation proposed by the committee on page 37; how can you have structures and you do not provide money for them? Why don’t you remove the Ministry of Ethics and strengthen the IGG? Also remove the function of economic monitoring because that too is under the Office of the Prime Minister. Do you just want a number of ministers or quality service? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.21
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I equally want to thank the committee for the work they did. 

Just as my colleague has said, the people of Bunyoro are wondering what share they have in this budget in terms of percentage. When they announced that we have a minister for Bunyoro affairs, the people of Bunyoro got so excited. I can still see the excitement from my honourable colleague, hon. Kwizera, about hon. Bahati becoming Minister for Kigezi Affairs. However, let me advise you to go slow. Get guidance from those who have such ministers; they are more of regional commissioners than ministers. (Laughter) When you look at the activities that we have done and those that we did last financial year, we held consultative meetings, bought furniture for the ministry – and that is for a whole financial year; can you imagine! 

I was part of the consultative meetings that we held in the region; Bunyoro as a region has got historical issues which have never been handled to this day. We are suffering and will continue to suffer due to historical injustices –(Interjections)– They are very clear; they are no record. 

In those meetings, the people from Bunyoro raised serious matters. We raised issues to do with Bunyoro University. We have oil; as we talk, speculation on land issues in that region is too much. People are buying land recklessly and land prices are being hiked by the day. People are planning to build, hotels are emerging – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute just to conclude. 

MR BIGIRWA: Madam Speaker, those types of businesses are not bad, but the issue is poor physical planning of the area. We need to plan everything to guide those structures. 

On land registration, we have a very big challenge. As we talk now, we have got a caveat on land registration in the region. The people of Bunyoro can no longer get land titles and this is under the pretext of oil. The biggest challenge is that while some of us are denied land titles, other people are given land titles; there is select issuance of land titles in the region. 

On page 24, under the planned activities for this financial year they say they shall have to complete the study to operationalize Bunyoro Integrated Affirmative Action and they shall operationalize the Bunyoro regional office. We are still talking about –(Interruption)

MAJ. MPAIRWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable colleague for giving way. You mentioned something on the planned activities. They have done so many studies and come up with reports; the only thing the people of Bunyoro need is implementation of those reports. There is the Ruth Mukama report and others; implement them so that our people can get some good money from it. 
The only thing that will fail the oil activities is failure to compensate our people. Most of them do not have land titles due to the colonial system. We have raised that issue on several occasions but nothing has been done. So we request the Government to come up with systematic registration, titling and demarcation of the land before the refinery starts work. Thank you. 

6.22
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to debate. I would like to begin by posing a question: How can a directorate, for two consecutive financial years, produce a similar budget and in that budget they seem to have mastered the art of presenting the same issues – I hear they are working on the quintum law, the corruption law? 

I think this is being unfair to this economy. We have other votes that actually need money. Therefore, I will support the recommendation made by the committee that money be reallocated from this particular vote to the other one the committee recommended – (Interjection ) -  monitoring and evaluation. I think I would support the committee’s recommendation on that one because these people say they are ethics and integrity and yet they are encouraging corruption in a silent way. This has to be discouraged, Madam Speaker. 

I would also like to discuss the issue of fast tracking the KCCA Act. You have realised that there has been a problem in Kampala in as far as conflict is concerned. Work has deteriorated in the city because we do not have a particular Act. Therefore, I also strongly support that we fast track the KCCA Act, revise it such that we are able to do a lot of work in the city –(Member timed out_)

6.28
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support what my colleague, hon. Muwuma, stated. Busoga region has accommodated people who suffered under Lakwena, the insurgency in the North and even the Karimojong. However, it is sad that it is only Busoga which lacks this special programme. I want to also make it clear that what we are asking for is not a ministry in charge of Busoga affairs; we want an affirmative action programme for Busoga region, which would address issues of sanitation, education, poverty, etc.

Secondly, I want to thank the committee for bringing out the issue of the External Security Organisation (ESO) arrears. The External Security Organisation is a very important organ in this country. In some instances, ESO is mandated to carry out due diligence studies outside the country. Imagine a poorly facilitated officer going to carry out due diligence research and write a report and he is not paid. I pray that the ESO issues are addressed.

Regarding the issue of RDCs who were demobilised and sent home, many are on the streets depending on handouts. Is the ministry coming out to help these Ugandans who are patriotic, who were mobilisers and are now living a poor life? Madam Speaker, these issues must be addressed. Thank you very much.

6.31
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

My point of concern is the unfunded priorities in the Office of the Prime Minister, and that is on page 25. I would like to particularly focus on the slow response to disasters. I will give the example of the Elgon zones. I would like to correct the impression that the people in the mountains do not want to leave the mountains. People are willing to move but the land is an issue. In Bududa, for example, we were promised an urbanisation programme but to date, we have not seen it.

Secondly, the committee talked about monitoring and they recommended that there should be a committee to monitor the IDPs. I have been to Bweyale and the resettlement camp has no secondary school. That means the pupils have to sit and re-sit P.7 until they marry. If one is tired of re-sitting, they have to get married or the parents have to marry off their daughters early. That is unfortunate.

They also have a language problem. They cannot explain their problems to the health workers in the single health facility that is there. So I request the Ministry of Health to send someone who speaks the local language, Lumasaaba or Lugisu, so that our people can access the services.

Finally, I agree that the department in charge of disaster preparedness and refugees should be allocated a vote because this might help our people, especially those from disaster prone areas, to get quick responses to the problems that emerge. Thank you.

6.32
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the good work. I have some few observations I would like to make.

The committee on page 32 is recommending a comprehensive plan to decongest the city. A comprehensive plan might take 10 or 20 years but there are a few things that I see that can be done to decongest the city. One of them which was mentioned in passing concerns the boda bodas. I think our city is the most disorganised city in East Africa and mainly because of boda bodas. 

Recently, I read in the papers that they were supposed to be registered and all of a sudden we also saw reports that it is political because of insecurity. Now which one concerns security; for these boda bodas just to operate without being registered? I want clarification on that, minister. What happened? Why don’t you help the Executive Director to register these boda bodas and even organise them?

Madam Speaker, the report says that KCCA is further urged to undertake a study to improve on transport networks in Kampala. By the way, I want to commend the Executive Director of KCCA on fixing the roads and trying to create some beauty in the city. At least we can be proud of our city because of her, and I commend her. 

However, I want to ask what happened to the Pioneer buses. These buses were helping our public, especially the poor people, with transport. I do not know the owner but I heard that there was a problem concerning taxes. Can’t it be sorted out? Can’t that man be helped so that they pay the taxes in phases and the people are helped to get transport? –(Interjections)- Members are saying “like Basajjabalaba”; I do not know, but let him be helped.

Madam Speaker, lastly, the committee said on page- (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In conclusion, the committee was further informed that resources collected from the respective divisions are not declared to the respective divisions to guide budgeting towards priority activities. If nobody knows where the money collected goes in these divisions, no wonder the roads in those divisions are bad and the infrastructure is so disorganised. It is like we have no plan and everyone builds the way he wants. I think this statement should be qualified. May I get clarification on where this money, which is collected, goes? It is very much money, by the way. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.36
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I happen to come from one of the marginalised areas of Uganda, and that is Busoga, but that is not my issue of concern as I speak. My concern comes from pages 20 and 21. 

As I was trying to go through this report, I tried to go through the activities of the ministries of Karamoja, Teso affairs, Bunyoro affairs and Luweero triangle, which they undertook throughout the financial year. When I applied my elementary economics, I realised that the value of the assets those ministries are using is even more than the activities, which are on the ground.

Under in Teso affairs, for example, throughout the financial year only four consultative meetings were conducted. They also bought only one hydraform machine and that was that. Do we really need this kind of arrangement? If you look at the minister’s car, it is very expensive compared to the activities that the minister is going to carry out. I am not against the ministers and it is not because Busoga has no minister but I am just concerned. Is there really value for money? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.38
MRS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on the State House sponsorship fund. The committee noted that this fund was removed from the Ministry of Education because of bureaucracy. I would like the minister to give us clarification on the criteria used for accessing it. I actually find it more bureaucratic when it is State House funds especially for scholarships. Is State House not more bureaucratic than Ministry of Education? What happened when this fund was in the Ministry of Education? Could we have clarification on that so that even some of our districts that have failed to access these funds can actually access them?

Two, I really do not know whether we are not frustrating the minister without portfolio in charge of political mobilisation. I happen to have been on the vetting committee and when we were interviewing this young minister, he was very vibrant and looking forward to work hard. He had several ideas and when you look at the budget, - Shs 60 million – it is not enough even for fuel to take him around. Can the ministry look around and give him enough funding so that we do not frustrate the young minister who is ready to move and work for this country? Shs 60 million! - (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving way. On bureaucracy in State House, we have some students who are being sponsored by State House, especially those ones who are studying in Uganda Christian University Mukono, who because of bureaucracy were not paid the whole of last academic year. The university therefore told them to apply for a dead year. 

So, all the students under State House scholarships from Uganda Christian University last year were forced to apply for a dead year because of the high level of bureaucracy. The person concerned could not access the payments in correspondence with the university exam timetable. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: If it was issues of bureaucracy, wouldn’t it have been better to address issues of bureaucracy in the Ministry of Education rather than – (Member timed out_) 

6.41
MRS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for their report. 

Just like any other member in this House complaining about the State House scholarships, I want to add my voice to that.  The issue of State House scholarships is really a problem especially the accessibility. We realise that it seems sometimes for one to access a scholarship from State House, one has got to be NRM; if you are not NRM then you cannot benefit from this State House Scholarship. 

Some of the Members of Parliament are saying they do not know the criteria. It is my humble opinion, Madam Speaker, that if the details of how people benefit from these State House scholarships can be brought to this House, it would help us. We have processed these funds and we want to see the beneficiaries. 

Madam Speaker, if you checked on page 20 of this report you will see vote 1303, management of special programmes. It is embarrassing to see that 1000 acres of land were ploughed for traditional chiefs in Northern Uganda. After ploughing, what next? Wasn’t it better for them to buy for Northern Uganda these machines - the tractors and the ox ploughs - rather than ploughing for them 1000 acres and leaving them like that? What about the next season? What are they going to benefit from? 

We urge them to plan for us - buy for us tractors in Northern Uganda. We have the traditional chiefs also in Lango sub-region who have not benefitted from this ploughing. I do not know where in Northern Uganda they benefited from these 1000 acres of ploughed land. 

Under item No. 3, also under Northern Uganda, four hydraform machines were procured for Northern Uganda. This is too general. We want specifications. Where specifically in Northern Uganda? One hydraform machine was bought for Lira District but, Madam Speaker, I am sorry to report that it got lost just mysteriously. The minister should inform us where they put the hydraform for Lira District- (Member timed out_)

6.44
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I want to thank the committee for this wide overview of the different Government departments mostly under PRDP. 

I want to add my voice on the issue of scholarships. The issue of education is a very hard-pressing thing for us who come from the war affected regions. Most of our schools are in bad state. Most of our parents cannot pay school fees. Even those who would have qualified for these scholarships cannot qualify for them. 

My appeal is that the offices for these scholarships be opened in the North so that at least some of these students can also attempt to apply. People do not know how to apply for these scholarships. When it comes to that time for State House scholarships, it becomes almost an NRM thing. Even as a Member of Parliament here, you cannot access anything in State House unless you are Movement. It is dividing this country. You cannot make an appointment. Ministers behave like goats- (Interjections) -even if they are from your region.  

Secondly, the issue of the millennium villages was mentioned in this - (Member timed out_)  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude. 

MS AJOK: We need to know where these millennium villages are going to. 

Lastly, on the issue of special programmes, people who are crying for ministries, we have a minister in Northern Uganda and Northern Uganda is very big with varied problems in different corners. It is not one size fits all. You could have semi-arid, desert, dry Karamoja areas in my district but we do not get any of those special programmes. So, how are they planning? We would like them to look at these things more critically.  

6.47
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at page 20 of this statement, especially on Northern Uganda, the committee talks of the purchase of four hydraform machines procured for Northern Uganda. Can I know which district the four hydraform machines have been given to? Which districts in Northern Uganda? Most times Members in this House keep on saying that Northern Uganda is benefitting from many programmes. It is important to state which part of Northern Uganda and which districts in particular have been given the hydraform machines. 

You have said that 1000 acres of land have been ploughed for traditional chiefs. To my understanding, no traditional chief in Lango sub-region has had his garden ploughed. Can you tell us which districts and which region in Northern Uganda have had their gardens ploughed?

Thirdly, for the last two years we have been told in the budget that Lango sub-region had settled for oxen and ox ploughs, and it has been in the budget for two consecutive financial years. I want to know what has happened to the ox ploughs; I want to know whether they have been stolen together with the Prime Minister because this has been in the budget for two consecutive financial years and yet the people of Lango have not seen the ox ploughs neither have they seen the oxen. 

In the last financial year it was reported that they have been purchased; can we know where the oxen and the ox-ploughs for the people of Lango have gone? Otherwise, they will say the people of Lango have benefitted because the Minister comes from Lango when we are suffering just like any other sub-region- (Interruption) 

MR BESISIRA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. I am a member of the Public Accounts Committee and we visited the Lango region, the districts of Dokolo, Oyam - I hope all those belong there - and some chiefs there had their gardens ploughed – (Interjections) - In Oyam, Dokolo and these other districts from that part. 

I am not from there, but I know in that region some gardens were ploughed for the chiefs. If my chairman Public Accounts Committee was here and my colleagues were to be faithful, they would tell you that they are there. The houses for the chiefs have also been constructed using hydraform machines. So you cannot say that no work has been done in that part of the country.

MS AMONGI: I want to conclude by saying yes, there are gardens that have been ploughed; you could have been wrong and that is why I asked that let them say which sub region in Northern Uganda. I know that in Acholi they have built the houses of the chiefs but not in Lango sub region. In Northern Uganda we have West Nile, Lango, Acholi and Karamoja. (Member timed out_)

MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue I want to raise is from page 36, political mobilisation. The committee recommends that Shs 300 million be internally reallocated from patriotism clubs to strengthen political co-ordination. I want to ask, what is this political co-ordination? 

First of all, I am not comfortable with what is going on with patriotism clubs especially in schools. As a Member of Parliament, I have tried to find out what they are doing and I have failed; now the committee is recommending that we internally reallocate Shs 300 million to political co-ordination. We need to get an explanation from the Minister.

Madam Speaker, another point I would like to raise is from page 39, vote 159. Hon. David Sejusa was the co-ordinator of intelligence and right now we have been hearing what has been happening to him. He is not around, we have not got any explanation and now we are going to approve money which he has been using in that office for co-ordinating intelligence. Can we get an explanation from the minister as to where he is? Can we get an explanation from the government where he is, because he was our colleague? So it means one by one we will go and we cannot get an explanation, and then we approve the money. It is important for this Parliament to know where he is. 

The other point is about the RDCs. In the report (Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have many reports; those who do not contribute on this one will speak on the next one.

6.52
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Rt Hon Speaker. My point of concern is from page 10 of the report, for which I will thank the committee for their contribution in this Parliament. My concern is on the Uganda AIDS Commission; the mission statement for the Uganda AIDS Commission is “to provide overall leadership in the coordination and management of an HIV/AIDS national multi sectoral response.” 

Rt. Hon. Speaker, the Uganda AIDS Commission was placed under the Office of the President because it was envisioned that this should have the patronage of the President for the purposes of attracting finances to fund priorities related to the HIV/AIDS response. I am also aware, because we have interacted with them as the health committee, that whereas they have got to give the overall leadership, the Uganda AIDS Commission does not know the stakeholders in the HIV/AIDS response realm. They do not have a database of all the actors and they cannot speak sensibly about who the actors are. 

There is a lot of activity in this realm and those who are supposed to give the leadership are ignorant about these responses, which makes us get worried, and which may explain the upsurge of this disease. I wonder if the Minister or the committee did engage the Uganda AIDS Commission to find out how they use their budget. (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is that the budget of Uganda AIDS Commission is also found in the ministerial policy statement of Ministry of Health. This increases the budget of the Ministry of Health when in actual fact the money is not there. What I want to prove to you is that what you are seeing here is also in the ministerial policy statement of Ministry of Health and yet the Ministry of Health has no control over Uganda AIDS Commission. That is very interesting for me.

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that money is voted by us in both places?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Yes.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, honourable, for that information. Rt Hon. Speaker, for Parliament to appropriate this and even to have this consideration, we need a report on how these activities have been carried out, how relevant they are in the current state of affairs, and what new things these selected outputs are going to achieve in order to alleviate the current situation. I want to urge this Parliament to reject this section of this report. I contend that if this is removed from our appropriation, the state of affairs cannot worsen simply because Uganda AIDS Commission has not been given money.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said, some Members will speak on the other reports. There are many ministries under this sector; I will see you on the other reports, honourable members. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have the policy statement for the Office of the Prime Minister. On page 34, I see the organisational chart of the Office of the Prime Minister. I see the Prime Minister and then the Second Deputy Prime Minister; I do not see the first deputy and the third deputy. We are aware the First Deputy Prime Minister died; does it mean that that office will never be disclosed and he will be replaced?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, on page 33 of the policy statement, I see the office of the Government Chief Whip. Under the Administration of Parliament Act, the Government Chief Whip is under Parliament, but I also see here that they have budgeted funds to mobilise NRM MPs; we already do this in Parliament. She has a budget of Shs 3 billion, maybe for phone calls. 

Also of interest, I see that the minister has medical expenses of Shs 28 million. Since the minister is here, is he not part of the medical insurance scheme? What type of disease does he suffer from that he needs Shs 28 million and yet in Parliament, we give you medical insurance to take care of it? 

Madam Speaker, I have these three issues to raise - absence of the First Deputy Prime Minister and the Third Deputy Prime Minister, the Office of the Government Chief Whip having Shs 3 billion yet we budget for them under the Parliamentary Commission. Of course, there are so many of them but I am also interested in the medical expenditure for the minister. I have not seen the medical expenditure for the Second Deputy Prime Minister; I imagine with his advanced age, he would be the one to be budgeted for but he is not here. I also do not see the one for the Prime Minister. That is why I want the clarification. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

7.02
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to seek clarification. 

On page 18, under the list of ministers in the Office of the Prime Minister, I do not see the minister without portfolio in charge of political mobilisation. However, I want us to debate beyond petty politics. There is a minister in charge of political mobilisation and yet we are in a multiparty dispensation; if we are, how can we have a minister in charge of political mobilisation? Is he going to mobilise the democrats or UPC, and yet he is paid? This person should be paid by the NRM Secretariat.

The second clarification I would like to seek is from page 19, about the Uganda Media Centre. The Executive Director of the Media Centre is also the deputy spokesperson of the NRM and we are appropriating money to go to the Media Centre, which is partisan. Can we get clarification on whether a person can be paid by the NRM and at the same time the Ministry of Public Service? This Parliament should appropriate money to pay the Media Centre – (Member timed out_) 

7.04
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to draw the attention of the Members to page 8 of the report where we get the budget performance of State House. I see, and I am really surprised, that despite the fact that the operational budget went up from Shs 53 billion to Shs 178 billion, which is a performance of 332 per cent, we still have unfunded priorities. So, I am raising this as a matter of concern for those who are dealing with finance under that ministry.

The second one is on page 20. I have seen the list of special programmes with ministers to preside over those programmes. Madam Speaker, if you read the performance of those special sectors or departments, we have to ask ourselves, is it justifiable for us to put money in those departments? It is important that we should apply some knowledge and wisdom on this. 

Finally, on page 25, it is clearly stated that the Office of the Prime Minister lacks strategic plans. We know that the worst cases of corruption have come from the Office of the Prime Minister and here we are, with this report from our committee telling us that that very ministry has not properly planned. I think it is important that before we pass the budget, we understand how the money is going to be spent. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SIMON MULONGO: Madam Speaker, I have two short ones. The first one is on page 3, paragraph 3.0, also under vote 001, Office of the President; it has a mission statement of providing leadership. On page 5, still under 4.0, we have a mission statement of the Office of the President (ISO). My concern here is: why do we have ISO, which is established under the same law with ESO, having no vote of its own? It is under the Office of the President. It is not like ESO which has its own vote. Why don’t we have the two separated for purposes of proper finance management and accountability? 

Finally, on the issue of human resource, I am concerned that we have these intelligence services but they don’t have proper progressive training arrangements. Where do they train from? How do they qualify commensurate with their postings? The only funding – they are not funded at all! – (Member timed out_)

7.08
MR EPHRAIM BIRAALO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 25, under unfunded priorities, I would like to comment on the implementation of the monitoring and evaluation policy and rollout of the Baraza initiative. My observation is that the best form of accountability and fight against corruption is through the Barazas where the natives have got the right to pin the thieves about public funds. This should be supported.

Secondly, No. 5 is the implementation of the Luwero–Rwenzori programme. I would like to remind the government that they have forgotten their origin; the NRM is suffering and is not doing very well because these areas have not been supported.

Lastly, from page 35, I would like to comment on the transfer of money and relocating it from patriotism and ethics and integrity. I will overwhelmingly support the recommendation that this money goes to where it will serve us; otherwise, these areas of patriotism are not yet tested enough. Money should be transferred to help the RDCs because they live like beggars at the districts. They are in existence and they must be supported; they help us in fighting corruption, they help with government programmes, they improve the government image and even give accountability against CAOs - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, everyone is now coming up under clarification. Please close, I want to ask the minister to respond. 

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, someone may urge you to oppose the RDCs but the fact is they are already in existence and they are being paid. So, because their job descriptions are so good, we can best utilise them by facilitating them to continue existing and help our country move forward. If you cannot eliminate them, accept to work with them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, because we have many ministers to respond, I think I will start with the smaller one – (Laughter) – I will start with the Minister of Information, then Karamoja, Teso, Bunyoro and then security. If you have nothing to say, you come to the podium and say, “I have nothing”.

7.11
THE MINISITER FOR INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Rose Namayanja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We concur with the recommendation of the committee to establish the UBC Board. That is all that was raised. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister. Under your ministry, UBC is a public department; we appropriate resources here from the tax payers. All of us are tax-payers, including the Opposition Members, and we pay a lot of money. However, UBC’s television and radio stations discriminate again the Opposition. There is no equality in using that media. So, why is it a policy of your ministry to refuse the Opposition to appear on UBC television and radio? 

Secondly, as far as I am concerned, there is no board, at least until this evening. You appropriated funds for that department yet there is no governance for that department. So, why is there no board of governors for UBC?

THE SPEAKER: The issue of UBC was explained in the report, but you can answer.
 
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, the issue of the UBC board was clearly elucidated in the report. It is true the board does not exist, but it is also true that there are cases in court that have not been disposed of, which would cause litigation if we create another board. Actually, there was an effort to create a temporary board, but we were advised by the Attorney-General that a temporary board is not provided for in the law. 

Under such circumstances, we are in the process of identifying candidates suitable for that board as per the UBC Act. The board that was suspended is supposed to expire in December. According to the committee’s recommendation, which we concur with, by January we should have a board of UBC.

On the issue of why UBC television and sister radios discriminate against the Opposition, the Member should come up with tangible evidence showing a particular day when he went there and he was denied opportunity. Otherwise, I have not heard of any report. You have not communicated that. I am new in the ministry, but even in the records I have not found any such complaint from any Member of the Opposition that they have been denied access. 

Further, UBC is the only media house that covers the sessions of Parliament. There is no time when the television switched off a Member of the Opposition; it has never happened. If there is a technical problem, it happens to all of us. Otherwise, it is the only media house that covers Parliament and when I talk of Parliament, I mean both sides of the House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

7.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER ( KARAMOJA AFFAIRS) (Ms Barbra Nekesa): Madam Speaker, I have about three clarifications to make that arose during the debate. 

I think it is very important that I make this clarification for record purposes: When hon. Bigirwa Junjura was making his submission, he advised the Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs to be careful because those in charge of the special programmes are just regional commissioners and not ministers. That is a very dangerous statement because it puts to question the appointing authority of this country, the Appointments Committee of this Parliament and the Members of Parliament who are now serving as ministers in these various dockets. 

To the best of my knowledge, let me inform and educate hon. Junjura that the President appoints ministers –(Interruption)

MR BIGIRWA: Madam Speaker, I rarely make reckless statements; in fact, I do not make any. While I was making my submission here on the Floor, using the same microphone, and you were in that same sit you are in, I made it clear that the biggest challenge we have as a region is funding. I went ahead and explained the historical issues regarding the problems we have in the region. I made it clear that I was part of the consultative meeting in which the minister reported on the activities carried out. I said if this continued, with no funding, then these ministers would no longer be ministers but instead regional commissioners. 


I was a resident district commissioner. I never wanted to say that they are district commissioners because this is a region. That is why I said, they would be rendered commissioners. So is she in order to impute wrong motive and even drag in a colleague, who is my friend, hon. Kiiza Ernest, and incite him on the matter, yet I was very clear on the matter that once these ministers continue being underfunded, they might become regional commissioners? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Member was speaking of the need to increase your funds so that you can be more relevant and more visible. I think he was only helping you. 

MS NEKESA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me continue with the issue of Karamoja or any other region being referred to as disadvantaged. There are special programmes in these particular regions, but these regions are not disadvantaged. These regions are suffering because of the neglect of the former regimes –(Interjections)- it is nothing else apart from that – (Interjections) – yes. I can confidently say that there is no regime – (Interjections) – let me substantiate my statement. 

Madam Speaker, Karamoja has been give due attention by the NRM Government. This is why I will say and state that the Karimojong are not lazy; they are just suffering the after effects of the past regimes. We are here now and we have engaged the Karimojong people and this is why time without number, myself and my senior minister have presented status reports to this Parliament showing that the relief- (Interruption)

MRS JOY ONGOM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Twice I have heard a minister I respect so much, young as she is, with a bright future as someone has just said, really intimating on the Floor of Parliament that some of these regions, most especially Karamoja, are suffering as a result of past regimes. 

You will realise that this government has been in power for the last 25 or 27 years. Wouldn’t it be enough for Karamoja to have been transformed more than it is at this current time? What great things have you done for Karamoja? We have just heard from the Floor of Parliament that Karamoja keeps surviving on aid given to them? Is she in order to impute that Karamoja is suffering as a result of the past regimes? This regime has been here for the last 27 years and it has not helped Karamoja in any way. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think when we are discussing in this House, we should be serious and factual. Is it not true that Karamoja has always been disadvantaged? Are you denying that it has not been disadvantaged? Has it started now? Honourable members, please accept that Karamoja was neglected for many years, and that is a fact. Let us not pretend. There have been many regimes and none has been pointed out, but the fact is that Karamoja has been neglected. Let us accept that and find solutions. Proceed.

MS NEKESA OUNDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. In conclusion, I would like to comment on the issue of irrigation. It is true, like colleagues have advised, that irrigation is the way to go to improve food production in Karamoja sub region. Government would not have considered irrigation initially because we did not have water in the first place. We embarked on the construction of parish dams and bigger dams, which are being constructed by the Ministry of Water with the help of other development partners.

As I speak, we have a good amount of water in Karamoja now and we are beginning with the process of irrigation using the pump and tread machines as we await the construction of the ten dams by the Ministry of Water. These will enable us to roll out irrigation on a full scale in the region to boost food production in the area. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (TESO AFFAIRS) (Ms Christine Amongin Aporu): Madam Speaker, hon. Otengo is not here and I am also holding that portfolio. Let me respond to the funding of the special programmes. Out of the available budget for the Office of the Prime Minister, vote 003, 80 per cent is earmarked for the special programmes in Northern Uganda, Teso, Karamoja, Luweero and Rwenzori. On page 25 of the report, 9.7 emphasises the unfunded priorities under Office of the Prime Minister; so we agree with the report.

Members raised issues of output for Northern Uganda - the hydraform machines, the ox ploughs and the oxen. Purchases have been made but I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker, to let me come back with a detailed list of the districts that have benefitted from the hydraform machines so far purchased because I would not like to mention them from the blue.

Hon. Betty Amongi raised the issue of the ox ploughs. The ox ploughs that have been purchased for Northern Uganda have not yet been distributed. I will bring this list so that we are able to share it with colleagues from the Northern region.

I agree with you about the houses for the chiefs of Lango; they have not yet been constructed. However, they are in the plan for this financial year. The majority of the houses were built in the Acholi sub region so when you talk about Oyam and Kole, I definitely do agree with you because these houses for the clan chiefs are not there- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The clarification I am seeking is: was hon. Besisira, the future minister in charge of Bunyoro, lying when he said four houses had been built in Kole and Oyam when you, the minister, is saying-(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN APORU: Madam Speaker, hon. Besisira saw gardens that were ploughed, not houses. The houses for Lango are going to be constructed.

Madam Speaker, the shadow Minister for Special Programmes raised issues about Teso restocking. The Office of the Prime Minister has allocated Shs 20 billion for restocking - Shs 5 billion for West Nile, Shs 5 billion for Lango, Shs 5 billion for Acholi and Shs 5 billion for Teso. Soon we are going to have – (Interruption)

MRS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister. When I look at the committee report, and I believe they got that list from the policy statements, it talks about restocking as part of the unfunded priorities. The minister has said some money has been allocated and yet the policy statement says it is an unfunded priority. I do not understand. 

For purposes of information to this House, if there is anything that is important to Teso region, it is their cows. When we are talking about compensation, Government has changed and is now talking about restocking and the same restocking is under unfunded priorities. What are we talking about?

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Mulongo is about to burst. Let him say what he wants to say.

MR MULONGO: Madam Speaker, I would not burst if you did not give me the chance. The honourable minister has stated well the plans for building the houses for the chiefs but she is not mentioning the one for the Umukukha in Mbale. Under which financial year is it going to fall?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Opolot has been dying to say something. He is the last one.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to seek clarification. From the outputs delivered under the Ministry for Teso Affairs, we have consultative meetings with the stakeholders. I would think that these consultative meetings, since I participated in them, provided the needs and priorities of Teso. This should have been translated into the planning by the Ministry for Teso Affairs and OPM generally. 

I am now very shocked that on page 25, the committee observed that the planned outputs for Teso region lack the ability to create the requisite impact in accordance with the needs of the affected people. I seek clarification from the honourable minister; where did our views, our needs and priorities go? I thought the consultation was to fit into the planning of the ministry? Are these the same issues we submitted or were they neglected? Thank you.

MS APORU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the colleagues for raising those issues. First of all, at committee level we provided an addendum which clearly indicates that there was a shortfall for restocking. However, for this financial year a provision of Shs 20 billion has been allocated to Northern Uganda as I have mentioned. It is a continuous process but this financial year it is Shs 20 billion to take care of those regions.

Madam Speaker, in this report we talked about those meetings that have been held for Karamoja, Teso, Luwero-Rwenzori and Northern Uganda. The nitty-gritty of the action plan for these special programmes is quite elaborate and it addresses most of the issues that have been raised. So, in the near future we shall be inviting Members of Parliament from Northern Uganda, from the special programme areas, to discuss the details of how we shall operationalise project 0932 which handles post-war recovery, and definitely it is clearly indicated in our policy statement.

Going to the issue of His Highness the Umukukha of the Bamasaba of Bugisu, the Constitution recognises cultural institutions. We have just started receiving the request of the Umukukha of the Bamasaba from the Office of the Prime Minister. However, as we continue with our PCM meetings, we shall definitely be able to come and make a pronouncement when we are ready with something in the envelope for His Highness the Umukukha of the Bamasaba. I happened to be with them over the weekend - the Bagwere, the Bamasaba and the Iteso. 

Hon. Opolot has asked about what happened to the recommendations that were made in the Teso policy committee meeting. The issues that were raised in the Teso policy committee meeting were taken into consideration.

That leads me to the question raised by hon. Ochola about de-silting of dams in Teso region. This financial year, the Office of the Prime Minister has planned to de-silt one dam from each of these constituencies of Teso sub-region because it is very crucial that people from Teso get water for livestock.

On the issue of the fruit factory, the site was changed from the original site to a new site at the Soroti Industrial Park. Roads have been opened, water lines have been prepared and there is water at the site. Power lines to the fruit factory site and now unipots for the Police are on site because the Police are supposed to take care of the water, the transformers and now the roads that are being opened. Training of the farmers is going on. The people of Teso are now supposed to grow more citrus fruits. So UDC is currently training and visiting a number of farmers. We have just concluded training in Soroti District and we are moving to another region very soon. 

Madam Speaker, I wanted to say that Government has moved very slowly on this issue, but I am sure we are going to put in concerted efforts to make sure that the ground breaking ceremony for the construction of the facility takes place by January 2014. I know in the statement I made earlier on, I had said September but it is January 2014 when we hope to break the ground. 

The ox ploughs for Teso will be distributed to Amuria, Katakwi, Pallisa and Bukedea districts. They will benefit from those 200 ox ploughs that appear in the statement.

The hydraform machine will go to Kumi District and the subsequent ones which are going to be purchased this financial year will go to Bukedea and Soroti districts as per the plan. Madam Speaker, I will come here with a list of the distribution for the hydraform machines for Northern Uganda for the benefit of colleagues. 

We have allocated Luwero-Rwenzori three machines but I will bring the list here also, so that the members know which districts are going to benefit from those machines. Madam Speaker, I will bring the list this week. Thank you.

7.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (BUNYORO AFFAIRS) (Mr Ernest Kiiza): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable Members of Parliament. I have two specific questions to respond to. 

One, why is there no strategic plan for Bunyoro? The answer is, together we should appreciate that this portfolio is fairly new; it is still a baby. We must work together to nurture it. We are certainly working towards achieving that strategic plan. We have had consultative meetings, which have resulted into a concept note for the Bunyoro Integrated Development Plan. The concept note is ready and is going to help us develop a bigger plan. 

The second question was: why do we have inadequate funding for Bunyoro? The answer is clear, and the first answer is that the resource envelope is small. Secondly, the bigger development plan is not yet ready.  However, in this financial year, we have Shs 123 million a month for recurrent expenditure, while Shs 869 million is earmarked for development expenditure. I am quite sure that during this time - between now and the next financial year - we shall be ready with the development plan and we should be able to request for more funding. I thank you.

7.41
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, allow me, before I answer the concerns of the honourable members, to extend my hearty congratulations to you for the position that you recently attained. Madam Speaker, you made this Parliament proud and you have done the country proud. 

Members wanted to know the whereabouts of Gen Sejusa. Gen Sejusa, before he left this country, obtained permission from the office of the Speaker to go out. All we know is that he is abroad, and I think the office of the Speaker knows exactly what reasons he put in his request to go abroad. Unfortunately, he did not consult the Office of the President or the office of the Minister for Security, which is the political overseer of the intelligence co-ordinator’s office. So, really all we know for now is that Gen. Sejusa is abroad. Press reports said that he was in United Kingdom; he is abroad. 

Members wanted to know why the Internal Security Organisation does not have a special vote like the External Security Organisation, for example. Well, as far as the Internal Security Organisation is concerned, the feeling is that yes, it is still being very well served under vote 001, the Office of the President. When the need arises for an extra vote, extra steps will be taken to consult with the Ministry of Finance to have a special vote for the Internal Security Organisation. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.44
THE MINISTER FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues. In this financial year 2013/2014, provision of Shs 8 billion has been put in place for the acquisition of land for the resettlement of the disaster-affected population of Elgon area. As I speak now, I did not wait for the budget first to be approved; I have already sent a team aided by the Commissioner for Disaster Preparedness to look for the land so that as soon as Parliament approves its budget, we shall immediately go ahead and acquire the land and ensure that our people are resettled. 

To enhance disaster preparedness and response, we are in the process of setting up a national emergency co-ordination and operation centre, which currently is housed in the old Post Office Building but we are acquiring five acres of land at Namanve Industrial Park to set up this unit. 

We would wish to go beyond reaction to disaster. We would wish to be more prepared in advance, using all the scientific means and information. We have our meteorological department which forecasts the weather conditions, we have the geophysical surveys which normally monitors the earth movements; we would like to utilise all these information bases to ensure that we act in advance before any incident takes place. We want to use these early warning systems so as to reduce the reaction time to disaster and do early evacuation of our population from impending disaster. So these are steps being taken by the department.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: We know there was a disaster somewhere in Kanungu a year ago and the people of Kanungu were cut off because they lost their bridge; even the Prime Minister has to go home by helicopter –(Interruption)- This is another disaster in the house; we can see sellotape everywhere.  

The clarification I would like to seek from you, honourable minister, is: through the Ministry of Works, are you planning to buy some emergency bridges and culverts and store them, so that when roads are washed away they can also be fixed quickly?

MR ONEK: Thank you, colleague, for raising the issue. That is part of the National Emergency Co-ordination Operation Centre. We intend to have in place equipment and facilities to react to whatever nature of disaster that occurs. For the Kasese floods, for example, we were not quite prepared for them; but we would wish now to develop that capacity to react on time when it gets to such. 

The case of the Kanungu bridge is one of such disasters. Those are typical cases, classical cases that we have of disasters here. Of course there are other forms of disasters here like drought, which occasionally creates hunger situations in areas like Karamoja and so forth. All those must be planned for early; with early warning systems from world hydrometeorological systems, we should be able to prepare in advance and have stocked food prepared for such situations in time. – (Interjections)- No, I have finished. Come to my office for more details.

7.48
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Thank you very much, colleagues, who have raised issues, especially the Leader of the Opposition. 

Honourable members, when you read the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act 2006, part 2(b), that is 6h, says, “There shall be in Parliament a Government Chief Whip appointed by the Government from among Members of Parliament representing the ruling party.” This places the office of the Chief Whip both in the Executive and in Parliament. When you are appointed by Government then that means that you belong to the Executive, but remember you are appointed because you have to do the work of the Chief Whip and the Chief Whip is an office of Parliament. That can be interpreted by the lawyers, but that is how I understand it. (Applause)  

Madam Speaker, when you look at the policy, page 33, as raised by the Leader of the Opposition, the issue of medical expenses is meant to be for the staff and not the minister. The minister is catered for by the Parliamentary Commission. The Office of the Government Chief Whip is not the minister alone; it has a structure with staff and staff are also entitled to this. So, the Chief Whip is under the Parliamentary Commission.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to read this: it says, “Medical expenses for the Minister” - not for the staff - and the heading here is “Government Chief Whip”. Are the staff of the Office of the Prime Minister now called “the minister”?

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, when you look at the policy statement, there is electricity, fuel, allowances, per diem and printing for the Office of the Chief Whip. So, this could have just been a typing error. 

Madam Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition raised the issue of the position of First Deputy Prime Minister being vacant. I want to take this opportunity to inform the House that the Office of the First Deputy Prime Minister is not vacant. It is filled, and he is the Rt Hon. Muganwa Kajura, but he is catered for under the Ministry of Public Service. We already handled the sectoral committee report on local government and public service.

The office of the Second Deputy Prime Minister is not vacant. It is the Rt Hon. Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali rightly seated there, and he is catered for under the Prime Minister’s office. The office that is vacant is that of the Third Deputy Prime Minister. 

Madam Speaker, there was an issue raised about the strategic plan for the Office of the Prime Minister. There is a strategic plan for Luweero and Rwenzori, there is also one for Northern Uganda, one for Karamoja and they are developing one for Teso and Bunyoro. So, it is our responsibility. According to our plan as Office of the Prime Minister, we are going to bring all this together and make an investment plan and we have already secured support from UNDP.

Lastly, the issue that was raised by Members from Busoga is pertinent. We are going to inform our seniors because when you look at all the programmes, as ably stated by colleagues, the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme is for the districts covering the Greater North up to the forest in Busitema, at the border of Busoga with Bukedi. If we come to this side, there is Luweero-Rwenzori that covers central Uganda and a bit of western Uganda and it stops at River Nile. So, Busoga is left in the middle. We have taken it up and we shall inform our seniors. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government Chief Whip, I think when you reconfigure the Cabinet, you should let us know. I have been under the illusion that he is still the Third Deputy Prime Minister and hon. Kajura is still the Second Deputy Prime Minister until now. You had not communicated to us about those changes. Thank you.

7.54
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I rush to answer the concerns of Members, allow me, Madam Speaker, to have the final word on congratulating you upon your sweet victory. This victory put you at the helm of liberating Africa from losing the seat because you contested with someone from another continent. Allow me to congratulate you most sincerely.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I also thank the colleagues for the many issues they have raised. I will try to combine those that share some similarities. 

I will start with the issue of KCCA. Hon. Byarugaba from Isingiro and hon. Kabasharira are concerned that the report does not bring out proposals on how to solve the issues in Kampala. I would like to inform the House about the observations I have made about KCCA for the last one year I have been in office. 

The problems in KCCA are not necessarily the individuals, as is quite often portrayed. The problem is three-pronged. One, the KCCA law which establishes Kampala as a Capital City governed by the Authority still creates a lot of gaps. It places the city as a supposedly independent authority yet it allows decentralised structures within the Authority. That is a very big problem. It is not Musisi’s problem and it is not Mayor Lukwago’s problem; it is a structural problem. 

I think we must address this in the law. You have an Authority supposedly independent just like NEMA or NFA, but it also has local governments, division governments with supposedly decentralised independent powers. This is something I will want Members to understand and this is how we are going to propose amendments.

Madam Speaker, I have already agreed with the members of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. I am also going to invite the Members of Parliament from Kampala. Before we even start drafting our own principles, we would want to hear as many proposals as possible. I would like to appeal to colleagues, really without putting in mind any political considerations, to be candid and we come up with proposals that will make Kampala the kind of capital we would all want to live, in irrespective of which vote you cast.  

The second part of the problem, of course, is the pioneer leaders. We had the political leaders for the first time elected in that status and we had the technical leaders appointed. So, they were all pioneering and there were disagreements. These disagreements have taken a number of twists; they are in court, they are in a tribunal and they are in this House. 

I want to assure you, Madam Speaker and Members, that a more feasible approach I am taking, in addition to respecting all those channels, is soft dialogue and discussing with the different leaders. I want to tell you that I am registering progress with many people. I am moving on slowly and I would appeal to Members to support our effort - [MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “But the tribunal is about to resume”] - That is a different story; don’t worry. 

Before I forget, the final problem about KCCA is the mindset of Ugandans, the mindset to resist changes in the city. Why, for example, are people refusing to register boda bodas? Madam Speaker, I have requested you, tomorrow or any other day, to accord us an opportunity to come here and inform you about our plan to register boda bodas, which even is part of the recommendations of this committee and part of one of the plans to decongest the city. So, I will come with a statement, on the advice of the Speaker; we would also want to hear your views on this. 

So, partly, that is the problem of Kampala. I have hope that a problem identified is a problem solved, and we will have order in the city with the support of everybody.

Plans to decongest Kampala; we have a number of ambitious plans and with your support, we will get there. Besides those problems, you all know that there are good positive changes in the city; the road network in Kawempe is excellent and many other things. Despite those problems, there is progress. 

We would like to introduce bus services, we would like to restore train services, reorganise taxis and boda bodas and have given stages that will be mainstreamed in the plan of road designing. If you are designing a road, you will take care of the boda boda stage. 

We have plans to rehabilitate feeder roads. As we speak, adverts have gone out to have roads in all divisions worked on. We want to restore traffic lights; if the habit of theft can subside, the better. We want to rehabilitate the city roads and remove potholes and also completely remove vendors from the streets. 

The issue of State House scholarships has been talked about. The explanation the President has given, which I would like to repeat here, is that there was no programme or policy launched on scholarships. Here is a President, as a leader like all of us here are in our respective capacities, who is given a donation fund by Parliament –(Interjection)– Yes; you vote money for the President. 

The criterion you are asking about is the discretion of the President to support those needy – (Interjections) – Just listen to me. I do not know what criteria you use to support the people who come to your Office, Leader of the Opposition. Also, you cannot tell me that in your life as a leader, you have not helped any people from your constituency. So, what criteria do you use? 

We have explained this matter to the committee. Needy people like war veterans come to him to make requests. I am happy to hear that there are students sponsored from different regions. Much as there are problems of school fees administration – that is another problem - I am happy that this proves wrong the statement of my brother from the mountains. So the criteria is –(Interruption) 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate; for the last 28 years, I have not heard of anybody from Kasese benefiting from State House scholarships and yet Kasese District contributes to the national treasury by over 50 per cent – (Interjections) – Yes; compared to other districts in Uganda like Kiruhura. 

The point I want to raise is: can the Minister in charge of the Presidency prove to this House that in Kasese there are no needy people? Is the minister in order to say that the President identifies needy people from any family yet the President has visited Kasese several times and there are very many needy people in Kasese but none of them has ever benefited? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is difficult for me to make a ruling. I do not have the list and so I do not know who the beneficiaries are. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I invite my colleague to my office. I will show you the people from your county of Kyabulangire who are benefiting. (Interruption)

MR KAFUDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information following the point of order raised by the Member, who is my neighbour from Busongora North.  It is not true that Kasese has not benefited from State House scholarships. At the moment, we have 35 scholarships at the district. The Rwenzururu Kingdom has got 25 scholarships and the Basongora part has got 10 scholarships – (Interjections) – Yes, they are from State House. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR WANGOLO: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from the Minister. Last financial year, some of our students from Butaleja brought in their applications and they were told that State House scholarships were terminated. So I need clarification whether that programme is still on or whether it was terminated. We have heard reports that it is now dealing with only continuing students and they no longer recruit students for State House scholarships. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of this committee. When we interfaced with the minister and his team, the issue of scholarships was a hot debate. The members were asking about the criteria. They told us that there are no clear guidelines. The President uses the Shs 30 billion; when he visits an area and interfaces with, say the cultural leaders, Members of Parliament and others, and they demand for scholarships, they are given out. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, whether there are guidelines or not, I do not think we have proved that nobody in Kasese has ever got. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: I thank the colleagues for the information. The point I gather is that the President gets a lot of pressure. The information I gather here is that maybe the President should take into consideration equity. If the funds could allow, you are much aware that the President would reach out to everybody. 

That is the same issue the committee raised about model villages. The President initiated model villages in some districts. I would also want a model village, but unfortunately, I do not have one. The explanation we gave was that the President started some pilot cases so that the other respective government agencies can see a success story and replicate it in their programmes. 

We took note of the advice and whatever funds we have – I am happy to note that the funds we get are spent and the challenges we have in late school fees and not taking more students are because the money is not enough. So, hon. Wangolo, we can look at your case administratively – (Mr Ochola rose_) – Can I finish one statement at a time and then I will take information? 

Hon. Wangolo, I will follow it up and give you feedback on what is possible and what is impossible. Sometimes the problem is poor communication, which I pledge to improve. Let me have the information. 

MR OCHOLA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The information I want to give the minister is that the issue of the funding being limited is known. The issue was on the criteria, and we raised that matter in the committee. 

I was initially a member of the Committee on Presidential Affairs and for the last two years, we kept raising that issue in the committee. We asked you to have criteria given to us because we wanted transparency. Up to now, the Office of the President has not given the committee an answer, and this is the third year. That is the information I want to give you; we should just have criteria in place.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you so much. Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. Can I take as many calls for clarification as possible?

THE SPEAKER: We need to finish.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Mr Minister, for giving way. As a brilliant young minister, don’t you think that you could innovatively advise the President to withdraw from this policy of giving away scholarships so that in some way or another, the universities can cater for this?

The President at one point could simply ask the universities, especially the private ones, to allow him to have some scholarships, instead of sponsoring them from government coffers. That would be very innovative, instead of thinking that we must appropriate for the President to have a prerogative to give away. Don’t you think that you can assist the President innovatively? Thank you.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I had pledged to take information from some honourable members.

MR KWIZERA: Thank you for giving way. Honourable members and Rt Hon. Speaker, the criteria that the President uses is demand driven, I think. When you demand, you get. Recently, the President gave a sack of money to Busoga but he has not given a sack of money to Kisoro even when we vote 94 per cent. Thank you.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the opportunity to give you information. I just want to inform the honourable minister that just as Members have spoken, the main problem with State House scholarships is that they are so closed and there is no transparency. If it was as transparent as other programmes, people would not be asking these questions.

The Committee of Education tried to reach out to the President with concerns about the potential fraud in that scheme. When he sent some of us out, some information was passed on to him and he sounded surprised. A few days later, he pronounced in Fort Portal that he was going to scrap the State House scholarships when we get the student loan scheme. I would now think that we should be talking in that direction.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please conclude.

MR TUMWEBAZE: The Speaker’s ruling is final. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for the advice. I need to conclude on the scholarships. I want to say that maybe I would be open to views on what criteria you think should be used so that I can also share them with the President. What do you think, because I have told you the President -(Interjection)- Of course that is unrealistic, honourable Leader of the Opposition. In your office, you support people from Bugisu; what criteria do you follow? Really, let us be sincere. I would- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is true that I support many people, but I do not use public money and you must know that. If it is public money, it must be spent through public tendering. The President is spending Shs 30 billion, which can run a whole university for a full year. So, is the Minister in charge of the Presidency, who is my good friend, in order to say that I have State House scholarships in the Office of the Leader of the Opposition when there is not even a small unit for that, apart from my own resources? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think he was saying that you have a Leader of the Opposition scholarship in your office, not State House.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you so much. To wind up, the President has power to donate. You have given him that power through the law and you give him these funds. So if you want to impose criteria, I am simply saying, let us hear those views. For you to say that the President should not support people where he deems it fit as a leader, maybe that is not also a good idea.

Madam Speaker, as I wind up I am trying to comment on every sector that colleagues raised. I would like to beg that we get an opportunity as the Office of the President to interface with the committee again on issues of the proposed reallocation, because we did not go back to be heard concerning the proposals. The reallocation may disorganise activities or departments. I beg that before those reallocations are approved, we get an opportunity to interface again with the committee to see what is feasible and what is not.

Today we are not supplying the figures; so before the Appropriation Bill is completed, we could be guided and helped to have our views heard without necessarily going into the details of each proposal.

The honourable Dr Lulume rose on the issue of Uganda AIDS Commission. Two things are key here. It is true that in the country, there are so many actors in the HIV/AIDS sector. Some are doing a good job while others are actually doing a bad job and profiting from the industry. 

The Uganda AIDS Commission, as you know, has a network of actors. The Civil Society Fund obviously has a database of the partners they work with. It may not be exhaustive because as I have told you, some NGOs act under different arrangements. However, a big achievement and a big step that the Commission has taken is to centralise the message. There was a problem with different actors giving different messages and even contradicting the government policy on ABC. 

I would therefore appeal to you to change your passionate objection and support the Uganda AIDS Commission because the commission is simply co-ordinating actors. If you look at the budget of the commission, it is so small. It only runs a fund of people. These funds, even for the donors, do not go to the commission but the money is managed by Deloitte & Touche, some other agency. So it is merely a co-ordinating agency. I respect your expertise, and we can discuss the areas you think they are not paying attention to and we can improve.

Madam Speaker, I have two or three final points. To hon. Mathias Nsubuga, the Secretary-General of DP, I think let us be sincere. The honourable minister without portfolio was approved by this Parliament as a minister without portfolio and as a minister for political mobilisation. 

Political mobilisation does not mean partisan activity. If I go to meet district leaders to support Government programmes- If you say the man should not get fuel or a car, the next day you are going to suggest that the Leader of the Opposition or the Chief Whip should never be facilitated by Parliament. Maybe you would best define what is partisan and what is for Government. I would humbly request that we understand it in that context.

Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague talked about ISO, that they should have a vote, and the Media Centre. When Mr Ofwono Opondo was recruited as staff, he ceased being a party official – (Interjections) - You do not know what goes on in NRM. I have told you that when Mr Ofwono Opondo was appointed the Executive Director of the Media Centre, he ceased being an official working for the party. That is so clear; otherwise he would not have been put on the Government payroll. 

It so happened –(Interjections)– Talking for NRM; NRM is the government in power with a manifesto and even a CAO who is an accounting officer is paid to speak for that manifesto. Even you, in your constituency, you implement that manifesto. So, really let us be clear. If I go to the Office of the Leader of the Opposition and he serves me tea from the money he gets, that is also the manifesto of NRM - (Interjections)– NRM recognises multiparty democracy. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, for the last 28 years I have been wondering what the Office of the President actually does. I have been wondering what the Office of the President does, what it can do best and what it can do worst. 

Madam Speaker, you know that the money that is used by Government is generated by taxpayers irrespective of their political party. To the worst, Government pays for the President for everything - (Interjection) – Yes; let me give my submission. Is it in order for the Minister in charge of the Presidency to give very naked lies to the House and to the people of Uganda that actually –(Interjections)– But hon. Tumwebaze, what is your problem? - (Interjections) - No; order for what? 

Madam Speaker, the issue that we are talking about is in respect to all Ugandans contributing to the national treasury and not NRM as a political party alone. Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that the money that Government uses is donated by NRM and is NRM money?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the money which is allocated is prepared by the Ministry of Finance in the NRM Government. (Applause) The money we use is from the NRM Government because they are the ones who allocate it. They prepare the budget for Parliament, for health, the roads, for the Police, Leader of the Opposition, Shadow Cabinet. Please conclude.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable colleagues. I would like to thank the colleagues and the committee chairperson and members for the support to our sectors- (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is a very important clarification I want from the honourable minister. Madam Speaker, I wanted to seek clarification before but you denied me the chance. Now that you have given me a chance, I would like to get clarification. 

We have other students who are under the State House scholarship; they studied for three years and their transcripts were retained because State House did not send the money to the university. A case in point is Gulu University. Transcripts of students under State House scholarships who graduated last year were retained because the money was not paid by State House. 

As I mentioned before, last academic year, students from Uganda Christian University were asked to apply for a dead year because State House did not send the money. Madam Speaker- 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of the scholarships has been concluded. If you have got individual cases of those children in UCU, give the names to the Minister in writing and say, “these 20 children have had a dead year, please solve the problem.”

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, because I did not hear him respond to that, that is the clarification I wanted to seek.

THE SPEAKER: I have directed him to handle it. You write to him so that he can handle those children.

MR OLANYA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I will listen to my colleague and if the students had been committed, we will push to make sure those arrears are settled and they will get their academic transcripts. However, I am happy to know that they are from your area and I hope my brother will get to know that.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you so much and the Members. I would like to apologise that the last time I should have been here, I was in Mbarara trying to speak to some RDCs of that region so that they can stick to their work and monitor government programmes. Thank you so much and once again, congratulations.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, save for recurrent and development expenditure for vote 001, Office of the President; save for recurrent and development expenditure for vote 002, State House; save for recurrent and development expenditure for vote 003, Office of the Prime Minister; save for recurrent and development expenditure for vote 107, Uganda AIDS Commission; save for recurrent and development expenditure for vote 112, Ethics and Integrity; save for recurrent and development expenditure for vote 122, Kampala Capital City Authority; save for recurrent and development expenditure for vote 159, External Security Organisation, I put the question that the rest of the report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for the work done today. I just want to brief you about tomorrow’s programme. As indicated in my communication, the late hon. Fiona Egunyu will be brought here at 9.00 a.m. and the body will lie in state up to 12.00 noon. So at 12.00 noon we shall have a special sitting for just two hours so that at 2.00 p.m. we allow her to leave and then at 3.00 p.m. we resume our normal parliamentary session.

I also want to inform the Committee on Appointments that we shall sit, but we shall have our sitting in the northern part of the building so that we do not lose out on the work we had planned to do. 

The House is adjourned to 12.00 noon for the special sitting and then for the normal sitting at 3.00 O’clock in the afternoon. House adjourned to tomorrow.

(The House rose at 8.37 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 11 September 2013 at 12.00) 

