Wednesday, 7 September 2005

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to this sitting. This session will run from today until Friday. We have had to make certain adjustments due to unavoidable circumstances, but also to make room for a number of loan requests, which had not been part of our programme when we were originally planning the programme for the Parliament. So, we shall have to interrupt the Budget process to look at some loan requests, which are before us and then we shall go back to the Budget reports with a view to concluding on Friday with the Appropriations Bill.

I would like to urge members that definitely on Friday we shall take several Votes and I really expect to see more of you here than there are right now. Thank you.

2.42
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Two months ago I came here and asked for some assistance for my constituency where drought had reached an alarming level. The Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, and the Office of the Prime Minister wrote to the district and to the relevant ministry, they made the survey and a report and recommended food to be given to my constituency. When I contacted them they said the Minister of Finance has not released the funds. The situation is very alarming. I am lucky that both ministers are here but I do not know why they do not sympathise with my constituency.  

Two days ago a very serious storm destroyed about 20 houses. Madam Speaker, I am again appealing to the Government to assist us but with food first. The rains have started and at least they would start growing the food, but they are starving very seriously now. I wish I could go with one of the ministers to my constituency to see how pathetic the situation is. Maybe then Finance could release the money. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the ministers have heard. I saw a letter from the Prime Minister about food sometime back. I do not know whether anything has been done about his constituency.

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Madam Speaker, thank you. The Rt hon. Prime Minister has put a procedure in place and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is in the process of quantifying the need of food in the districts that have been hit by hunger. The process is ongoing and soon we shall be availing a report. I thank you.

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Government has a mechanism where disaster such as one that has hit the constituency of hon. Kagimu - government has a mechanism, which involves the Ministry responsible for Disaster Preparedness, which then has a relationship and a vote upon which they can requisition funds if they are not there. We would be happy to help but we would want to see that the right procedure is followed. If the honourable member can, instead of threatening to take one of the ministers from the ministries, raise the critical issues with the relevant ministry, then we would be able to look at it from that perspective.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, without being rude, I think the Minister of State for Finance in charge of Planning has just said nothing because I am here in a possession of over 20 pieces of letters in which the hon. Members of Parliament have followed all the procedures and the procedures have not yielded any kind of results. So, for the honourable minister to come to the Floor of this House and advise the Member of Parliament to follow criteria and procedure, which he has been doing for the last three months, may not help this House. I really beg the minister to be clear. If you can do nothing, just say you can do nothing and you do not push us on the wall to think of censuring you or bogging members on procedure. What are you talking about?

MR KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Madam Speaker, I would like to find out from the hon. Minister of State for Finance, Planning what these procedures are because my constituency was hit by a terrible storm and I and hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, the State Minister for Defence, wrote to the Ministry and Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and we have not heard from them. I do not know whether what we did was part of the procedure the minister was trying to allude to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, have you actually introduced that procedure to the members informing them in writing? If the procedure is there, can it be laid on the Table so that it is available for all the members for them to know what to do?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. First of all, the mechanism the minister is referring to completely ignores the very definition of disaster. He should have his own surveillance mechanism that should really confirm that this is a disaster. The moment you have the bureaucracy, even one life which is lost as a result of disaster is total irresponsibility on the part of those in charge. Frankly speaking, the explanation is not satisfactory.

Second, the Minister of State in charge of Animal Industry knows only too well, even in her own constituency disaster has come, drought has hit, water and grass have dried up and she is absolutely and fully aware. Now, what mechanism does anyone want for this rescue to be operational? Honestly, what is it?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, if I was not clear, I will try to be clearer. The Ministry of Finance cannot say, we have heard or we have known that a storm has hit Bukomansimbi and therefore here is a cheque. No, the Ministry of Finance does not operate like that and Members of Parliament know it. The Ministry responsible for Disaster requisitions money from the Ministry of Finance. There is no evidence that that has yet happened. This is what I am trying to say. Let us not put the blame in a wrong place.  

Having said that, I want to assure the members that when disaster does happen, you report to the Office of the Prime Minister who is responsible for disaster situations and the Prime Minister issues directives to the rest of us on what to do to ensure that that calamity is averted. Thank you.  

2.51
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Permit me to raise three concerns of national importance and urgency. The first one is seeking guidance from the Government again on a matter of disaster, this time not local but international. We are all aware of what befell one of our development partners, the US, in the last three days. To the best of my knowledge I have not heard any official response, official message of sympathy or clarification on the status of our nationals who were in that area.

Madam Speaker, by establishing an embassy in a country, among other functions, it is for consular services. In providing these services one of the functions is to look after the welfare of the nationals in that country. So, I assume that the embassy in Washington should be abreast with the situation in the Southern part of the US where some of our nationals are either undertaking education or employment. I am seeking clarification or guidance from the Government. Have we sent any message of sympathy to this partner of ours in development? Have we sought any information regarding the fate of our nationals who may have been caught up in that national calamity?

Madam Speaker, away from the calamities that have happened abroad now we have come to calamities that are near, in the management of the state affairs in this country. One of the main functions of this august House is to make laws for this country and these laws generally originate from the Cabinet in form of bills, we debate and eventually we enact them into a law. Not long ago this august House had a privilege of passing a Bill to authorize the Government to set up the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. 

Among other things that Bill set up a tax on TV. I was shocked yesterday when I learnt from the media of a statement to the effect that His Excellency has either amended or repealed that law authorizing UBC to collect money from TV owners. There are legal as well as social and economic implications in that statement. The UBC was authorized not long ago by this august House as a law. We know the process of amending a law or repealing it. UBC entered into some arrangement with an international company to collect taxes and we committed ourselves to paying that company more than half a million dollars for that exercise. We are now in the process of annulling that particular agreement with that company. Madam Speaker, this august House is aware that such exercises in the past have cost us money dearly in court settlements because the agreements were flawed.

Last but not least, again this shows uncoordinated activities on the part of the Government. This same government, which originates and is rooted in the Movement - the Vice Chairman of the Movement stands up and says, “Members of Parliament are not entitled to more than Shs 300,000 in emoluments.” 

Madam Speaker, I assume that the Vice-Chairman of the Movement, which is more or less a ruling political organization of this country, is aware of the procedure of how to make a law, which among other things authorizes this House to determine emoluments of these members. Why on earth would such a highly placed person in government come up with a statement to the effect that we seem not to know what we are doing but we are fleecing the public? I seek correct information from those who are near that person or those who think the way that –(Interruption)

2.56
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With regard to the first issue, I wish to inform hon. Members of Parliament that our Minister of Foreign Affairs who is in America has been assessing the situation regarding the hurricane and he has already communicated to us. We intend to take an appropriate action which will be revealed to the entire nation. 
 
With regard to the second issue, I have no hesitation in asking hon. Dr Nsaba Buturo to answer it. 

The NPC is going to deal with the issue of our esteemed Vice-Chairman of the Movement. I thank you.

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, it is not true at all that His Excellency the President has stopped the payment of the TV viewing license fees. It is not true at all and I wish to inform the honourable members here that there is no way and no time the President made that directive.  

It is true that a statement came out of State House, but that statement was not in reference to the comments that hon. Awori is raising. It is equally true that the President did actually express concern about those Ugandans who earn low income, who own second hand TV sets and his question was whether those would be treated in the same way that we intend to treat those who have the TV sets that are not the second hand. Madam Speaker, I want to assure this House and hon. Awori in particular that His Excellency the President is aware it has legal implications and, therefore, he has no intention at all to do anything that runs counter to what Parliament has already ruled.  

Can I finally say that the President’s concern was that the introduction of this fee should be very well planned and that the country as a whole should be sensitized in a way that will give the collection fee a smooth passage? I want to assure the House that that is what we intend to do.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get a clarification from the minister as he talks about the fee and harmonizing it. Recently it is the Government, which came up with the abolition of Shs 3,000 graduated tax. The license fee is Shs 20,000. How possible is it going to be? Members of Parliament get worried. 

I can give an example; Parliament here is investigating the report of driving permits. The report is not yet passed here and when you watch television there are adverts and even driving permits are being issued. The revenue collected goes to the budgeted revenue of financial year 2005/2006. So, we find it a problem. We abolished graduated tax of Shs 3,000 and now we are instituting a TV tax of Shs 20,000? How possible is it and how is it going to be instituted? If we are fighting poverty and we are putting the same thing to practice, how are we going to manage this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I thought you made the law here recently. What did you discuss when you were making the law? Are you suggesting you did not discuss the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Bill?  

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, we discussed the Bill but we did not discuss the fee, which they are advertising now.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, while we were discussing and passing this Bill, I remember all these issues came to the Floor and I was actually contemplating that that tax should not be imposed on the people because it was not clear how that tax was going to be collected. 

There is cause for alarm for a Minister of Information, who is under the President’s Office, to say that information came from State House and apparently that information that came from State House is conflicting with the statement that the minister is giving here on the Floor of this House. Which action do you intend to take on those officers from State House that give information that is contradictory to the policy and to the act that has been passed by Parliament?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Much as the State Minister of Information will in a couple of minutes come out to inform Ugandans, the information I want to give is that this is not the first time where the State Minister of Information is misinforming the public and the President is trying to re-inform the public. 

There has been an incident when the late John Garang died, the State Minister of Information misinformed the public that the President was devastated and the President came and said a freedom fighter cannot be devastated. Then yesterday again he said people should pay television tax, and then he went again on radio to say the President said we should first begin with Kampala. 

The information I am giving you is, would you consider whether he is a potential Minister of Information who is busy misinforming Ugandans and as of now people are not sure whether they should pay the television tax or not? He has not even told us on the Floor of the House whether we should pay or we first wait for him and the President to resolve their contradictory information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know whether you are going to resolve this matter today but it is certainly a matter in which Parliament has an interest. Can you come back here and give us your position on how you are going to implement this law so that members can have an input and the country goes home satisfied? Would that be okay with you?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I oblige but what my colleagues have just said is a very clear example of the urgent need to sensitize the country. I will just say this again with your permission, that the statement the press released from State House was grossly misrepresented and misinterpreted by a number of parties in the media. I can quote the example of the New Vision, which came out with a headline that the President had stopped payment of this tax yet in no way did the President indicate that would be the case.  

As to the importance of this tax, Madam Speaker, what honourable members need to know is that we are putting in place for the first time in the history of this country, a public service broadcaster. What we have been having is the Government broadcaster, and no wonder the problems we were having are very well known to honourable members but we now want to have a public service broadcaster for the public and the standard of practice the world over is that they should pay for the quality they deserve from the public service broadcaster.  

Madam Speaker, finally I oblige and will be coming here with a statement that clearly addresses those concerns honourable members have. I want to add that those who are able should continue visiting all the pay centres so that they have the television licenses as required.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Once again I will rise on a point of procedure for the honourable colleague to tell this august House what is happening on the ground. Procedurally, there is no law until it has been assented to. Any Bill, which has been passed in Parliament, is not a law until it gets presidential assent. 

I would like to know whether this particular Uganda Broadcasting Council (UBC) law that we passed here has been assented to. And if so, I think it is the onus of the honourable minister to inform the august House that the law we passed has now received the assent of the President. If that is not the case, is it in order for the Government to collect tax on a law, which has yet to receive presidential assent? You cannot collect tax from the public in the absence of a law, and until an Act of Parliament has received the assent of the President, it is not yet a law.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, has it got assent?  

DR NSABA BUTURO: Well, Madam Speaker, this is a very classic case of misinformation and I will proceed to oblige by informing the honourable members that actually the President did assent to this Bill and so it is a law, which is in place. Therefore, I urge honourable members, particularly those who have not paid for their television licenses, to do so as soon as possible. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, the hon. State Minister for Information, Dr James Nsaba Buturo, has just told us that the President has assented to the UBC and it is a law. Therefore, is the honourable minister in order to come and tell us that when he was implementing the law Parliament made, the President decided to put his hand and say, “Please, start implementing it only in Kampala”. Is the honourable minister in order to come in front of this House to apply a law this House passed selectively or irregularly in such a manner that he has been doing that has messed up the entire tax administration? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know whether that law had a commencement date. If it did we would like to know when it is. And also instead of causing excitement among the members, why don’t you just come with your document and we discuss it? Because now I do not know where to pay and how much to pay and so do not know about the other people in Kampala. I think we need to get a better picture from you.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I oblige and will do that as soon as you permit me to do so. Can I repeat that the statement from State House was grossly misinterpreted and I am disappointed that even after I have explained there is that insistence that the President was interfering with the work that should be done by others? The President was only expressing his view that the implementation of the collection of this fee should be done in a way that will not allow the – I must say people actually misinterpreted what the genuine motives of government are. The truth is, -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members. 

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I will come to this august House as soon as possible or as soon as you allow and with evidence that the Bill –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, circumlocution in the absence of concrete information is outside the decorum of this august House. We are dealing with laws and beating about the bush is an affront to our procedure. We ask specific questions for the honourable minister to answer but he continues to beat about the bush. 

We have established the truth and we know that this law if it was assented to, it was actually after the honourable minister and his cohorts in the administration had entered into agreement with a foreign company before the law was assented to. You entered into an agreement with a foreign country to collect revenue in this country, which is highly irregular constitutionally, in Parliament and otherwise. Is it in order for my honourable colleague to continue misleading this august House when he knows the truth and he is definitely withholding it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know the details of that information but minister, we have agreed that you bring a statement and because it is important we will give you time before Friday so that we can settle this matter and it gets out of the way.

3.12
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. I rise to make comments or respond to what hon. Awori has said. In respect to the report that was in the newspaper on the Rt hon. Vice-Chairperson of the Movement, as all of us know and as hon. Aggrey Awori has said himself, the Vice-Chairperson is a very senior official in the Government. He is a very responsible person and very conversant with procedures and regulations in as far as they apply to Parliament. He was the Speaker here for a long time as we all know. 

When I saw this story this morning, I got in touch with the Rt hon. Vice-Chairman and he told me he has been quoted out of context. The facts are that he was at a function where one of our colleagues, hon. Victoria Kakoko Sebagereka, was celebrating her graduation. Addressing the guests that were there, he made an observation that his perception is that many people outside Parliament were vying to come to Parliament and he thought they were under the perception that Parliament is a place to earn big money. He told them that Parliament was a place for patriots, people who come here to do donkey work in case they thought that the issue in Parliament was earning money. So, he sarcastically said, “Maybe we could pay Members of Parliament Shs 300,000 or Shs 400,000 so that you people out there know that it is not a place for pleasure and earning.” This is the clarification I give on behalf of the Vice-Chairperson.

MR AWORI: Clarification, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this one?

MR AWORI: Yes, on that one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Awori, this is becoming a dialogue between you and the Executive and it is against our rules.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your timely advice and I hope the Executive branch takes note of our concerns. This business of the Executive branch blaming everything on the media, “I was quoted out of context”; when you attack a matter of policy, have written text so that you are not misquoted. In case of any misquotation, you can produce the original evidence. We are tired! I was in the media way back for a long time. This kind of taking shelter under focal misquotation, out of context, is not acceptable. Let them be responsible. Stick to your word.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I want to inform this august House that it is actually Aggrey Awori who started the tradition of quoting politicians out of context.

3.15
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Attorney-General. It is a matter to do with a ruling that was delivered by the High Court of Uganda on 12 August this year in connection to a one Mr Nathan Okiringi and others, who have been held suspected of treasonable activities. The High Court did rule and granted bail to Mr Nathan Okiringi and three others but since that day and even now as we talk, Mr Nathan Okiringi and a team of others are still held up at the court martial in Makindye. 

This type of practice casts a heavy shadow on the rule of law in this country. I would like to hear the advice of the Attorney-General to this nation in regard to this matter, because keeping them there when they have been granted bail undermines the whole question of the rule of law.

3.17
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): I thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Alaso, for raising this matter. I have no personal knowledge of this matter. I will investigate and give a report.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I thank the Attorney-General. I undertake in about five minutes to bring the document and lay it on the Table so that he has access to the bond application forms and other communication. However, I would like the Attorney-General to commit himself. These are people who have been in detention since 2003. They could not be granted amnesty even when they applied for it and when court has also ruled in favour of giving them bail, they are being kept there. I would appreciate that he commits himself to a time frame so that I know when to follow up this matter.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, I have no basis for committing myself as of now. If I had personal knowledge of the matter - but since my honourable colleague undertakes to furnish me with the information, I have to look at it and see what is happening. At the moment I am not personally aware. The commitment I can make is that when I get the papers, I will move as soon as it is humanly possible.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY 
APPROPRIATION BILL, 2005

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2005 be read for the first time. The Bill is duly accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications, which was received by the Clerk to this House on 7 September 2005. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill will be sent to the Committee on Budget for examination and they report back at the earliest opportunity.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2005

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Appropriation Bill, 2005 be read for the first time. This Bill is also accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications, which was received by the Clerk to this august House on 7 September 2005. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill will be sent to the Committee on Budget for examination and they report back at the earliest opportunity.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.21
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I am giving a statement as promised by the Rt hon. Prime Minister on the security situation in the country. The statement is being distributed.

On Tuesday, 23 August 2005, hon. Dora Byamukama, Member of Parliament representing Mwenge South constituency, raised concern in this House regarding recent murders in the country. The honourable member cited the recent murder of Samuel Naswaali, Manager of Send-a-Cow and the murder of Robinah Kiyingi. The honourable member wanted to know what actions government was taking to contain the situation. 

In view of this, the Rt hon. Prime Minister committed government to coming up with a statement on the matter within two weeks. The following is a statement to the House on the subject matter.

The honourable member’s concern and the concern of many other people appears to have been fueled by the distorted information published in the press. The information was based on a report earlier given by the Director of CID. It was published in the local press on 20 August 2005, a day before the late Samuel Naswaali of Send-a-Cow was killed. 

The press report, as indicated in table 1 in this very statement, which has already been distributed, gives a wrong picture of the situation. The truth is that out of the 380 persons accused, 308 of those have been charged and cases are in court. It takes quite a bit of time before cases involving murder are finally dealt with.  

Honourable members, it is true that some deaths have occurred. I, however, want to assure the House and the general public that the situation has not gone out of control. It is unfortunate that some people have been killed. Government is doing everything possible to bring the culprits to book. The murders that the Police statistics indicate have taken place in the country in the recent past are in the following categories:

•	Those killed in cattle raids 
•	Those killed under mob justice
•	Those killed as a result of simple assault in public and private places
•	Those killed as a result of domestic violence
•	Those killed by other causes like accidental shooting or stray bullets, and
•	Those killed with actual intent to murder, whether by shooting or by other means. 

The total number of cases reported to the Police during the period of January to August this year under the above circumstances is 1,250. 

Honourable members, I wish to point out the fact that for Kampala, out of 183 deaths recorded by the Police, only 10 were a result of shooting, 17 were a result of mob justice, while 156 were due to other causes like domestic violence, accidental shooting, et cetera. This has been over a period of eight months, from January to August this year as indicated –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your microphone is not on.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker for making sure that we do not lose vital information. The table I was referring to is table 2. It shows you what has happened with regard to the death reports to the Police in the eight months of this year.

Madam Speaker, an analysis of Kampala cases of people killed reveals a decrease in the rate of crimes. The rate of murder actually went down. For example, between May and August 2005, there were 77 deaths; this is a period of four months. There were 77 cases compared to 106 murder cases reported between January and April 2005. Among the 77 cases that were reported between May and August, four were as a result of shooting compared to six between January and April 2005. These figures are indicated in table 3 on page 4.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Uganda Police Force has in the past published this information and made it available to concerned government agencies. Let me give an update on some of the reported cases so that honourable members can take note of that information. Members should note, however, that there are many more cases that the Police have handled successfully and that I am just illustrating the point by quoting a few. 

The first case I would like to quote, Madam Speaker, is the murder of Mark Kayongo. This incident occurred on the 15 June 2005 at Lugoba Zone of Kawempe Division around 2100 hours. The deceased was a boda boda cyclist who was robbed and later killed by shooting. Police registered the incident and although immediate steps were taken to apprehend the culprits, no immediate positive results were achieved. 

Later, however, while on routine and target operations on 14 July 2005 at Kyetume on Mukono-Katosi road at night, the VCCU confronted a motorcycle cyclist with two passengers. They failed to stop when requested to do so. They were then pursued and one of them was arrested. In the process the Police recovered the motorcycle that belonged to Mark Kayongo who had been murdered. A search of the homes of the suspects recovered many uniforms and ammunition. The two passengers who managed to escape were identified and are being pursued by the Police.

The second case is the murder of Leonard Isingoma. The deceased was a councillor of the Mbarara local government representing Buremba sub-county. He was killed by shooting at his home at Kazoha Buremba sub-county on 30th June 2005 at 11.00 p.m. The following morning the Police responded by investigating the case and searching for the culprits. Evidence implicated seven people who were arrested. Statements were also recorded from the seven suspects. Three of these suspects were from Mbarara, two were relatives and there were two others. The gun that was used and stolen items that included two mobile phones and cash amounting to Shs 560,000 were recovered. The accused are now facing trial.

The third case is the murder of Robinah Kiyingi. This incident occurred at Buziga in the Makindye area of Kampala on 11 July 2005. Police responded almost immediately by using motorised patrols and a group of detectives. The details of this case are well known to the public especially in relation to how the Police and other security agents responded to the incident. The current position is that the four culprits implicated, including the husband of the deceased, have been charged in court and are facing trial. There are two other suspects who are still on the run and are wanted by the Police. The Police is pursuing them.  

Honourable members, you may have heard of the very unfortunate death of one of the suspects, one Atwine as reported in the House by my colleague, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs. Police is carrying out investigations into this tragic death. I must, however, assure the House that this death will not hinder investigations into Kiyingi’s death.   

Madam Speaker, the next case is the murder of Vincent Lugonvu. The incident occurred at Nankinga Zone in Najjanakumbi, Makindye. Two thugs attacked the deceased from his sister’s house on 26 July 2005 at around 1.00 a.m. The culprits gained entry by opening the sitting room padlock. The deceased was forced out of the house, dragged away to some distance while being tortured and left in a coma for death. 

Police 999 patrol was alerted at around 4.00 a.m. and although the team arrived in good time to rush the victim for treatment, nearby relatives preferred to look for private means. They rushed to Mulago where the victim died later. Inquiries carried out resulted in the arrest of five culprits among whom was a boda boda cyclist, a resident of Kasubi who transported the culprits from central Kampala to the scene. 

Other suspects included a phone dealer, a mechanic, a taxi conductor and a businessman. This is not included in the statement but three of the suspects were charged on the 5th of this month, that is, two days ago, with murder, and they have been remanded in prison, till the 22nd of this month.

The next case is the murder of Capt. Musisi. The incident occurred on 12 August 2005 at Sendaula village of Lungujja, Lubaga Division of Kampala. The case was reported to Old Kampala Police Station. While investigating other cases, a suspect who was arrested in connection with the murder of Mark Kayongo at Kawempe revealed the names of persons who are said to have killed Capt. Musisi. The Police are now concentrating on this clue. Efforts are being made to trace and arrest the mentioned suspects. 

Madam Speaker, the final case I would like to give is that of Samuel Naswaali. This incident occurred on the night of 21 August 2005 at Kyaliwajala. Police is doing all it can to trace the culprits although nothing has been successful so far. The Police suspected local area guards and other local armed persons. The Police carried out a cordoning and search operation in which 35 guns were recovered. These were taken by the Police and are under ballistic or forensic analysis.

Madam Speaker, what is the proposed way forward? The Uganda Police Force on their own initiative reviewed the situation and came up with solutions. These solutions are in addition to other measures they have embarked on and they include the following: 

1.	Strengthening of the Police crime intelligence data collection and collation desks countrywide, 

2.	Reviewing deployments of personnel and resources in order to benefit public security and crime prevention.  

3.	Hold meetings with managers or private security organizations with a view to instituting maximum control, supervision and inspection of their operations in order to improve the standard of their operations and discipline of their staff. 

	It should be noted that there are other tougher actions that the Police has already taken. These include closer supervision and/or suspension of operations of those that will be found wanting. In fact the Police has already suspended a number of private security organizations that have been found wanting in terms of the required standards of performance.

4.	Calling on other security organs to report, review and trace all disasters and recover all arms that may be in their possession and to institute regular public and press briefings through press conferences. This is in addition to popularizing community policing. Through this measure the population will be updated on the status of crimes that are being investigated.

5.	Boda bodas are to be brought under closer control because a number of crimes have involved in one way or another by some of the boda boda cyclists. This will help in maintaining public order and also help operations. Crime prevention guidelines will also be issued.  

6.	The Police together with other security organizations will renew public security sensitization programs through local government structures. LCs will be talking to people in various communities about the importance of being more alert, their security responsibilities, reviving and strengthening security committees, which in the past have performed very well in combating crime.

7.	Reviewing and monitoring activities of previous convicts and persons released from custody especially those associated with serious crimes.  

8.	Creation of a new police division in Kampala region. Under this arrangement Kiira Town Council will cater for the areas of Kireka, Bweyogerere, Kyaliwajala, Kiira and Naalya. All these areas are currently under Jinja Road and are partly policed by Kiira Road police stations.

Madam Speaker, honourable members are certainly aware of the many challenges the Police face. These include: 

1.	Limitation of numbers and insufficient equipment. This is due to budgetary constraints. Government is aware of the problem of manpower fatigue and this has resulted in over stretched deployment and fatigue of the officers and men concerned. The police are working hard to increase the strength by 4,000 personnel as directed by Cabinet.

2.	Insufficient transport. The problem of police transport has been further stretched by the creation of new districts. These together with the old ones have created a need for an increase in motor transport. Last financial year government provided 27 pick-ups and other vehicles for VCCU operations. This financial year efforts are being made to close the gap in the area of transport.

3.	Co-ordination of boda boda operations, which problem the Police has already pointed out. Some of these people lack proper identity cards, are not organized at their various stages, and some of their operations have inconvenienced the public and resulted in crime. Furthermore many of them get involved in accidents.  The Ministries of Internal Affairs, Works and Local Government together with the Police are going to review this matter with the aim to streamlining their operations and solving some of the problems especially those that create an environment for crime.

4.	Public planning in order to secure investments.  During various operations the Police have always identified the problem of widespread investments that are in locations that are not properly planned. This results in the Police’s inability to promptly respond to incidents where police service is required. This challenge is being taken on especially in urban areas.

In conclusion, it is true that there have been incidents of insecurity. It is important to note that all cases that have been reported have been investigated. Some have been solved; others are in courts of law, while some are still under investigation.

I want to assure the public that the situation is under control. All is being done to ensure that we all live in a secure and crime free environment. It is true that the Police lack the numbers and equipment needed but this is a matter that government is aware of. All efforts are being made to ensure that we have the numbers and equipment required.

I call upon all of us in this August House and the people of Uganda to work closely with the Police. Please, report all suspicious incidents and let us remember that prevention is better than cure. We all need to be cautious and alert instead of being sorry later. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you honourable minister.  Honourable members, as you may recall last Friday we had five hours of debate on issues of national security and members were able to contribute to the issues that were raised here. 

Secondly, a number of these cases are actually in court. Therefore, comments should be limited to crime management, prosecutions, incarceration and so on. No one should go into the evidence concerning these cases otherwise this could amount to subjudice. Actually contributions will be limited and those who contributed on Friday should not speak again. 

3.46
MRS VICTORIA SEBAGEREKA (Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the detailed report on crime. My contribution is on streamlining operations to control crime by focusing on boda bodas. These boda bodas are themselves in danger of being targeted by criminals and they are sometimes arrested as if they were the actual criminals. In the steps to be taken will there be a code of conduct for boda bodas for example the time they should stop working? Are they going to be trained in military tactics in case they are attacked?

Secondly, there was an incident in my area where some people were caught stealing cattle. The thieves were arrested but later the people who had reported to the Police were also arrested and the thieves set free. Up to now the thief is at large and –(Interjections)- protect me, Madam Speaker, and the people who lost their cattle are still being investigated. 

I wonder what kind of operation this was. I spoke to these people last night and apparently the thief is busy harassing them. The Police claim they did their work and handed the case over to the District Police Commander who up to now has not administered any justice to them. I feel that the thief was attended to and the owners of the cattle unjustly treated.  

Madam Speaker, policing of rural areas is very minimal. The Police there do not have telephones or any means of transport. One time there was crime and I went to the Police who told me they did not have money to buy fuel for their motorbike and that I had to buy the fuel. The Police are not catered for and they sleep in very bad conditions. I just wanted to submit that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just been advised that there is a problem with the recording system. I would like to just suspend the proceedings for five minutes to allow the technicians to check what is happening. Please, do not go away. We will back in five minutes.  

(The proceedings were suspended at 3.51 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.59 p.m._)

4.00
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I would like to ask the honourable minister some supplementary questions but he is not to be seen. I do not know if I may proceed?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR ODONGA OTTO: The National Political Commissar is around. Maybe he will be of help. I was wondering whether a better phrase for “mob injustice” could be coined. This is because I have seen in the minister’s statement that he defines situations where people gather and beat someone to death as mob justice. However, I do not see this as justice in anyway. Furthermore, calling it thus may by innuendo encourage other people to administer this kind of justice.  

That aside, I wrote an article that was published in the Monitor where I talked about the death sentence. I was wondering if there is a way we could have death sentence convicts hanged at the district level yearly. This is because the actual purpose of killing these people is not to make them feel the pain but to discourage others from becoming potential criminals. 

I was wondering therefore whether the minister could bring the necessary law to Parliament to decentralize hanging houses so that if I killed someone in Pader the people of that village who saw how I killed that person would be given an opportunity to see me being hanged. Honourable minister, please consider these ideas as a potential way of deterring people from becoming criminals. Otherwise, this business of bringing people to Luzira and keeping them there for five years only to hang them as and when you want may not serve the purpose of deterring people from becoming hard core offenders. It will only serve the purpose of punishing the one who committed the offence.  

Lastly, I have been wondering whether it is possible to collect all guns and have government monopolise the use of force. A year ago I went to the Police to look at the inventory of private arms that they had collected. I found out that over 780,000 forms had been picked for pistol licences and I do not know the status as of now. I request the minister to consider the idea of government monopolising the use of force, instead of privatising security. This privatisation is destined to cause us probleMs 

Yesterday I heard on Radio One that a tribesman of mine, called Ogaba, who was a medical student at Makerere had gone to a bar in Jinja and had broken one of the bar chairs. It seems that this was due to an argument he was involved in. Consequently the bar owner pulled out a pistol and shot him in the head, killing him. Now we have a dead body to take home. Honestly speaking, if a bar owner can lose his head and shoot someone simply because he broke a bar stool then this privatisation of security is going to cause us problems  

Honourable minister, there was a cartoon that was published in the newspapers three days ago. In the cartoon there were people in kiosks and someone was asking for Shs 1 million to murder someone. Another asked for Shs 200,000 while a third person asked for even Shs 100,000. This goes to show that the more guns we have with individuals the more risk we are taking. I ask you to consider the idea of withdrawing all arms and allowing only ministers, the Police and Prisons to be armed. The rest of the populace should have guns only on request. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.04
MR BERNARD MULENGANI (Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for this report. My contribution is specifically on the proposed way forward. On the issue of private security, security firms are issuing guns to their personnel even when they are not in uniform. I wonder whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs has issued a code of conduct for these private firms advising them on how their personnel are supposed to conduct themselves, where they are supposed to reside and where they are supposed to hand in their weapons when they are not working.

Secondly, the minister talked of creating a new police division in Kampala region. Under this arrangement Kiira Town Council will cater for the areas of Kireka, Bweyogerere, Kyaliwajala, Kiira and Naalya. If you look at the geography of that area, they are all on the left of Jinja Road. I propose that they also consider establishing a police post in Kirinya on Bukasa Road. This is because the residents there have provided free land and Akright is willing to construct a police post if the Police gives them the go ahead. It is, therefore, my request that honourable minister, you consider this. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.05
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for responding to this question. I have a supplementary question to the minister that is related to these private security organisations. I wonder what kind of guidelines they have been issued with and what law they operate under. This is because on the 10th of June this year a guard working with Star React Security Organisation was murdered while on duty at Classic Inn Hotel, Nakulabye. Thieves came, hit him on the head, left him for dead and they took whatever was in the hotel.  

When the relatives of this man went to this security organisation, the people there behaved as if they did not know this employee. They refused to take any responsibility yet they were the ones who had picked the body the following morning on their rounds to pick staff from the night shift. They had found this man lying helpless and he was not yet dead. They took him to Mulago Hospital and abandoned him there. When his relatives went to the office the boss behaved as if he also wanted to kill these people. The relatives took the body to Adjumani and buried him and they are even considering opening a legal case against this security organization.

Secondly, it is also very unfortunate that in the month of July an army man working with Special Investigations Bureau and staying in Mbuya was gunned down at Middle East in Bugolobi. Information surrounding his murder is still unclear. Some witnesses say he was called on his phone and by the time these people arrived he had actually ordered for a soda. 

On arrival these people shot him dead. However, others have reported to the Police that this man shot himself. Despite this allegation this man’s colleagues from Special Investigations Bureau said that when they arrived at the scene of the crime this man’s pistol that he had on him had not been fired. The murderers simply shot this man and left him there with his pistol, telephone and everything else that he had on him. There has been false information circulating in the Red Pepper about his death to the effect that this man was from Lira yet he comes from Adjumani. This is very unfortunate.

Thirdly, in the same month of July a businesswoman from Adjumani went to collect money from the bank. She first withdrew money from Stanbic Bank main branch and then went to Centenary Bank to get a loan. I do not know if these people had been monitoring her but as she moved from the bank to Kampala Road, just in front of Barclays Bank, some boda boda cyclists came and grabbed her handbag, which contained Shs 9.7 million. This case is also still with the Police. For all these three cases the culprits have not been apprehended. 

Concerning the cases of Caesar Inya, the man who was working with Special Investigations Bureau and Fred Draparaku, who was working with Star React Security Organization, reports are that the Police was not co-operative. In the beginning there was some information but later on even the Police declined to follow up on these cases. 

We are all aware that the Police have limited resources for following up investigations. However, they should not indicate to the public that they are not interested in these cases. Instead they should show some interest because if they do not have money, at least people will know that they do not have money. But not having money for whatever reason and being uninterested in following up these kinds of cases are very unfortunate. Madam Speaker, can the minister clarify? Thank you.

4.10
MR AMON-REEVES KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I want to thank the minister for this report. As I said on Friday during our Defence and Internal Affairs presentation in connection with the Budget, terrorism is taking a new phenomenon. You may recall recently when people started poisoning others in Kampala and countrywide –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I heard you correctly at the beginning of the debate you indicated that only those who did not contribute on Friday would be given an opportunity and if I recall correctly hon. Kabareeba is also the vice-chairman of the committee. The vice-chairman contributed in the committee and also in the report, and he is the same person responding to this. This leaves me wondering whether we are paying attention to your ruling and advice. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the chairperson of that committee was presenting, he was doing so on behalf of 25 other people. He did not contribute his personal ideas but those of the committee. Since he is the chairman of the committee I thought I should also allow him to say something as a Member for Rwampara.  

MR KABAREEBE: I thank you very much for that very wise ruling. Madam Speaker, I said that terrorism is taking on a new phenomenon. We started with poisoning and now we have gone further to hit people on the spot. We have said that the Police must be fully facilitated if they are to be effective. In days gone by things were such that should a policeman learn that you are about to commit a crime or you are thinking about it you would be investigated. We used to have Police who would go to villages and pretend to be labourers. In the process they would come up with information that was vital in preventing a situation, instead of waiting until somebody was killed.  

I wonder what happened to that section of the Police and whether it can be rejuvenated as a way of acquiring information. For example the late lady lawyer Robinah Kiyingi had reported to the Police some three years ago that she was being threatened and that her life was in danger. Recently the Police were saying that when you look at Mr Kiyingi, the man suspected to have murdered this lady you cannot even imagine that he is capable of killing a fly but the fact is that this information reached the Police three years ago and nothing much was done. I think a lot of effort should be put into acquiring information.

I also call upon the courts of law to take caution while keeping criminals in custody so that no harm comes to them like was the case recently when a key witness died in prison due to poisoning. Where do we –(Interruption)

MR KAGIMU: Even Baliddawa of PriceWaterhouse Coopers reported that he was receiving death threats. His colleagues advised him to report to the Police and that was the end. The Police will continue to do nothing and he may also die like Robinah Kiyingi.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I indicated that on Friday last week we had five hours of debate on matters of Defence and Internal Affairs. Some of these matters were already discussed so please focus simply on the policies, management, custody and such things and be brief. 

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much. Finally I have noticed that the people mentioned in the report of the honourable minister are only big shots. There are very many people who have been killed countrywide and then purported to have died say in accidents. I mentioned cases in Nyeihanga Township and Kakigani Trading Centre where in a period of about three months eight people have been killed. These people would be killed and then taken to the road to be knocked by a trailer to fake an accident as the cause of death. The Police needs to be alert concerning such matters.

I want to thank the Police for doing a fair job. However, the way they handle some of their cases has sometimes prompts mob justice. For example a person is arrested today for murder only for him to be seen two days later walking in the village. How fast would the Police have investigated and released such a person in order for him to be regarded as innocent? Should the mob come across such a person, they simply take justice into their own hands. How I wish the Police could hold on to these people and first investigate thoroughly. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.16
MR WILLIAM SITENDA-SEBALU (Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement and I will just make a very short submission. I would like to express my condolences to all our brothers and sisters who have lost their dear ones. I know all of us will die but no one has a right to hurry anyone to their death by shooting, more so in this era of NRM when the gun has been demystified. I am not very religious but I would like to condemn all those who are killing people by shooting and to say that it is only Psalm 35 that can handle such people. 

On page 9 of the honourable minister’s statement he argues that limitation of their numbers and insufficient equipment are some of the challenges met by the Police Force. He goes on to say that these are budgetary probleMs I am wondering aloud that we are now in the budgetary process. Has the minister addressed this in the new budget, because if he has, this will be an issue of the past? 

I have also failed to understand why the Police are emphasizing getting revenue from traffic more than handling crucial issues. Hon. Mulengani has been talking about areas like Kirinya, Bweyogerere and Namugongo. These areas are found in my constituency. If you had a chance of going to Entebbe Road you would find about 50 to 60 traffic officers congested in one area just giving out receipts while crucial areas like Kireka and Bweyogerere with high crime rates have no help at all. 

I would also like to quote another example. Recently I was in one of the commercial banks and found about ten to 12 armed policemen. This is strange. When did Police start guarding banks? We have privatisation of these units and there are so many private forces. Why is the Police doing this? That is the end of my submission. I thank you.

4.18
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will be very brief and I would like to assure my colleagues that I did not contribute on Friday because I was not here. However, I would like to thank my honourable colleague, the minister for his statement.  Actually one could say that basically his statement starts from page 9 because the first eight pages are really what they call a situational report that is not very relevant in this case. However, –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sitenda-Sebalu, can you switch off that microphone?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I would like in principle to thank the Police and also the ministry for the wonderful job they have done in maintaining law and order with a shoestring budget. They are the most under-funded department yet they are the most important organ of the state in terms of democracy. When you talk about democracy it is law and order and these are the people in charge of law and order yet they are the least funded. This leads me to question the commitment of government to the idea and principle of maintenance of law and order. 

Madam Speaker, as I speak some policemen have not been paid since June. Those who have been paid have been paid in instalments and there is evidence to that effect. I can confirm that these people, notwithstanding their commitment to work, have nobody to look after their welfare. Because of this their morale is very low.

In terms of convicting suspects I have heard my colleague saying that people are arrested and then set free. The Police are only following the law, which states that you can only hold a person for a specified period of time and no longer. You have to establish reasons for keeping someone in detention and you need evidence. Of course the Police are sometimes not facilitated to obtain evidence that can be used to convict criminals or to even produce reports for the DPP in order for them to continue with the matter.  

I know of a case where the Police needed Shs 5 million to be offered as reward money to the public for any information. They could not get that money and there was no funding from the ministry. The Shs 5 million you gave us for voting purposes, why didn’t we give it to the Police for heaven’s sake!  

Let us talk about their welfare. The Police are the most poorly housed people. As a matter of policy before we expect to much out of them, let us look into their welfare in terms of facilitation -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am sorry but these matters were canvassed at length on Friday evening.

MR AWORI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do acknowledge your advice partly because I was not here and I did not watch TV that day. I was hoping to watch it on Sunday but there was power failure so I could not watch it. 

However, I do not know if you covered the matter of counter intelligence with the Police. The Police must be facilitated to infiltrate the gangs; they are people who are organised. I do not mean to say there is organized crime here yet, but we must allow the Police to infiltrate these gangsters. The only way to infiltrate them is to deploy some of the policemen for a period longer than a year, not even reporting to the police stations except clandestinely, but they stay most of the time with gangsters. We are not doing that. 

In terms of crime, again we are not giving these people enough scholarships to go abroad and study new techniques of countering this kind of work.

In my honourable colleague’s statement he talks of homicide in general but he does not talk about police victims of the crimes. How many policemen have been killed by gangsters, we need to know. Why do we talk about civilians alone? We should also talk about the Policemen who are being harassed and killed by gangsters? Madam Speaker, I do not want to be specific, but I know a highly placed senior officer in the Police in charge of – against trafficking drugs - he died mysteriously and it was not possible for the Police to follow up this matter again. Since then we have long forgotten and yet he was top-notch in anti-drug trafficking.  

How do we encourage people? Have we since then trained somebody to take his place and follow up these people? The most dangerous gangsters, Madam Speaker, are the people who traffic in drugs. They leave you no chance; they always want to obliterate any evidence and the only way to obliterate evidence is what we call final solution and final solution means you are liquidated.  

This report, the data we have been given here, I would like to challenge my honourable colleague; this is what we call reported cases. You do not say these are the murder cases; you say these are the reported cases. I once lived in a country where the media worked with the Police. The media connived with certain senior officers and they said we are not going to report this week any crimes at all so that the graph appears to have gone down. No crime has been reported this week, which means they were doing a wonderful job and yet in actual fact it is just that the media is not reporting. So, Madam Speaker, let the minister not boast that you are doing a good job before we analyse this report. Thank you.

4.25
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to point out on page 4 of the report, the way to keep crime statistics. The minister on page 4 gives the statistic from January to April and May to August. Crimes tend to follow a pattern, which is governed by the period of the year. So, if we were to compare and see if the crime is going down we would be comparing 2004 January to April; 2005 January to April, and the same with May to August to know whether the crime is going down or it is going up. The way we are doing it now does not tell us anything.  

A lot has been said about the policemen. I am also one of those who have got to praise policemen and women for the good work they have done. They have done a fantastic job with limited resources; they have been given the task to control crime in this country. But, when I see the quality of people carrying guns in public places, I am afraid that crime is going to continue. You see people without shoes walking around with guns in a crowd. What do you think he is going on in that person’s mind? If he gets a chance he is going to use that gun and we have seen that happen many times. There are too many guns out there without sufficient discipline on the part of those who are carrying those guns and we are not doing enough to make sure that the people who are carrying those guns are well taken care of.  

Policemen in this country used to be taken care of specifically well and crime by the policemen was something that we could not hear of. But we have too many arms, security guards, you see them going against the law of this country. They are not supposed to join a crowd while armed unless they are on duty, but you find people just walking around barefoot with some kind of funny uniforms carrying guns and these guns can be used to commit crime. Most of these people who are shooting people at night are the people we have licensed to carry guns. 

In conclusion, the process of searching and arresting criminals who are carrying guns we have seen it done in this country successfully. First, ESO under Brig. Tumukunde and Elly Kayanja was very successful. This should have been a continuous process. Here it was seasonal. When we are overwhelmed we deploy these people to go and look for arMs With the serious number of the arms out there all the time, the process should have been funded and become continuous in the countryside.  

There are many guns in the countryside, we know that. We have heard people being accosted on the roads at night.  On the road from Kampala to Jinja, the road from Masaka to Mbarara and the road from Kampala to Mbarara, many people have been accosted there by people carrying guns and we should have taken it seriously and enabled the responsible people to carry out operations to stop this kind of crime. So, Members of Parliament, we better wake up. We are the makers of laws in this country but we also tend to shove our responsibilities elsewhere and say it is the Executive. Have you made the laws, have you budgeted money, have you allocated money to carry out these responsibilities?  We have not and we are ready to –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you said finally, but you have not finalised. 

DR MALLINGA: I have got to be very grateful to you for your kindness to listen to me this afternoon. I am going to say this –(Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was listening to you, surely!

DR MALLINGA: I am going to finalise by saying this: let us take on the responsibility as Members of Parliament and not to pass on the responsibility somewhere else. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.30
MRS MIRIA MATEMBE (Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for this statement. I would like to make a few comments.  

I want to note that - actually it is noted in this paper – it appears to me that there are many cases of domestic violence related to murder. We keep reading in the press about men killing their women out there. I want –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order, order members.

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Speaker, I know the members know what I am talking about. They even know that in their areas many women are killed by men -(Interruption)- if the honourable members could really listen to me because it is not a matter of joke. Incidentally when it comes to the woman who is provoked to kill such a man, she is harshly treated. I am telling you I have been involved in these matters, I know. But when it comes to such a man killing a woman, I have a number of examples where for instance is it in Tororo where the prosecutor said that the man was demanding to enjoy his conjugal right and, therefore, he killed the woman for sex? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members!  Order!

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Speaker, I was intending to take a short time but I do not know why members are getting excited.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I really would like to appeal to you to look at the death of man or woman as something that we do not want. So, do not laugh because she is talking about women. It is not good for anybody to die in this country.

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you very much. You know, honourable members, I am not saying that some women do not murder men. They do, at times they are so provoked and murder these men in self-defence. I am not condoning that. I wish what drives women to madness could be dealt with, but we have no laws on domestic relations. Here we are, honourable members, there are no laws on domestic violence and sexual violence. It hurts and pains that we honourable members –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.  

MRS MATEMBE: It is not a laughing matter to see women who give you the most votes suffering. When we try to talk on their behalf here some honourable colleagues are just laughing as if it is a laughing matter. These are really serious matters that need attention. I know I have been following cases where men have had to cut their wives to connect the other two parts into one. These things have been happening in this country. Hon. Hyuha here can bear me witness on cases, which we have been following.  

It is extremely unfortunate and it is against this background that I want to say that this House, for goodness sake, should consider passing laws related to domestic violence and the Domestic Relations Bill. Otherwise, what development are we talking about? 

Having said that, I want to make another comment. I want to thank –(Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: The hon. Matembe said something connecting two parts. It was not clear to me. What does she mean? (Laughter)

MRS MATEMBE: I did not expect a fellow woman to ask me to go into the details of an anatomy of a woman, but since she is now requiring it I have no alternative. (Laughter) I am not a doctor maybe hon. Kiyonga could help me here. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Matembe if it will help this country to understand domestic violence please explain.

MRS MATEMBE: Yes, I am going to tell you now -(Laughter)- many of these cases of domestic violence are related to sexual relationships. You find a man having different women around and the wife at home denies him sex because she is scared of AIDS. What do these men do? They bring bottles and push them into the vagina. You want to hear that. You want me to shout it here -(Laughter)- they push - yes now we call it a spade. At times they just cut the small part between the anus and the vagina and it becomes one part. It has happened in this country. 

I think you now know what I am talking about. So, this is the level of domestic violence that goes on. The woman may be mad and hit the man or cut him. These things have been happening and yet we have no law at all against a gender sensitive and responsive Constitution that we have been implementing for the last ten years.  

So what are we giving to our sisters who vote us into these positions? We have been here for all these years and at the end of it there is no law to protect them? Anyway, I had put that point aside, but hon. Mugyenyi brought it up. I think now she understands what I mean.  

I am concluding. I want to thank the Uganda Police. Since the Ssebutinde Commission and the appointment of Inspector General – what is the title - IGP, the Police has been doing well because prior to that all these shooting cases nobody had ever been arrested and prosecuted. Since he took his seat many people who shoot others have been arrested and prosecuted. 

I know of two cases, which would never have been seen to the end but when I was a Minister of Ethics and Integrity I used to follow up cases. I used to go to prisons and police to see whether the culprits sleep in prison. These culprits who have money, you do not know how much they pay to have their way out in the night. At times they release them to go and sleep at home!  

I used to go to prison in Luzira; you know they are in my neighborhood. I followed these cases and I knew what was going on. When this case came up I was not here but when I came back I told hon. Tim Lwanga, the DPP and Deputy Commissioner of Prisons to be aware that this witness was going to be killed. I told them and only came back and find him killed. This hurt me. The level of crime in this country has now become mafia and there are many things we must do. Robinah Kiyingi had reported that somebody was attempting to kill her. I knew everything and we were following the matter. You know what happened, corruption! Money changed hands and later we leant that the man was set free. 

The DPP advised that the man should be set free whereas the original advice was that the fellow should be arrested. So, that is why I went to the DPP. I told him, “You did not follow the case now the lady is dead. Now you better be careful because they are going to kill the suspect who has all the evidence.” I came back only to find him killed. So in view of the fact that even the other suspect was also killed in prison, you need to do something. He was the chairman of Mayuge. I was following the matter before I was removed from the ministry. But later I learnt he had been killed and the suspect was released. 

We need to do something. You cannot say we should beef up the Police. The Police knew and the prisons should have known that they would kill this man. Therefore, I want to appeal to the Commissioner of Prisons to devise a new strategy of dealing with culprits who have money. Otherwise, we shall never manage to prosecute these cases. 

It is very unfortunate that this matter happened like this. I know the God of Robinah Kiyingi will deal with the one who killed him. So, I am not worried that the case will get lost because it will not. But we should really devise methods of making sure that people who have a lot of money and are in prisons are handled in a specific way. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.42
MRS JULIET RAINER (Kibuku County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honorable minister. I am going to concentrate on the way forward. We do not pay the LDUs for a long time and they turn to the gun to earn their living. The other people are the Arrow boys and the Amuka boys. These people should be paid since they are holding our guns; they do use those guns to earn their living.

When I was growing up I never used to see so many guns but in every corner you go now somebody is holding a gun. As my friend said even those who have no shoes carry guns. Definitely you cannot give me a gun when I have no shoes, I have no way of earning and I don’t use the very gun to earn a living and buy shoes.

The other factor contributing to the insecurity in this country are the very many security organizations. I do not know how you register them. What they are doing? I will give you an example: one tycoon who is my neighbourhood hired a guard. My house is about a quarter a kilometer away and I use dogs as security. These fellows thought I would torture these people with my gun. Unfortunately, my dogs attacked him. He was not supposed to be in my compound. The dogs bit him. The following morning he reported to his bosses. He was asked, “Where did the dogs find you?” He said, “At the neighbours’”. 

I was sitting at home the fellow came with his gun. As usual they normally call me, “Maama, I have a problem”. I said, “Which problem, you have a gun why are you here?” He replied, “I was bitten last night by your dog.” I asked him, “What where you doing in my compound?” The only thing he wanted to know was whether these dogs had anti-rabies vaccine. Fortunately enough we had done the anti-rabies vaccination. He went away happily because he knew I was not going to have him arrested -(Interjection)- no, the dogs disciplined him.

Lastly, we have too many army deserters. These fellows go away with guns. When they have wrangles over women the next thing you hear he has killed so and so. I plead to the Minister of Internal Affairs to reduce the amount of guns in the whole country. (Applause) While growing up we never saw guns. How come this government encourages so many guns in every corner? Kindly, let us not have guns everywhere. Some of us do not fear guns because I know I have only one day and that is the day I will die. Whether you bring guns or not, death is there. Please, honourable minister, make sure you collect unnecessary guns. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I appreciate that this subject is of very grave importance but as I said on Friday we had five hours of debate on these matters. So let me now ask the minister to respond so that we move on to other business.  

4.48
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank honourable colleagues for enriching the paper that I did present on security issues. I will make some few remarks and comments and responses to some of the points that have been raised.

I agree with comments made by hon. Kakoko Ssebagereka on tightening up control for the boda bodas. 

On the question of poor policing in rural areas, the comments are well taken and government is doing all it can to reinforce security and policing in the whole country, including the rural areas. 

The inadequate facilities for the Police, especially in the rural areas, the point is well taken.

Hon. Otto Odonga, the question of implementation of the death sentence, I think that the critical point is to create a hostile environment for criminals so that they do not cause trouble. So, let us put emphasis on prevention of the crime, detection of the crime and dealing firmly with the crime. I think the facilities we have at national level for implementation of a capital punishment are adequate. There is no need to decentralise this facility.

Hon. Mulengani’s comments about the private security organizations and their conduct, the point is well taken. Actually government has given clear guidelines for the control and regulation of private security organizations and they are now being rigorously implemented by the Police Force. There is a police commissioner who is in charge of these private security organizations.  

The offer by the people in Kirinya to construct a police post in accordance with guidelines from the Police Force will be very positively considered.  

Hon. Eriyo raised concerns about the neglect of workers for private security organizations. This is a significant point. Implementation of the guidelines for police security organizations will reduce this problem and also ensure that basic minimum terms of service are at least put in place. 

Hon. Muzoora Amon-Reeves, your comments about terrorism are well taken. The fact that terrorism is on the rise is a challenge to all of us to be on guard. 

The support for police facilitation is very well taken. 

The issues you have raised about Nyihanga and Kakigani and the crime rate that is high will be more rigorously pursued. Police is working with the leadership and actually I think there should be now an interaction between you as Member of Parliament for Rwampara and police leadership on this very point so that we can focus on those criminal elements.

Hon. Sitenda-Sebalu in terms of supporting police, yes, it is true the budget of the Police is not very large but the fact that government has now given money to recruit more 4,000 personnel is really something very significant and shows you the commitment of government in terms of boosting the Police Force.

I salute hon. Awori Aggrey for his complimentary remarks on the very good work of the Police Force.  I must say hon. Awori Aggrey has been consistent on supporting improved facilities for not only the Police Force but for government workers. On this one, we share the same views.  

The question of training and scholarships, we are trying to boost capacity for training here. We still have some facilities for training abroad but we would really want to improve and increase our capacity to train our personnel locally. You may be interested to know that we have improved training facilities for the Police. We have accepted to train some policemen and officers from our sister Republic of Somalia. I think this is again an additional credit to the Ugandan Police Force.

Hon. Mallinga did dispute the statistics that I gave – not disputing them but he said they do not help very much. Actually, they do. Hon. Mallinga, there is no rigid way on the presentation of figures; it depends on the points that you really want to demonstrate. In this particular case the issue that was being debated was whether there has been an increase in crime especially in murders or not in the course of the year. Indeed the point we tried to demonstrate was that since the beginning of the year the crime rate and especially the murders reported to the Police, are on the decline.  

Hon. Matembe did raise very pertinent points on domestic violence but let me also say, hon. Matembe, there are many laws under which these people committing crimes in homes can be dealt with. While the call for Domestic Relations Bill is valid, let us not pretend or let us not suggest that the existing laws cannot handle many of those criminal acts and let us use them as much as possible.

The points –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry I was not here but I have read and I have been briefed about the comments of hon. Matembe. I would like to get a clarification from the minister. I would like to thank him for his response and his statement on the issue of domestic violence. Yes, we have the Penal Code Act, but the Penal Code Act punishes and handles cases of domestic violence just like any other cases. 

For example they can term such violence in terms of aggravated bodily harm but when you look at the issue of domestic violence there is an emotional aspect, there is the physiological aspect and all these are embroiled and entangled with emotional ties of the people involved. A general law like that provided for under the Penal Code Act or any other Act, which may be violent, cannot adequately address issues of domestic violence. When you consider for example that the woman may have young children, you may also consider that this woman may be in love with her husband. You have to consider that there is economic insecurity and she has nowhere to run to even if she may want to run away.  

So, I would like the minister to take this issue of enacting a specific law on domestic violence as very serious because the circumstances are very different. Even during elections, as you know, we had to have a line to which women who voted differently and needed protection from their spouses could report. So, Madam Speaker, this couples with the issue of election by secret ballot because the minute you do not line up behind your husband or your in-law you are in trouble. So I would like the minister to clarify as to how a general law under the Penal Code Act can adequately address the issue of domestic violence.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to know from the minister whether he has done research to find out whether other countries in the region or in Africa have this domestic violence law specifically.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The absence of a law relating to domestic violence is also clearly portrayed in the minister’s statement. If you look at page 3 the minister says - the last paragraph, the second last line - he lists the causes and says, “… while 156 were due to other causes like domestic violence”. It is so incidental and even when you move around our police stations in this country you will find where they have listed the crimes, the reported cases and you will find that domestic violence is not specified. They call it something like assault and other related things.

So when we argue out the case for this law we would like to make domestic violence and all that goes with it visible so that we handle it appropriately. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this country is party to the declaration against violence against women by the United Nations. We are party to it, so it enjoins us to enact laws to deal with domestic violence.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate the comments made on this matter, and the information given. Let me say this, that I am not in any way opposed to the Domestic Relations Bill or law. On the contrary the point I stressed was that while the Bill is still going through the usual stages, let us optimally utilize the existing laws. For example, the point illustrated by hon. Matembe where somebody could change the anatomical position of a woman, I think there must be laws that in a meantime could handle such brutality against women.  

The question raised by hon. Ben Wacha whether I have done research about other countries, I think in a way, with due respect, we in Uganda are convinced that we should have the Domestic Relations Bill whether the countries have it or not -(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Madam Speaker, I want to give a clarification to the honourable minister if he can agree because he seems to understand us. We are talking of the law on domestic violence. There is a law on the domestic relations that deals with marriage, divorce and so forth. It is very different from the law on domestic violence, honourable minister.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Hon. Matembe, I appreciate that information. I agree with you. So –(Interjections)- and by the way I appreciate her information. That was very useful information to me. 

The question that I would like to comment on is what hon. Kafiire raised as the last speaker. She did raise the issue of Amuka Arrow boys and LDUs using their guns for their living. Well, I must say that government here has been doing everything possible to pay the auxiliary forces. As the situation normalizes we shall reduce their numbers and eventually let the regular forces handle the security situation. Therefore, if this problem is there it is a transitory problem and it will be over.

The question of too many security agencies and organizations, to the best of my knowledge the country has only the adequate number of security organizations that we need. I think the security organizations that we have are doing very commendable work and, therefore, the question of too many, I do not share that view.

The question of deserters, I think that is a point that she has raised. All of us should be on the look out to ensure that if anybody has deserted either from the army or from the Police he or she is dealt with as quickly as possible.  If he is in the village with a gun he should immediately report to the LCs and other security organizations so that he can be dealt with in accordance with the law.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, the question of anybody deserting with a gun should not arise. In the case of the army, in the army structure a soldier is not supposed to be anywhere with a gun without proper command. It is unfortunate that we see individuals, soldiers walking around with the gun.  That should not happen in the military structure.  When they are deployed, the least they can be deployed is in a section. At the end of the deployment, they should be paraded and the guns taken away. I do not know how this has been breached and people are walking - individuals with guns - and individuals are allowed to take guns to their homes!  It should not happen under any military structure.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I think really the report I am making, asserting that it is already an offence.  So, it is not that this is something that is authorised by the people who may be commanding.  It is really an offence committed by the very person concerned.

The question of reducing the number of guns, well yes, gradually we would like to ensure that every gun is really in very, very responsible hands.  That is why Government is carrying out steps to disarm some of the people that should not be with arMs  So this is the policy position of Government, and in fact that is why the Government of Uganda supports the focal point, which is the National Organisation responsible for making sure that illicit and illegal arms are collected and destroyed. 

The last bit raised by hon. Ben Wacha, indirectly on demystification of the gun, yes, there is no doubt that the Movement has demystified the gun and in fact this process is continuing and all of us should support it.  So, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank all the colleagues –(Interruptions)

MR WACHA: Point of information.  Madam Speaker, there are two issues which have been appearing in the press which are directly connected with the minister’s statement.  One, there have been allegations in the press that they are killers for hire in Kampala.  I thought the minister would come up with some clarification on the matter, but it does not appear on his statement.

Then number two; there have been a series of articles on serial killers.  I think these are fundamentally important matters.  If they are true, this House should be told, if they are not true, we should also be told as to why the press keeps on alleging to them.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The minister talked about mob justice and he did not indicate to us what action Government is taking to eradicate it.  In my view the statistics, which he gave probably take into account cases, which occur in urban areas, which are well policed.  

But I think in the country side there is more mob justice than probably the minister is aware, and I would attribute this to probably the shortage of manpower in the Police, and maybe people losing confidence in the Police, and therefore, taking over what the Police should be doing.  So how is the Government going to handle this menace of mob justice?  Thank you.

DR CHEBROT: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  First of all I would like to refer the minister to Page four of his statement, in which he intends to inform the House that the numbers of murders actually decreased.  Now my colleague, this is not - by any statistical standard does this table indicate that there was a decrease? It does not.  You are merely comparing the month of January to April, there were six; and May, there were four.  In statistical terms, this is meaningless; it does not mean anything.  Even if you look at the whole figure!  Now is the minister in order to mislead the House that they actually dropped when these figures have no meaning in statistical terms?

Two, despite the fact that they are not even related I do not see in this document anywhere; we have had a series of murders, recently in Kweni County, some in Kapchorwa by Pokot of Uganda and Pokot of Kenya.  I do not see it, there were about over 20 murders.  I do not see where the minister has put this.  Could the minister clarify to us what he intends to do about this?

Number three, next time he wants to do statistical figures, can he please consult me, I am his colleague, and I will tell him what to do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now hon. members, I think let me protect the minister.  In preparing this statement he was responding to specific concerns raised by hon. Byamukama who mentioned particular incidents.  But if we said let him give us the statistics of murder in the whole country that would be different.  But this was raised by hon. Byamukama specifically.  –(Interruptions)- I do not know if they are meaningless.

MRS OKURUT: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Actually it is related to the minister’s statement, but in connection with what hon. Wacha brought about those stories about serial killers. Most of these are known as “urban legends” and the minister may find out, but most of them are not true.  

They are called “urban legends,” but they serve the purpose of putting you on the alert.  But the Minister can check the authenticity.  Usually they involve women, if you have been following those stories.  They are about women because women are the most vulnerable.  But they are called “urban legends.”  Madam Speaker, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is interesting.  

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Madam Speaker, it is very important for the minister to clarify to this House whether the morality of Ugandans is decaying so much and their criminality is increasing.  

Madam Speaker, in 1950, the Colonial government then had categorised that Ugandans had a very high tendency for violence, and it was in fact Buganda itself, which was categorised as an area in which to be very careful because they had a very high tendency of becoming very violent, and yet they were the most civilised at that time.  

Madam Speaker, it is very important for the minister to calm us down whether the criminal tendency or the crime rate which is happening in Uganda is being triggered off by the moral decay or it is an isolated incidence during this season, or it is rampant in the whole East African region as a standard of comparison, or is due to many economic hardship? But it is very important for us to help the minister by reacting properly because if we do not give them the correct feed back, then he will not be able to actually come on top of criminality. 

Madam Speaker, in my constituency alone, there has been an LDU who was arrested for having attempted to shoot somebody.  I am told he has been left loose; telephones have come to me today.  So it is very important for us to report to the minister, but also the minister or his ministry must report to all of us so that we become partners in taming something, which could come out of control.  I thank you.

MR MUZOORA: I thank you, Madam Speaker.  The minister has just mentioned that arms, which have been collected from wrong hands, are due for destruction. 

I am seeking clarification because some of these arms, which you got from the illegal hands, especially from the Karimojong warriors and cattle rustlers, Government paid money for them; actually the Government was like buying the guns from the Karimojong, and some of them were brand new. 

Instead of talking of destroying like 20,000 guns and yet we have got a factory that can repair these guns and serialise them, don’t you think it is advisable that we can put them in the factory instead of just destroying them?  I am seeking for that clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister respond to the clarifications and we finish with these.

DR BITANGARO: I am seeking clarification from hon. Karooro Okurut.  She brought something I thought was very new called “urban legend,” and I found it strange because there is a person like Arinaitwe serving a sentence, he is a serial killer.  So is Arinaitwe fact or fiction?

MRS NANSUBUGA NYOMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Mine is to the hon. minister.  He just brought a way forward to bring boda-bodas under closer control, but he did not tell us how. 

Like this morning you heard the news that mob justice killed a passenger who wanted to cheat a boda-boda man after he had made an alarm.  Actually I expected the minister to have brought even this case among the cases they have because it happened this morning.  So boda-bodas are becoming a menace, how are you controlling them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Chebrot, had you finished what you were saying?

DR CHEBROT: No, Madam Speaker, I had just walked in because I realised that under the proposals made by the minister, I had anticipated that he would mention something, which I thought is extremely important, and that is the aspect of community policing.  

Under his shortages, I do not even see any component of community policing, because what I do know is that community policing is a very important aspect in fighting crime.  If the Police themselves have a strategy and they cannot even put down the aspect of community policing to ensure that the crime is brought down, then we are in trouble here.  

The whole concept of community policing is to ensure that that community itself wherever it lives if the crime is high, usually the community becomes very vigilant, and they can even be able to report the potential criminals who are summoned to the Police. 

 Why not even just propose community policing, if you are a Police officer, and you do not even mention it in one of your strategies to fight crime in this city or anywhere in the country.  Thank you.

MRS RWAKIMARI: Honourable minister, I would like to mention something about Army deserters who are causing a lot of insecurity in the villages.  In my own district a month ago our DISO was killed on duty while trying to fight these bad elements in society. 

I felt that I should mention it here in the House, that Ntungamo District is experiencing increased insecurity at the hands of Army deserters and other thugs, plus highway robberies.  

Honourable minister, may I request to make special investigations into the increasing insecurity in Ntungamo district, especially in the sub-counties of Ngoma, Rubare, Rwikiniro and Ruhama.  I thank you, hon. minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please answer so that we can end this matter.

5.20
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I will just make very short comments on the points raised by hon. Rwakimari.  It was a tragedy that the DISO of Ntungamo died, the Police has been pursuing that case; I will need to get the Police to get the latest information on the matter. 

But let me stress this point; the criminals are the people we live with, and if we members of the public are vigilant and work closely with security agencies and the Police, these criminals will be got and will face the law.  

Madam Speaker, the question of community policing raised by Ndugu Chebrot, this is well covered on page eight of the Paper that I did give out.  

The question raised by hon. Nansubuga Nyombi on boda-bodas – actually the question of boda-bodas, by the way, lest a wrong picture is given, some of the boda-bodas help in perpetuation of crime, but some of them are victims of these criminal elements. 

 So no impression should be given that it is the boda-bodas that are doing a, b, c, d; many of them are suffering under these criminal gangs.  The tighter control of the boda-bodas will help in reducing both the criminal elements within the boda-bodas and also gangs that want to attack and use them.

The destruction of arms that has been raised by hon. Muzoora, I think that detail, if a gun is clearly identified as belonging to the Government of Uganda, to the UPDF, destroying it would be destroying our money.  So this is a matter that we are really going to examine to make sure that we do not invest in order to destroy.

The question raised by hon. Wambuzi Gagawala, whether the morality and the criminal tendency and the like in Uganda is particularly high, I would say that Uganda is like any other society and that this wave that we are talking about, the Police and security agencies are doing their work; combined with us leaders and the population, we are going to stop it.

Hon. Karooro Okurut’s comment, the information was generally useful.  The Police recently issued a statement that they have not identified in the recent times a serial killer; this was a Police statement.  Although the point of Arinaitwe is a valid point, however, in terms of time frame – this was I think about two or three years ago, this was in reference to the present and recent deaths that we have had; they have not been attributed to any serial killer.

The question of killers for hire; I do believe that some of the people who commit murder do so because they have been hired, not because they themselves planned on their own to commit murder.  A number of cases tend to suggest that and I think the Police continue to pursue this line, but some of the killers I believe are hired. 

The issues raised by Ndugu Chebrot; statistical issues I think the speaker, Madam Speaker, has given a definite position and I think that is really the position. 

The question of mob justice, well hon. Mwandha, if a mob kills somebody and the killers are identified they will be dealt with like any other criminals.  So, you cannot be excused on the ground that “ Oh! You know I did it because I was in a mob the law will take its course.” 

So, Madam Speaker, I know there are a number of other points that have been raised that I may not have referred to. But we will continue to deal with them, to discuss them and further, if colleagues have any other point that would help the Police and the security agencies to rapidly, finally and firmly deal with this insecurity we will very much appreciate that information being given to us either at a political level or in the Police or through any of the security agencies.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, may I lay the papers on the Table I –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You brought the papers?

MS ALASO: Yes, I got them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Come down.  Honorable members, those are documents directed at the Attorney General in relation to matters raised by hon. Alaso.

5.27
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on Table documents in relation to the clarification to do with the case of Mr Okiring Samuel - the ruling of the High Court.

The first letter I have here is from Omoding Ojako & Okarany Advocates it is a letter to the Registrar General Court Martial, Makindye and it points out that Okiring Samuel, Monday Deus, Komackech Cosmos and Manenero Mwesigye have complied with the order of court to pay Ug shs one million in order to be granted bail. Attached to it are receipts from Uganda Revenue Authority for all four of them.  

The second is bail bond form the Republic of Uganda about Okiring Samuel Vs Uganda Respondent and it points out the fact that the Okirings’ were transferred from the civil prison they could not sign.  So, it is still a blank document from the civil prison in Luzira to Makindye and they could not sign these bail bond forMs

Madam Speaker, the third document I would like to lay on Table is a communication between the Amnesty Commission and the DPP in regard to the same persons it is dated 12th May 2003. 

The last one Madam Speaker, is also from the Amnesty Commission to the Chairman General Court Martial dated 18th June 2003 and signed by Nathan Turinaomugisha Principal Legal Officer.  Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  The clerk is directed to produce one set of those documents for the Attorney General and we retain the other one for our custody. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

5.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Nduhuura Richard): Madam Speaker, according to section 25(1) of the Local Government Financial Commission Act 2003, the Local Government Finance Commission is required to submit to Parliament its annual reports. 

I now, therefore, beg to lay before the House a report of the Local Government Finance Commission for the period June 2003 to June 2004.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, that report is committed to our Local Governments Committee to peruse and report back.

MOTION TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 6.55 MILLION

5.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this august House does make a resolution authorising Government to secure financing from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group (ADB) an amount equaling to 6,550,000 units of accounts for purposes of financing the multi-national project for the creation of sustainable tsetse fly and Trypanosomiasis III areas in East and West Africa.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, it has been seconded. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, and honourable members, as we all know trypanosomiasis and sleeping sickness is a very serious fatal disease that has both social and economic consequences on our society. Its vector is the tsetse fly. 

This tsetse fly affects mostly the eastern parts and western parts of Africa in particular it affects 6 countries of the African continent and these are Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, Mali, Burkina Faso and Ghana. 

In order to eradicate the tsetse fly the African Union Heads of States came together and put up a project to look into the technologies of completely wiping out the tsetse flies. Now it is for this project that Uganda among other countries is expected to get financing for the purposes of putting in place a mechanism to suppress, to control and finally eradicate the tsetse fly and therefore the two diseases nagana and sleeping sickness.

Honourable members, this disease affects the human beings, livestock and wildlife, it can render any country where it inflicts completely useless. This is a very important borrowing because as you all know if our livestock, if our wildlife is wiped out then we are also wiped out.  Honourable members, I beg you to support this borrowing whole-heartedly. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

5.34
THE CHAIRMAN, STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Madam Speaker, hon. members, I just want to make one correction to the minister: The first lot is of six countries but there are many more countries involved. So, members were questioning if Tanzania is among them, yes, it is but this is for the first group of the countries in Africa. 

Honourable members, this is the report of the Committee on National Economy for the loan request to finance the national project for creating sustainable tsetse fly and Trypanosomiasis in three areas in East and West Africa.

Honourable members, the loan request was laid on Table in the House and was referred to the Committee on National Economy in accordance to rule 138 (2) of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament and Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.  This loan request is for US $ 6.550,000 from the African Development Bank and has a grant element of US $ 240,000.

Background.
In the year 2000 some African Heads of State decided to take a stride in total eradication of the tsetse flies and trypanosomiasis on the content once and for all. 

They established a Pan African Tsetse and a Trypanosomiasis Eradication campaign, called PATTEC, under the African Union to coordinate this initiative and develop a plan of action. 

This move was aimed at saving the lives of people and animals from the affected areas and to exploit the vast fertile lands of humid and sub-humid zones of the continent, which were badly hit by the flies.

PATTEC has so far collaborated with all the 37 affected Sub-Saharan African countries - that is why I am saying the six were deferred, they are 37 - to prepare the national projects in line with the plan of action.

The first group of countries being appraised and which will be the piloted for the first period of six years of this project are: Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, Mali, Burkina Faso and Ghana.

The project components are:
(i)	Tsetse fly Suppression and Eradication;
(ii)	Capacity Building;
(iii)	Sustainable Land Management; and
(iv)	Coordination and Management.

How did the committee do the work?  Of course, the committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries with technical teams from both ministries.

We also held joint meetings with the committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and we also examined the following documents:
i.	The project appraisal document;
ii.	The protocol of agreements between Government and ADB;
iii.	The brief from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The project has been designed in line with the country’s National Tsetse fly Eradication Strategy with the major objective as earlier mentioned, is to create sustainable tsetse and trypanosomiasis free area and the above will be achieved through the following interrelated components.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable chairperson, trypanosomiasis (Applause)

MR MAFABI NANDALA:  Madam Speaker, I do not come from areas way of tsetse flies and I was educated in Busoga, so, I do not understand English very well.

MR AHABWE PEREZ:  Madam Speaker, the other acceptable name is nagana and it is in the literature of agriculture, it is accepted.  So I would like to inform my friend that - my chairman actually of the committee - that he could substitute and use nagana instead of the other one.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So chairperson, if you have difficulties with the other English word, use that one which is like Lumasaba (Laughter)

MR MAFABI:  Yes, Madam Speaker, I would have been very happy if we had written this report in the local language, maybe it would have been easier for me. 

Now, Madam Speaker and hon. members, the first ones are a suppression and eradication component.  This component will use relatively simple and environmentally friendly technologies, which include traps, targets and “pour ons” to suppress fly population to low levels and application of sterile insect technique (SIT).  Other activities under this are:
i.	Community involvement;
ii.	Baseline data collection and processing;
iii.	Mass rearing of tsetse flies – these are the male tsetse flies, which are sterilised;
iv.	Releasing of gamma radiated sterile males;
v.	Reactivating of the insectory in Ethiopia and Burkina Faso.

These methods will lead to clearing of about 190,900 square kilometers.

Now, the one of capacity building component: This component will address the following issues:
i.	Establishment of an integrated data information system;
ii.	Rehabilitation of sub-regional training facilities;
iii.	Strengthening of National and Regional capacities
iv.	Targeting to train 600 technical staff, 1,800 extension staff, 3,600 village technicians and 1,200 village leaders;
v.	The national capacity for environmental audit in each country; and
vi.	Rehabilitation of the faculty for training at ELAT in Burkina Faso.

The other one, which is sustainable land management component, will address the agriculture intensification after the tsetse flies have been eradicated.  

It will further address the improvement, sustainability of agriculture and reduce the possibility of re-infestation and mitigate any potentially adverse environmental impact and expected output is broad based land use including sustainable management of this vital resource.

The last one is the coordination and management unit that will be the focal point in each project country and the link to the AU/PATTEC office in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

Funding

The total cost of the project is estimated at US $ 180 million or UA 54.9 million net of taxes and custoMs  Now, the details are shown in appendix 1 for the whole project.  Unfortunately, the appendix we have given is for the Uganda project, but in quick summary, the one of the whole total project is as follows:

Suppression and eradication will take US $ 37.19 million, capacity building will take US $ 4.85 million, sustainable land management will take US $ 0.96 million, coordination and management will take US $ 5.3 million, physical contingency will take US $ 3.56 million and price contagious US $ 3.10; which given US $ 54.96 million.  That is what is coming up there for the total project, but the summary we are seeing is for part of Uganda.  Of course the loan request for Uganda is only US$6.5 million with a grant element of US $ 240,000 from ADB and the Uganda Government will contribute US $1.075m.

The Government’s contribution comprises of salary of the national staff, some vehicles for the project coordination and monitoring unit and field technicians.
  
The terms of the loan:

The loan is concessional and in line with Government Debt Management Strategy.

It is also within the Government’s borrowing “cap” of US $ 200 million per year.

It has a maturity period of 40 years including 10 years of grace and an interest rate of 0.75 percent per annum.
 
Observations: 

This is an international effort to eradicate tsetse flies and associated diseases.  In Uganda the most affected areas are those near the national parks and the game reserves. 

The fight against tsetse flies will be rolled out to other countries after the first six countries covered by this project. This is because there is no boundary for the flies and therefore, artificial boundaries have to be ignored in the fight against this dangerous fly. 

This House has already been briefed about the intensity of problems caused by tsetse flies in the regions around the national parks and the House agreed that there is need to eradicate this fly due to high level of trypanosomiasis and nagana. 

These two diseases have retarded development in the affected areas and there are a few health centers for the treatment of trypanosomiasis.
  
The aerial spraying system equipment will be used to spray and release sterile male flies in the affected areas.  The sterile males will be released for 78 days. 

Uganda being a member of the desert locust area will be able to access the equipment used to eradicate locusts. 

The district entomology officers will be facilitated to collect the initial data base line for the project. 
 
The insectory at Tororo Livestock Institute will be rejuvenated and breeding of sterile males will be done there after sometime. Of course, sterile males will initially be imported from Ethiopia.

The sterilisation process will be sustainable because staff will be trained on sterilising techniques, which will be an advantage to the country as the trained staff will be Ugandans who will be retained as skilled resource persons.

There will be an increase in land available for agriculture after the big chunks of land under tsetse fly infections are recovered and put to economically productive use with the associated economic benefits.

Recommendations:

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should work in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and that of Trade, Tourism and Industry in the implementation of this project to avoid duplication and wastage of resources.

Tororo Livestock Institute should be rejuvenated to handle not only the tsetse flies outbreaks but also other related animal diseases.

Implementation of the project should be carefully monitored because in areas where cattle rustling is rampant, the project maybe retarded due to resurgence of the flies caused by this practice.  This is meaning like Lokeris and Omwony Ojok’s area.

The Land use management component should be implemented alongside the water for production management in order to sustabinably benefit from the reclaimed land.

Government should in the meantime step up the fight against the two diseases by establishing more health or treating centers in the affected areas of course mostly in Busoga where there are tsetse flies and in Karamoja.

In conclusion Madam Speaker and honourable members, of course the eradication of tsetse flies in Uganda will free land for productive utilisation and hence contribute to the fight against poverty as according to PEAP.

Therefore, the committee recommends that the House adopts this report and approve the loan request without debating, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you chairperson.  Honourable members, I have perused the report, seven out of 15 members have signed it, it has more than the necessary one-third, and so we can debate it.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, although this is a purely - almost a procedural motion in that we will not have much debate but for technical reasons, I beg to move that we suspend the business for five minutes in the light of our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why?
But honourable members, if you are talking about numbers we can debate, are you talking about numbers?

MR AWORI: Before, we pronounce ourselves, I would request that at an appropriate time we suspend.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will do the needful.

MR AWORI: Thank you, I just wanted to satisfy myself.

5.50
MR MURULI MUKASA (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much Madam Speaker.  I would like to support the resolution; I think this loan is very well placed and very well focused.  

Certainly, if nagana is eradicated from our midst or if not eradicated completely but seriously suppressed, it will certainly lead to an increase in the quality and quantity particularly of our livestock production especially the cattle, the goats and the sheep that we have in this country. 

Certainly if we have nagana free animals, then the doors to the international market for our livestock products will be wide open and more doors are wide open, it means therefore, that we are likely to get rid of the poverty that we are suffering from right now.

Of course, apart from that, if the area is free of nagana, then it means the people who live in that area will certainly be clear of the sleeping sickness disease, they will be health, will also be producing more and certainly once they produce more goods and services of high quality which are disease free it means that we shall be reducing on the poverty that we have. 

More goods and more services, which are disease free get easy market on the world market and therefore, we get more money.

Madam Speaker, the loan also has a very vital component on land management and of course if land management is improved on, it means that there will be better application to the land. Once there is better application, there will be more production; better production means more goods even on the international market and definitely poverty will be something of the past.

So, this loan is well placed, well focused and it in line with our desire in this country to get rid of poverty, to move from abject poverty to middle class.  I strongly support this loan.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5:54
DR NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, I support the motion and I would like to make a few clarifications.  One is information. The person heading this project used to be a Member of this House, Dr Kabayo in Addis Ababa and the project, I think is a good idea, very good science also.  

Clarification, this disease affects both human and animals; it is called sleeping sickness and if it affects animals and it is called Nagana or Kimpupulu in the local languages.  So this business that it is Nagana or sleeping sickness, there are two diseases; one called sleeping sickness for human beings and in fact you see people sleeping and for cattle there is no sleeping, actually most animals do not sleep but they lose a lot of weight and it really reduces production.

Now, I support this, but I think this money- there are three components, there is the suppression and eventual elimination.  I think that is a dream. In biological systems, it is almost impossible to eliminate this even if you spend a lot of money. You can suppress and control and live with them but I doubt whether you can eliminate them especially with this kind of money.

Secondly, there is the sustainable land use.  Really, the whole of Uganda is infested with tsetse flies. So if you clear the tsetse flies, who is going to get this money?  The money involved is so little that it cannot do anything on the so-called sustainable land use.  So, this money for sustainable land use should actually be increased to suppress and if you are lucky eliminate the tsetse flies rather than spreading the money –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: They will release the land; the land now will be free. So now, you can go and use it to develop.

DR NKUUHE: Yes, but you see what I am saying is, if you know tsetse flies, they are everywhere in Uganda now - tsetse flies used to be confined in certain areas but now they are everywhere.  So, what you are saying means that you are trying to free the whole of Uganda from tsetse flies. So how much money will you need to sustainably use this land?  In other words, it is just a drop in the ocean; you might as well not use it.

So, I want most of this money to be put where action is, which is really tsetse suppression. I do not think you can eradicate them and capacity building, coordination and management; forget this business of sustainable land management because it is simply impossible.  Thank you.

5:58
MR PAJOBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me chance.  I support the motion but I wanted just to get a few clarifications.  In the budget, there are some people who are already affected with sleeping sickness, which comes through tsetse flies. Is there a way for them to get for them either – those that are already affected?

Two, my worry is area of spraying. Spraying wont it be harmful to the human beings who stay in those areas?  It has been observed that some time back, there was spraying in Busoga region near Magamaga and then the substance, which was sprayed was unfortunately some of those chemicals, which were already burned, all over the world.  

So, I do not know what kind of chemicals they will spray; is there protection for the people?  Because sometimes, when they spray, people are there and you can imagine that, if it will sterilize the tsetse flies, will it not also affect people? Thank you.

5:59
MR WONEKA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I stand up to support the committee and support the motion for this loan because indeed, this trypanosomiasis is not only for animals; it affects people too.  Madam Speaker, for the information of honourable Members, Mbale District is one of those districts that are infestation with tsetse flies.  

The people cannot even access medication easily; they have to go all the way to Tororo to one very small health unit to care for them.  You find people from Busitema, all the way from Busia District, Busoga and Mbale they all have to travel up to Tororo, if they are lucky to get anybody to get them there.  

So, Madam Speaker, when I see the recommendation of the committee that the Ministry of Agriculture should work closely with the Ministry of Health this is what they should have been doing even all along because I am sure that they are aware of this unit in Tororo.  People there, who suffer from sleeping sickness, are really emaciated; they are pathetic cases.  

So this loan is timely, and I do hope that something will be done about that clinic in Tororo. Let it also be looked at and its facilities should be improved.

Madam Speaker, I am glad that this loan also takes care of training staff because when the Committee of Agriculture was in LIRI, in Tororo, to look at this Institute, we were told that the staff there find their own ways to get the training necessary to deal with the diseases and the situations that they find themselves in, in this institute is not good. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of land management, Mbale where the infestation of tsetse flies is rampant is an area where water for production is long over due.  Madam Speaker, I support this loan and I hope that water for production will indeed be a component and that Mbale will benefit.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I understand this matter has been debated even in the Committee of Agriculture? 

AN HON. MEMBER: No, it has not.

6:01
MR MUKAMA: I stand to support the request for this loan.  First of all, I want to declare my interest to Parliament that my area is infested with tsetse flies- heavily infested.  A number of people go a certain clinic called Namugalwe health centre, which is trying to assist them.  So, this is a very important loan, which can assist us.

Madam Speaker, Namungalwe is the centre to which the president too the Princess Anne of England, when she visited Uganda in 1988 to see that area because of the sleeping sickness infection and I hope hon. doctor Kiyonga is quite aware of that element. The British Government gave us a grant to improve that health centre to include more facilities. Their aim was for this centre to be a national training centre for those handling sleeping sickness.  

Buildings are there, laboratories houses for the medical workers and at least two medical doctors are there. Water is there too and everything is there, even dormitories for student.  That place is now what we a call a White – it is just there, it is not used properly and when the Minister of Health – I have tried to persuade them and one time they indicated that they are going to turn it into a national treatment and training centre for trypanasomiasis disease, but up to now no step has been taken in that direction.  

Each year the budget is made there is nothing; and when you go and say, can you provide doctors there to treat the people, they say, that is for the district administration council.  We go there but they say, please we do not have doctors, go to Ministry of Health. Because when I read in the report of the committee, they say that they are going to handle the eradication of these diseases.  

So I hope treating people is going to be a vital element in this, very significant here rather than just eliminating and we cannot eliminate them, but suppress the tsetse flies meanwhile the people are lying down.  I want to appeal to those concerned with this loan to readjust it so that they highlight the elements recommended by the Committee under number five of the Committee which says, “Government should in the meantime step up the fight against the two diseases by establishing more health treatment centres in the affected areas.”

Our centre is there; all that it requires is personnel to treat the people. Secondly, what it requires are more wards so that the women and men can be separated and when they are admitted, let them know that, perhaps you will stay in that place a minimum of three weeks and you cannot be there for a shorter time than that.  So we need proper elements to be given to this loan and treatment facilities in Namungalwe.  I am more concerned about Namungalwe.  Thank you very much.

6:07
MR ODIT:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I do not want to contribute much, but I want to appreciate the effort made to bring forward this Motion so that this loan can be approved urgently. For us as a Committee of Agriculture, we had already made a very angry recommendation demanding for this loan. I think now this one has exonerated them.  

But we have one other concern, this agricultural related loans should have come at this time wholesale because tsetse fly is associated with water stressed areas. Now, once we eradicate them, the next activity, which should follow is faming activities and we certainly need water for production.

This Committee has another loan under agricultural income announcement, which is specifically meant for that water stressed areas included these districts where tsetse flies will be fought from and eradicated hopefully.  So we are urging the Committee to quicken their pace and present this loan request either tomorrow or Friday so that we have our budget fully operationalised with these others because the other one amounts to Shs 58 million dollars with a component of Shs 13 million dollars grant. Once we add on to this, it will give us some meaningful support in those areas of concern. 

This is the only area, which I wanted to bring forth so that the Committee and the Minister of Finance can be able to respond and assure us that this loan, which has all along been in our mind, will be also approved in this week.  Thank you.

6:10
MR WAMBUZI:  Madam Speaker, I support the Motion strongly, the only thing, which I would like to say, is Shs 10 million dollars worthy of a loan for the whole of Uganda to eradicate tsetse flies is a small drop in the Ocean.  We need to be assured that this loan is supposed to last six years to have solved the problem.  

Is that the case? Is the project promising us that Shs 10 million dollars is all that is acquired? If you divide the dollars, it is about Shs 9 million dollars. It is 6.555 units of account equivalent to about 9.5 something, which is about 10 million dollars.

Madam Speaker, this appears to be very small money because the issue of tsetse flies, eradicating trypanasomiasis or eradicating Nagana from the animals and then the land being used and the people also being freed is a serious matter, which we think 10 million dollars is a very small to accomplish. If it is piloting, then we need to be clarified that it is only going to pilot a certain area of Uganda because in western Uganda there are tsetse flies infected with the bacteria or a virus.  

If you go to Northern Uganda, the whole of Northern Uganda is now infected with this disease.  Busoga is the original area completely is suffering, as you know Madam Speaker, it and if you go to Tororo the situation is terrible.  So 10 million dollars sounds a very small a figure to solve the problem.  If it can do magic and we can be assured that it is going to be magical; but it will be a pity if after two/three years then the Ministry of Finance comes back saying that the 10 million dollars we asked for was not enough. This will be a calamity and everybody will laugh at the Ministry of Finance for not being organized.  

I would like assurance that when we approve this the loan, is going to solve this problem forever. All of us will celebrate in a big way when we at last come on top of this Trypanosomiasis, which has killed a lot of our grandfathers to the extent that foreigners are now taking over a lot of Busoga Land as a result of this disease.
  
6:13
DR STEVEN CHEBROT: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I just want to reassure Colleagues that when I was a medical student, I had difficulties in pronouncing that word: Trypanosomiasis.  So let it be known that it is a difficult word to pronounce.

Madam Speaker, I do support the motion; only that I want to address myself to the gaps existing in this report. First of all, I welcome the formation of the party, which is supposed to address or at least pilot the eradication of Trypanosomiasis.  My concern is that, they have picked six countries. I think they are: Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, Mali, Burkina, Faso and Ghana.  

Now, the problem is that, as you recall, some time in the 1970s and early 1980s, Uganda had made a very big stride in eradicating Trypanosomiasis. We are a very big center of Utro in Tororo; in fact they were the ones who participated in the formation of that mail and eradiated Trypanosome that could not reproduce.  But now that center is more-or-less dead.  But I have also noted that although a Ugandan is heading this institution, I have not seen any effort being made to rehabilitate UTRO in Tororo.

Madam Speaker, as you know, we are bordering Southern Sudan, which also has a very big infestation of tsetse flies. Now, one thing to note is this, Madam Speaker, tsetse flies do not carry flags; they can go across borders.  Secondly, they do not carry passports, so they do not need permission of the Ministry of Internal Affairs to cross over. Now, if you are merely going to eradicate it in Uganda and you are not doing anything in Sudan, then you are doing nothing. If you do anything in the Congo, again the tsetse flies will come back to Uganda. 

So while they are doing this, there should be an attempt to ensure that at least the border areas are also catered for. Otherwise, we will go on wasting money trying to eradicate tsetse flies in Uganda while in Southern Sudan they are rampant.  I recall, some time in 1986, when I traveled to West Nile; the whole of West Nile was infested by nothing but tsetse flies.  All the patients found in the hospitals were suffering from this disease and you know it is very difficult to treat.  

So, in essence the partakers must review its strategy to ensure that at least the border areas are also taken care of simultaneously. Otherwise, it should be like trying to fight malaria on your own, using DDT without collaboration with Kenya, Tanzania, DRC and other areas.  These are diseases, which travel across countries. I do not know why they are trying to pilot it. If they want the money, let them get the money for the whole sub-region and start at once. So, that is the gap I wish to address at this stage.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now honorable Members, I have had nothing but support for this loan and may be a few additional proposals. So I will ask the Chairperson to respond and then the Minister.

6:16
MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much for that overwhelming support.  I think all of you agree that tsetse flies are a big problem in the country.  

Now, Dr Nkuuhe, the issue of eradicating tsetse flies is to free the land so that it can be put to productive use.  This money is not meant to be used in agriculture; it is purposely to eradicate tsetse flies so that you have free land to dig.

Hon. Pajobo is saying that if male ones are sterilized, they will affect the female ones. Yes, the purpose is to prevent them from producing and multiplying.  That is the purpose.  They ought to be eliminated; they should become barren and when they die, they get finished. That is your God given rights, you can take them anywhere.  

Hon. Woneka talked about Busitema.  I think Busitema is being worked upon and we hope it will be better soon.

About hon. Mukama point, I must insist again that this loan is not for treatment. The treatment is going to be handled by the Ministry of Health, and that is how it is going to be done.  The loan is purposely to eradicate tsetse flies.

Hon. Odit, you must remember that we have been having the constitutional amendment, which put off everything else. So, you cannot blame the Committee.  

Of course, the Ministry of Agriculture has a lot of money and I want to remind you about water.  We gave you 34 million US dollars for a livestock project, which has water a component, but there is nothing, which was implemented in 2002. So you cannot say that you are lacking money when you are not even utilizing what you already have.  

Eng. Gagawala said that this money is not enough.  Yes, there are –(Interruptions)

MR JOHN ODIT: Madam Speaker, this is a very serious allegation and the Minister responsible for livestock is here.  Can she clarify the matter of this money? We want to know the status of this money.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: She will come in after the Chairperson.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Hon. Odit, if you read the report of the Committee on National Economy, it will show you how much money is lying in the Ministry of Agriculture, which has not been utilized.

Eng. Gagawala, saying that the money is too little.  Yes, as far as you are concerned, it’s too little.  But there are equipments, which are going to be bought for use in the whole region.  The total loan now is 80 million, but for Uganda it is 6.55.  The equipment will be brought from Ethiopia, Mali and Burkina Faso.  Surely, we are determined; it will be eliminated.  

But also, if tsetse flies persist, the Government of Uganda should not leave it to the donors; they should put money in the budget to deal with the problem.  Otherwise, if we leave this to donors, then we are finished.

Dr Chebrot, thank you for accepting that that word is very complicated- Trypanosomiasis.  But what I want to remind you is that, if you look on page 5 about Tororo- Unfortunately he has run away. Tororo is supposed to be rehabilitated and the bleeding is supposed to be done there. The only thing that we put in our recommendation on page 6 is that Tororo should also be used for treating other diseases other than tsetse flies related diseases.  

In this respect, I would like to plead with you people from Eastern Uganda, that the Agricultural Institute in Busitema should be improved to handle agricultural matters and to deal with other things of the university.   Thank you very much.  

Madam Speaker, I am allergic to this Chair, can I go at the back?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. Until I finish, your business, you cannot move. Sit there. Please sit down there may be something else that I what to hear.

6:25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Madam Speaker, I thank you, and let me also first take this opportunity to thank the honourable members for the support that has been given to this project. That proves beyond any reasonable doubt that this project is timely and that the loan is needed. I thank you all, honourable members.

Hon. Nkuuhe, because hon. Muruli Mukasa supported the loan, there was no question to be answered.  But hon. Nkuuhe supported it he said that there is no way in which you can do total eradication of the tsetse fly. I partly do not agree with that because it has happened elsewhere; it has happened in Zanzibar, in Botswana –(Interjections)- but we do have some islands here and they are invested with tsetse flies, but scientifically, it can happen and it has happened before.

DR KAPKWOMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I want to get from the Minister is from page two - I attended that joint meeting of the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on National Economy. One thing that came up, which I noted with seriousness is that this project is not covering the whole country. 

What I am now asking is is it possible to have these areas, which are not within the project, to be collected as well during the database collection? Remember that in that meeting, I stated that at one time, NARO officers came to Kapchorwa, which was known as a non-trypasonomiasis area. But they came up with shocking levels of trypanosomiasis infections; as high as 20, which cannot be called a non-trypanosomiasis area.  So, I am seeking clarification that is it possible for the project to extend just for database collection to those areas, which are not within the project?  I am sure you will come up with something different.   Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS MUGYENYI: I thank the honourable member, and I think the idea is to phase this project.  The first phase starts with areas that are most affected and then we will roll it out to other parts. The idea is to get rid of the fly from the continent, not just Uganda.  

The fact that it is being handled under the African Union, I think the concept is to gradually eradicate the fly from the continent of Africa.  So, it might not happen in the first two or three years, but we hope that by the end of the project, at least according to the plan, we should be able to get rid of the project and I have no reason to doubt that scientifically established fact.  

Hon. Pajobo suggests that the aerial spraying is dangerous to other living things. First of all, before a project like that is done, before aerial spraying is done, there must be an assessment on the impact on the environment; so an environmental impact assessment will be done. 

But also, we have experience to show that the pesticides that will be used are not the type that will kill other living things, including bees, butterflies, human beings, other animals, and so on; and indeed this is not the first time this is done and these chemicals are not supposed to be dangerous.

Hon. Woneka, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) should work hand in hand with Ministry of Health. Yes, we do work hand in hand even on other projects like FITCA, which has been ongoing. We work with Ministry of Health, but we have division of labour in Ministry of Health, handles the treatment once the disease is already out. But in the Ministry of Agriculture, we handle the primary cause of the disease, which is the tsetse fly itself, but we work together.

MS WONEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  When visiting Liri that is in Tororo we did not find there Ministry of Health workers as opposed to Ministry of Agriculture. It was the same people in that program, in fact the Ministry of Health to have absconded from their duty in as far as that Health Centre was concerned.  So, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which Health Centre is that?

MS WONEKA: This Health Centre is in UTRO, it is in LIRI, in the institute itself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The UTRO Centre itself?

MS WONEKA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

DR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, there was an oversight, because I expected the Minister to inform the House about which areas have been mapped out for intervention strategy in Uganda. The information, which I was given by hon. Kapkwomu, is that they are not going to cover the whole country.  But even on the submission of the document, I do not see which areas have been mapped out for intervention. 

Now, what is going to happen? Are there many Non Governmental Organizations, bilateral agencies, who may also be interested in strategies for wiping out this problem? The Ministry of Health is also involved and this is likely to turbulent efforts and the little money we have got.  

So, we would like the Minister to answer, which areas have been mapped out for intervention, where and when, because we are just approving this money. We do not know, which areas are going to be dealt with. It will require me to go the Ministry of Agriculture and say, can you now move to Kapchorwa?  We want a clear scientific methodology in place.  Thank you.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, the institute in Tororo, which has a treatment centre, is supposed to be run by a medical doctor for humans because I cannot see how the veterinary doctors in LIRI can be treating human beings with sleeping sickness, and in fact –(Interjection)- I allowed you to speak So, let me answer you and provide information.  Unfortunately, there is no one from the Ministry of Health right here. But I have been the Centre on several occasions. And I know that it is a research institute for livestock.  But because it also deals with tsetse flies control, Nagana and sleeping sickness - in fact insect rearing is ongoing right now. One of the technologies supposed to be used.  

I also realized that there are patients of sleeping sickness being treated in that Centre, and medical doctors treat them. So that is the information that I have.  

Now, as –(Interjection)- no, hon. Alaso let me finish.  So, as I said, to come back to what hon. Dr Chebrot asked, this project starts with the districts that are heavily affected, but it is supposed to cover the whole country. It is supposed to be a national project that should see total eradication of tsetse fly from Uganda.

Hon. Mukama, an element of treating people should be vita; yes, I agree, MAAIF is already working with the Ministry of Health. An example is the FITCA project.  This is not the first time we are supposed to work together in this effort to eradicate tsetse flies and to treat human beings as well as animals of this disease. 

We are hoping that this is now going to be at least a big push towards that effort and I think the centre, which you mentioned, is it Namugalwe, right now is being taken care of by the Ministry of Health, but also under the project, FITCA is collaborating with the Ministry of Health on this centre.  

Now, I want to thank hon. Odit, our Chairman of the Agricultural Committee for bringing in the farm economy enhancement project loan request. Let me add my voice to his to say that the component of water, which has again been brought up is a big issue to do with agricultural production. This loan is supposed to help us to seriously tackle that element of water irrigation and water harvesting, particularly in areas that are water stressed. That is a project of the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, but it affects us as producers of livestock and crops.  

Now, hon. Gagawala, the project is supposed to be implemented in phases and this is the first phase and the AU is supposed to get subsequent phases in place as we implement the first one. So, the question of saying that this loan is too small does, first the entire project is about 80 million, The Uganda component is Shs 6 million but Uganda is not supposed to operate separately from the other countries. For example, certain species of flies are supposed to be reared in Ethiopia and introduced in Uganda. 

So, if you look at the mechanism of how the project is supposed to be working. It is not going to be just Shs 6 million to be used in Uganda. Uganda is supposed to benefit from other aspects of the project that are regional. So, this is just the first phase and other phases are supposed to be worked on as we implement the first one.

Now, I can only agree with Dr Chebrot about Sudan, and we know that Sudan has a high infestation, so is Congo and Tanzania. The idea is to get all these African countries on board because as you said, the flies do not know boundaries and indeed do not carry passports. So, the only way to go about them is to ensure that the whole continent is free of the flies; otherwise, we are going a re-infestation of the same fly. I hope this concept has been well accepted, understood and that is the move that we are taking. 

Now, Chairman Mafabi, the Shs 34 million ADB loan, that you approved here; first of all, I think it was approved in 2004 finally. The component of water cannot be 2002- it was finally approved in 2002, that was when it was first introduced. But the actual approval was done much later. 

The component of water, as you very well know, goes to the Ministry in charge of Water, Lands and Environment. As I speak now, I think tenders have been prepared and tenders are supposed to tender for the construction of the water as far as I know from this project.  Thank you.

6:33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, and honourable members, all I have to do is to thank the honourable members and in particular the Chairman of the Committee and my colleague in charge of Agriculture for ably responding to the issues raised by the Members touching this loan.  I think everything has been answered well. The only item remaining is the matter that was raised by hon. Odit regarding the Farm Income Enhancement Loan.  

I appreciate and I am really very happy that he has raised this matter. This is loan could go a long way supplementing; what we are trying to seek now is land use management. I am glad to report that that loan is pending; we have been in touch with the committee. They wanted some few clarifications, which we have given from the look of things, because the Chairman is here and he is listening. That loan will also be brought to this august House for your approval. I thank you very much honourable members –(Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you honourable members, the Ministers, the Chairperson and your Committee members. We shall conclude this process when we are taking the vote on other matters, which are also pending before this House.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE REPORT ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us receive it; we can debate it tomorrow.

6:35
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  This is a fairly detailed report but we shall try and summarize. The details can be considered overnight by Members so that when they come tomorrow, they can be able to debate after having gone through the details. 

But Madam Speaker, I have one correction to make on page 10 and this is an item concerning the budget for NARO vote 142 just down the page. The figure should be corrected from Shs 22,744,844 to Shs 25,547,254 and the same correction can also be done for page 13, where the same figure is reflected on he last paragraph on page 13. It should also be corrected; the figures are adjusted upwards. 

Madam Speaker, the committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries considered the ministry’s policy statement under vote 010 for the parent ministry and vote 142 for NARO. 

The focus of the ministry remains poverty eradication, even under the revised Poverty Eradication Action Plan. It is with this regard that now we present this report to this august House for consideration and approval. 

The committee considered the performance of the previous budget for the year 2004/05 under 13 key objectives:

1. 	Putting in place sustainable agricultural sector development institutions that would work in partnership with and be coordinated within a decentralised framework. This was to be achieved through:

	a) 	the Department of Fisheries Resources, with the aim of establishing an Authority for management of fisheries resources.
	b) rationalisation of the staffing in the ministry
	c)	undertaking functional analysis of the sector institutions
	d) consolidating ROM implementation
	e) operationalising of the NARS Policy
	f) 	reviewing and repeal of some of the laws of agriculture 
	g) training extension workers
	h)	consolidation of IFMS implementation programmes.

2. 	To develop supportive policies, regulations and set standards and provide enforcement mechanisms for the smooth functioning of the agricultural and agro-industrial sector. These were to be implemented under three sub components: 

	The crop sub sector, the fisheries sub sector and the livestock sub sector. The details of each of these are indicated. 

3. 	Promoting a decentralised farmer- driven and private sector serviced agriculture advisory services.  This was to be achieved by rolling out NAADS to the new districts and sub counties.

4. 	Planned activities within the PMA context and these were;
(a)	to increase incomes and improve the quality of life of poor subsistence farmers through increased productivity and value addition and an increased share of marketed production.
(b)	to improve household food security through the market-oriented production other than emphasising self-sufficiency.
(c)	to provide gainful employment through secondary benefits arising from the implementation of PMA, such as agro-processing and the provision of services to both forward and backward linkage industries and
(d)	to promote sustainable use and management of natural resources by developing land-use and management policies and systems

5. 	Ensuing poverty focus, prioritisation and performance of public programmes through strategic planning, capacity building monitoring and inspection services.

6. 	Generating and disseminating problem -solving, profitable and environmentally sound technologies on sustainable basis.

7. 	Putting in place viable and sustainable measures and mechanisms for epidemic pest and disease control for FMD, CBPP, Rinderpest, Rabies and ECF.

8. 	Promotion of utilisation of water for increased and sustainable commercial agricultural production through effective irrigation schemes. That is why we are very concerned with this very last loan, Madam Speaker.

9. 	Developing and putting in place a decentralised –(Interruption)

DR STEVEN CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, I am finding difficulties following this report.  First, the report is confusing objectives, activities with outcomes. It is difficult for me to understand what exactly the chairman is talking about.  Is he talking about outcomes or activities? Surely, it is confusing. He is talking about the activities, outcomes and vice versa. Could he clarify this?

MR ODIT:  Madam Speaker, this is the problem with people who do not spare time to look at the Policy Statement.  We have summarised these activities and objectives from the Policy Statement. From these, we are going to make our observations and recommendations.

DR CHEBROT:  Madam Speaker, the Chairman cannot presume that I cannot understand or have not read the policies.  I have done Policy Analysis and I know exactly what I am talking about.  The honourable member should know the difference between an activity and an output, irrespective of the policy formulation of that ministry. Is the honourable member in order to confuse the House?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members you are aware that this financial year, the Budget Committee and all the Chairpersons agreed on a leeway format of presentation.  So, this is a new format.

MR ODIT:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Precisely that is what we have been advised to do.
   
10. 	Putting in place appropriate infrastructure to facilitate development in the sector.

11. 	Promoting an environmentally sustainable agriculture by sensitising communities on the need to avert colonisation of water hyacinth in new areas within the lake catchments of Mbarara, Ntungamo, Masaka and the Lake Kyoga satellites Lakes.
  
12. 	Facilitate the development of a profitable and sustainable agro-forestry, integrated within the agricultural and non-agricultural economy.
  
13. 	Support the production of Strategy Agricultural Commodities for Export.

To achieve these objectives, there were certain activities spelt out and these are the details which I would urge members to look at in the Policy Statement. We have listed some for members to look at. The ministry was given shs 26,909,000,000 for the year 2004/05.  This was against the approved budget of shs 28,389,000,000, representing a budget outturn of 94.4 per cent.  In other words, they got less than what was actually approved by the House.

Similarly, NARO’s actual release was shs 6,99 billion against the approved budget of shs 7,534 billion representing a budget outturn of 93 per cent. This was also very good for it enabled the ministry to achieve much of the stated objectives. I wish to remind the House that it was the wish of MAAF that they should secure shs 67.7 billion under vote 010 and shs 27.62 billion for NARO under vote 142. This was to enable it to operate comfortably.

I will now summarise the achievements of the sector during the financial year 2004-2005:

a)	15 officers were promoted, 
b)	seven confirmations were made, 
c)	two disciplinary cases were handled, 
d)	twelve recruitments were handled, and the rest are straightforward. 
 
A number of policies were developed, food and nutrition security policy, national fisheries policy, national meat policy, animal feeds policy, hides, skins and leather development policy. In addition to the policies formulated, the following Bills were enacted; the Seed and Plant Bill, 2003; the National Agricultural Research Bill; the Agricultural Seed and Plant Statute No.8 of 1989 was repealed.  

3) 	The last activity on the five farms in Kasese, Luweero and Mpigi producing horticulture especially fruits and vegetable and spices for the European market were audited for compliance to EURO-GAP requirements. This is a tremendous achievement because these conditions were very stringent and if Uganda met the requirements, this is a very good development for the country. 

4) 	NAADS expanded to cover eight additional districts as indicated. There were also an additional 103 sub counties, which were covered in the 21 old districts.  

5) 	An aquaculture strategy is being developed to realign with overall FSSP. About farming in tsetse fly controlled area project, 84 heifers were given out to farmers in the indicated districts. A national laboratory for crop protection was constructed at Namalere and new equipment was installed.  Farmers managing 15 Beach Management Units (BMUs) on Lake Victoria in areas of financial management were also trained.  Seed lot sampling and lot examination was carried out for compliance to seed processing standards. 

6) 	85 per cent of NARO crop research output has been used by NAADS and NGO’s; 20 per cent of NARO strategies accessed by local governments; 60 per cent of soil management strategies have been accessed in Eastern Uganda. This is in a way reflects the degree to which our farmers are accessing technologies that have been generated from our research institute, through the extension arm of the Agricultural services, which is NAADS. Four BMUs were also established, collaborative forest management was established in four natural forests and three soil management strategies were developed. These are a few examples of key activities that were undertaken under that objective. 

7) 	The Ministry established Bacterial Banana Wilt control task forces in Mukono, Kayunga, Luwero, Mpigi, Mubende, Kibogo, Kyenjojo, Kabarole, Bushenyi and Ntungamo.  Madam Speaker, this is also an area of concern because this is a countrywide epidemic. We would have wanted the ministry to extend to a much bigger area than the limited districts mentioned. Therefore, they should have an answer for us in the course of the debate.  The ministry also procured CBPP vaccines worth 40,000 doses; Rabies worth 340,000 doses; Anthrax - 130,000 doses and FMD - 495,000 doses. That is all that the money could afford.  The ministry also established a Tsetse colony at 10,000 breeding female.  

8) 	We are sorry that the committee saw no remarkable progress and this was an area for emphasis for it involved water for production. There was no serious action taken and this is regrettable.

9) 	BMUs were developed and we are comfortable with the directorate of forestry resources and catch assessment areas.  

10) 	Under fish sub sector, Kantey and Templer consultants finalised the work on feasibility study for the landing sites and there are ready for construction.  Under livestock sub sector, phase 1 of refurbishing and extending the tsetse fly mass rearing has been completed. One animal holding ground was constructed and 3000 movements permit books and health certificates were procured. 

11) 	Wetlands and fisheries departments developed and harmonised areas for aquaculture development in wetlands; and 15 breeding areas for fish were identified in Lake Victoria and are awaiting verification with research for gazzettement.  The breeding area is a cause for controversy especially for member countries that share the resources of Lake Victoria.  Some countries claim that the fish breed in their own country so we should not have a lot of right to control the fish.  But we are saying, we really have identified areas where these fish breed. Therefore, this is one of the most important developments that our researchers have identified in this sub sector.

12) 	8 community fruit nurseries were established in Jinja district to supply fruit seedlings.

13) 	This is an area for strategic intervention by Government for export.  Under the cotton sub sector, about 400,000 acres of cotton were planted in 37 districts. (Interruption)

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Madam Speaker, some correction.  On point 13, under the cotton sub sector, “Pingire Sub County in Pallisa”, Pingire Sub County is in Kasilo County, Soroti. This is the sub county that borders Kamuli, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, my neighbours will get worried if you do not correct this.  

MR ODIT: Thank you hon. Okupa for this correction. I think we have taken note of the location of Pingire.  

240,000 bales of lint cotton were produced. This is exciting, Madam Speaker. In the course of the year, there was a projection that the country would only generate 230,000 bales of cotton.  Extra 10,000 bales is an achievement worth recognising.  This enabled the farmers to earn shs 45 billion. The economy was able to earn US$ 34 million from this export.

Under the coffee sub sector, 5.39 million coffee plantlets were procured, 350 metric tons of wet processed coffee and 175 metric tons of organic coffee were exported.  

However, during 2005/2006, UCDA has not encouraged tree planting which has always been the tradition in the previous years. Instead, it is concentrating on consolidating the performance of the previous year’s achievement.  This is because the sub sector is overloaded with debts non payment of seedlings which had been given out to farmers. The nursery operators still demand for payment from Government, to the tune of over shs 3.6 billion.  Therefore, I think it was a wise decision for UCDA to suspend this operation.  

Under the tea sub sector, shs 360 million of arrears for nursery operators were paid in the year 2004/2005.  

Under the cocoa sub sector, 3,595 metric tons were inspected for quality but amazingly 5,000 metric tons were exported.  That means some of these were exported without official inspection.  We do not know what has happened and the ministry owes us an explanation.  

Under the fisheries sub sector, over 15,000 illegal fishing nets were destroyed and 1.3 million fish fingerings were stocked in 15 water bodies in various districts of Mbarara, Masaka, Kabale, Mubende, Lira, Ntungamo, Kumi, Apac, Mbale and Soroti.  

Under the livestock sub sector, the ministry was able to categorise loose milk selling areas in Kampala. 734 farmers and traders were trained in hygienic milk production and handling practices in Masaka, Rakai, Lyatonde, Sembabule and Pallisa, Jinja, Iganga, Kamuli, Mbarara, Nakasongola and many other places. 26,852 doses of semen were produced but out of these 12,059 doses were sold, 32,098 litres of liquid nitrogen were produced and sold. 500,000 broiler chicks were hatched and sold to poultry farmers.  

Madam Speaker, while we register these achievements, we should appreciate that Uganda has been officially enlisted among the third world countries allowed to export honey to the European Union market.  This is an achievement because it is a potential area, just as the fisheries sub sector. If we promoted honey production, it would greatly boost our economy.

The ministry was faced with the following challenges during 2004/2005:
1)	illegal fish harvesting and smuggling on all water bodies.
2)	the menace of Banana Bacterial Wilt (BBW), which is still persistent and is really rampaging the countryside.  
3)	insufficient funds provided for the procurement of vaccines for our various livestock sub sectors.
4)	insecurity in Northern Uganda remains a challenge and a state of uncertainty.

Madam Speaker, the committee wishes to –(Interruption)

DR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, I do not intend to bore this House for I know the Chairperson is about to finish. I also know that you do guide the members whenever they are writing their reports. I am worried about the amount of detail including the number of doses of semen.  Soon, in the next report, we shall be asking about how many millions of sperms were delivered in the country.  Could you kindly in the future inform the members to keep to the minimum number of [Honourable members: “semen”] not number of semen. At least to limit themselves to the objectives and other issues, which this House will not find totally unnecessary.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this question of the total amount of semen is very important. For instance, members will want to know how it was distributed in the country and how they can access it. 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify to my colleague that measurable achievements should be recorded and reported to the House.

MR ODIT:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Surely, honourable members, some of these we should take lightly. You know this ministry is targeting the international market. We have for the last four years been struggling with disease control and improvement of quality of our products. Therefore, we mentioned some of these in passing but the details are worth recognising.

I now turn to the pending and ongoing activities, which we  were not able to achieve because of lack of funding or insufficient funding. Honourable members, as you can see, we have a long list including:
a)	National Agricultural Mechanism Policy
b)	Tea Development Policy 
c)	Organic farming 
d)	Land use policy 
e)	National irrigation policy 
f)	Dry land development programme policy 
g) 	  Peri-urban agricultural policy.  
g)	Horticulture policy 
h)	Seed policy
i)	Vanilla policy and a number of others which honourable members can study and discuss them tomorrow.

Madam Speaker, the committee now reports on the planned activities for the year 2005/2006, under three key areas.  The first one is rural development strategy with activities spelt out up to page 11. There is also zonal agricultural production programme with the details explained, and then the formulation of MAAIF development strategy and investment plan. We have all along been demanding for more resources for this ministry. We need an investment plan, and we are grateful that positive action has been taken to this respect. Therefore, we shall have some item to present to the Ministry of Finance for additional resource allocation.

The committee considered budgetary requirements for the FY 2005/2006, for MAAIF under vote 142 for the parent ministry of shs 98,371,117,000. Vote 010 for NARO is shs 22,744,844,000. The ministry requests that this House considers and approves these figures.  

Having considered the policy statement, the committee proceeded to recommend as follows:  

1) 	The Plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA) should be updated to address the issues specific to agricultural sector and to contain clear quantitative targets and success indicators.

2) 	MAAIF should expedite the Bill to operationalise a National Fisheries Policy.

3) 	Government should react to the spread of BBW in order to stop further spread and control the existing cases.

4) 	Government must pay arrears to respective suppliers of coffee and tea seedlings, which has accumulated over time.

5) 	The water level of Lake Victoria has reduced up to three metres in some areas.  Government should ensure that the original water level is recovered, and that the level does not reduce further.  But of course, this is a joint effort. Uganda cannot do it alone. All member countries within the Lake Victoria catchment area should get involved.

6) 	Government should commit sufficient funds to control livestock diseases. It should also develop strategies that will enable Uganda to get international accreditation and certification to allow export of its animal, fisheries and crop products.  We have been told that there are a number of diseases, which we need to control before we get this accreditation and comfortably export our livestock products to other countries.

7) 	Government should commit more resources to the fisheries sector since it is becoming the number one revenue source for the country.

8) 	MAAIF should establish irrigation projects in rain constrained and draught prone areas.

9) 	Government should strengthen research in the agricultural sector by setting up a clear well-packaged research agenda.

10) 	Effort should be made to monitor, provide regular and timely information to the farmers who grow vanilla and other high value crops for which Government has not direct intervention. We are saying that Government should give guidelines, so that when a farmer decides to grow some of these crops, they know the pros and cons of undertaking the venture.

11) 	While MAAIF is responsible for agricultural production, it should liaise with MTTI to ensure that an agro-processing strategy is established to enable value addition to agricultural commodities.

12) Government has a tendency to promote export commodities at the expense of food security and food nutrition. For example, fish exporters export fish fillet leaving behind fish heads, bones and tails for domestic consumption.  Government should review its food security policy to incorporate food nutrition.

13) 	The cross cutting tsetse-fly control programme was decentralised. I am happy to report that this recommendation has been taken care of just as we were discussing the loan. So, this can now be solved.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, Agriculture is the main source of employment with over 80 per cent of the population depending primarily on it for their livelihood. In order to directly and significantly have an impact in poverty reduction, there is a need to improve agricultural productivity and service delivery.  

In pursuance of this mission, I beg to move that the following funds be approved for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the financial year 2005/2006: 
a) 	Shs 98,371,117,000 for both recurrent and development expenditure under vote 010, which is the parent ministry.
b) 	Shs 22,744,844,000 for both development and recurrent expenditure as indicated.  I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson.  I have looked at the report, it has been signed by 13 out of 26 members, so it is eligible for debate.  However, members indicated that they wanted to internalise this report, so debate will take place between 10.00 11.00 a.m. tomorrow morning. If your matter is about money, all the finance will be dealt with in one session.  

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the Chairperson of the committee has given the figures, but instead of debating them in their raw form, I think it is appropriate that we amend them with reasons. When we are debating, members will use the actual figures.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, since the beginning of this debate, there have been many adjustments in different sectors.  So, we agreed that all the figures will be handled in one session separately, so that you can tell us the additional amounts and deductions.

MR RUKUTANA: Of course, I have no powers to overrule what was done. However, in my view, members should debate well knowing what the actual figures are.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister. We have done quite well in your absence by the way.  Now, the second matter I wish to bring to the attention of the Minister of Finance is that during the debate on the policy statement for Water, Health and Internal Affairs, there has been a persistent complaint that those sectors had secured funds to support their sectors. However, they were unable to spend it because your ministry said the expenditure would destabilize the macro-economic status.  So, in view of that, members requested that you come here with a paper on Macro-economics Stability. We really need to understand how it works and whether it can be altered so that our people can access these services.  Therefore, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 7.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 8 September 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)


