Tuesday 20 September 2005
 
Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to warmly welcome you back from the brief recess. I hope you were able to rest after the hectic Session during the Constitution Amendment and the Budget process. 

I am sure you were able to irrigate the population with information about what we have been doing here since the 5th Session began.  I appeal to you to be diligent, for we have a number of laws and other things to deal with before the transition fully sets in. These laws will require not only your presence but also your timely and effective advice. Therefore, I am happy to see you again and I declare the first sitting of the second meeting of the 5th Session duly open. 

2.45
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I congratulate you on steering through the budget at a very hectic but successful pace. (Applause) I bring to your attention a serious procedural concern regarding our legislative process in this august House. This week, a release from the Electoral Commission was in the press, detailing the dates of nominations among others and election dates for the presidential and parliamentary elections.  To the best of my knowledge, we do not have or do not intend to amend laws pertaining to both presidential and parliamentary elections.  

Through you, I seek guidance from the Minister of Constitutional Affairs. He should tell us whether it is proper for the Electoral Commission to come up with dates on elections before we complete the process of reexamination, adoption or enactment of laws pertaining to these two events. Why should they be guessing what we are yet to do?  

Procedurally, it is wrong for a person to anticipate a Bill and to bring such a matter to the public.  Therefore, through you, may I request the Attorney General to tell this House what the intention of the Electoral Commission is, in detailing this exercise prior to completion of the executive process of putting the laws together?
  
2.47
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Awori for raising this concern.  I will repeat what I have said before in this august House. In principle, the Electoral Commission is independent of the Attorney General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. It is also independent of Government.  The Constitution prohibits any person or authority from directing the Electoral Commission as to how it should carryout its functions. However, I undertake to make a comprehensive statement on this matter, on Thursday.  I thank you.

2.49
MS ALICE ALASO ASIANUT (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Before we went for recess, I asked the Attorney General for an answer, having presented all the documents. I wonder when I will get that response.

Secondly, while we were on recess, the road to Eastern Uganda got worse than usual. It is a pity that the Minister of Works is not here. The situation is terrible, Madam Speaker. The bridge gave way and people spent the night on that road. It is almost three days now and yet, no attempt to rectify the situation has been taken.  

Oil tanks and vehicles are stuck. Passenger buses and lorries have to struggle on their own to locate a by-pass. In this very House, we were told sometime back that by August 2005, there should have been some maintenance work going on that road. Madam Speaker, I believe that you use that road quite regularly and you do not see any maintenance work. Besides that, we were told that a new contract was going to be signed. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to get updates on what is happening. This is a very serious concern because you all know how important this road is to this country. It is this country’s lifeline and when it is in that state, it shows lack of accountability. The Government owes an explanation to the people of Eastern Uganda.  

Madam Speaker, I hope you will kindly cause the honourable minister to explain to us why that road has been abandoned in that state, before we continue to lose more lives and car screens.  We are undergoing a lot of political harassment from our people who think that no member from Eastern Uganda is bothered about that road. They think we do not call Government to consider solving their problems  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could the Leader of Government Business undertake to cause the minister to come here to make a statement?

2.51
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate you on continuing to do a very good job in this House. I also welcome back my colleagues and all members of this House. About what hon. Alaso has raised, as you may recall, the Minister of Works told this House exactly what the situation was. Unfortunately, I am not aware of the circumstances that led to the very severe condition of the road. 

We all remember that there was a temporally intervention for patching up by a locally contracted company, but the major contract was going to be internationally handled, which would take long.  However, I take it upon myself and that is what you asked me, Madam Speaker, to make sure that the Minister of Works expeditiously comes and makes a statement in this House.  

I join the honourable members and agree that the road is not of interest to only Eastern Uganda, but it is a lifeline of the whole country, because this is the main entry of goods.  Thank you.

(Hon Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I do not know whether this minister is in a position to clarify. I asked him to produce the Minister of Works to make a statement on the condition of Jinja-Bugiri road. I do not think he knows enough about the ministry.

MR KIBAALE WAMBI:  Madam Speaker, let us try and see if it helps.  This last weekend incident took place around Walugogo valley in Iganga district. This is part of the stretch of the whole road, which is being repaired. I think there was a heavy downpour in Walugogo valley, which created a big crater in the middle of the road.  This was not an ordinary problem. It was extra-ordinary, almost equivalent to Katrina and needed a quick response. 

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to supplement and correct the wrong impression my honourable colleague is creating. I do agree with you that the breakdown was due to a culvert. That culvert was made of inferior material and this was proved. In other words, the cement ratio to the sand was not correct.  

The Ministry of Communications has failed to monitor the weight of the vehicles per axle on culvert or roads and bridges generally.  We have a mobile weighbridge, just before you get to Iganga town. Unfortunately, all the people there have been corrupted. They lorry drivers normally stop about 200 metres away from the weighbridge, walk to the officers there and after talking for sometime, walk back. You immediately see the lorries being driven off.  I saw this myself and I am sure it happens regularly.  I will yield the Floor, for the minister has come.

PROF KAGONYERA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I rise on a point of order.  Hon. Awori is telling this House that he has continuously watched things going wrong on the road. However, he has kept quiet as if he is part of the conspiracy. Is it in order for the honourable member to come here and make a fundamental allegation, when in fact he ought to have reported immediately?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the matter is in the right hands with hon. Awori as an aspiring president. When you come to office, your people will use those roads.  Therefore, you are out of order to keep quiet when corruption is going on.

2.58
DR MAKUBUYA:  The first part of hon. Alaso’s statement related to the matter of people who were ordered to be released by the court, and were rearrested.  I would like to acknowledge that the Clerk did his job and delivered the papers, which hon. Alaso had laid on the Table. I am processing this matter expeditiously and early next week, I will have a response for her, come rain or sunshine.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for General Duties, the matter of this road is quite serious; can we expect the statement this week?   Hon. Awuzu, could you cause your minister to come here and make a statement on the Jinja-Bugiri road? Maybe you can do it yourself.

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I do not know whether there is anything new the minister can add. As hon. Kagonyera said, the minister recently made a statement in this House to the effect that a new contractor would be procured.  Currently, we have a sub contractor who was maintaining that road to make sure that it is passable. 

You will remember that near Iganga, heavy rains had washed away a culvert. These heavy rains are all over the country and they are giving us a headache.  However, H Young, the sub contractor, who had been contracted to maintain this road and to make it passable, did a commendable job; within 24 hours, he ensured that the road was reopened.  As you requested, Madam Speaker, I will ask the minister to come and make a more detailed statement on this subject.  Thank you.

MR BYANYIMA:  I am sorry to interrupt but I think it is high time the minister cooperated with the committee. We need to visit this road because we are tired of these stories. Whenever members of the committee who come from that area say the situation is very bad, the minister comes here and says, “The minister will come tomorrow.” This “tomorrow” has never come and instead we continue getting those reports. As a committee, on behalf of this Parliament, we get embarrassed.  Madam Speaker, I am sure you will allow us to have a day off to go with the minister so that we report to this Parliament the facts on the road.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I have no problem with giving you time. It is true your minister told us that by August 2005, the new contractor would be in place. It is now September and nothing is going on.  Therefore, he should have something new to tell us, on whether the new contractor is there or not.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2005

3.03
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya):  Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Political Parties and Organisations Bill, 2005” be read the first time. 

I refer to Section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001 to indicate that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has issued a certificate of financial implications relating to this Bill, the certificate is dated 14 September 2005. The Clerk to Parliament has already received this and I would like to lay a copy on the Table. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have looked at the certificate and confirmed that the Political Parties and Organisations Bill, 2005 complies with Section 10 of the Budget Act.  I commit it to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to handle expeditiously and report to the Plenary.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am not ready to present these papers before you now. I thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2005

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we go to the second reading of that Bill, I am delighted to inform you that in the Gallery, we have Members of Parliament from Lesotho. They belong to the Committee on HIV/AIDS and are in the country to share views and experiences on the pandemic. 

Please join me in welcoming the following: The hon. Sello Mathalla, the leader of the delegation -(Applause)- hon. Kinetso Mathaba, Member of the National Assembly -(Applause) hon. Pette Mantoetse, Senator of Lesotho -(Applause) hon. Mapheello Tsuluba, Member of the National Assembly and hon. Mookho Mathibeti, Senator of Lesotho. They are accompanied by Mrs Mamonaheng Makitimi Mamonaheng and Mrs Makhena Malapo, both, Clerks of the Senate and National Assembly. You are warmly welcome to the Parliament of Uganda.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “The Finance Bill, 2005” be read the second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, after the presentation of the Budget before you in this House, we begged to lay the bill on Table for this House and the Committee on Finance to consider. The object of that Bill was to provide alteration of the levy payable on a number of items, like the export of raw hides and skins and the alteration of fees under the Traffic and Road Safety Act and purposes related there to. 
 
We have since appeared before the committee and have had discussions with them. We are now ready for a second reading of the Bill. I thank you.

3.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you Madam Speaker. The Finance Bill, 2005 was tabled before this august House on 13 August 2005 and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for a detailed analysis. The committee has accordingly analysed it and now wishes to report its findings.

Method of Work:

The committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and his technical staff.  The committee also analysed the Finance Act, 2002-2004 and the Tariff and Road Safety Act, 1998 Cap.361

The Bill: The object of the Bill is to provide for the alteration of the tax on the export of raw hides and skins and the alteration of the fees payable under the Traffic and Road Safety Act 1998. 
 
Observations:

1. 	The committee noted that most of the proposed amendments are in line with the recommendations adopted by this August House last financial year. However, we observed that little effort has been made to widen the tax base. This has increased pressure on the traditional taxpayers particularly those in the formal sector.

2. 	There is need to promote value addition on the locally produced raw materials in order to increase on the export earnings. This has a positive multiplier effect, which includes investment and provision of employment. 

3. 	The proposed tax on the export of raw hides and skins is therefore a move in the right direction. Previously, Government has lost revenue through collusion of officials and exporters leading to under-declaration of consignments for exports. 

4. 	The Bill proposes wide range of alterations on fees under the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998. This is intended to address the improvement of documents to minimise forgeries of traffic documents and possibly reduce accidents on our roads. 

5. 	Government is in the process of introducing Computerised Driving Permits (CDP) and some of the rates are supposed to be in line with the arrangement.  

6. 	The committee however, noted that Government went ahead to launch CDP before the committee report was presented and debated by this House.  Madam Speaker, you remember that this report is still pending for it has not been discussed due to priority business much of which is associated with deadlines. 
 
7. 	It was also noted that the fees for re-export of agricultural machinery remains high to discourage the practice. This strategy is to stop re-exporting such important machinery, which receive high Government subsidies at the time importation.

Recommendations:

1. 	More tax incentive should be given to undertakings, which add value to locally produced raw materials. 

2. 	Government should create a necessary environment for the private sector growth because it is the engine of economic growth and development. Madam Speaker, honorable members, you must appreciate that the Government generates revenue from the private sector to finance its programmes and therefore, a need to create an enabling environment for its growth.

Conclusion:

The committee begs the House to adopt this report and pass The Finance Bill, 2005 to enable Government to raise the revenues to finance its programmes as approved by this august House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are now free to debate.

3.12
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (Bukanga County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable Members.  I thank the committee for this short and good report, but my concern, among others, is that we are after widening the tax base. The problem we have is the Ministry of Finance. Today, they are on drawing board for another budget; nobody cares to find out how we can widen the tax base because that means going to the field and doing some bit of research, which we do not do.

Recently, in the Budget Committee, the committee said that we should raise the fees for PSV, these mini buses. They used to pay shs 23,000 per year. We said they should be adjusted to 56,000 and the buses from shs 23,000 to shs 250,000. However, the Ministry of Finance has failed to get money to have the PSV cards and stickers on the vehicles.  Therefore, you need to look for ways of getting the money. The tax is being paid but there is no sticker, so you find that we lack consistency.

Madam Speaker, we have looked at the fuel as a soft target of revenue, because now we are charging about shs 720 per litre of petrol and shs 450 per litre of diesel, which makes the whole transport section very expensive. The economy depends on this very expensive fuel. There are so many other factors that we should consider in looking for revenue, but the problem is that we lack the initiative of creating avenues. 

Take an example of these mobile companies. Government has waived off tax on fixed phones but MTN and UTL are now crying that the tax on airtime is very high, which is not true. UTL and MTN are not paying tax on fixed phones but Celtel is. Everybody thinks that these companies are supposed to give us fixed phones. 

A fixed phone is supposed to be a phone in an office with a wire, and is used for office work, not the subscribers who pay money. When you move around Kampala, they are not fixed phones but mobile phones.  You do not tax them because they are national operators who had the duopoly but Celtel, which was never in the group of the duopoly, is paying a tax. Why don’t we make the tax uniform? 

Hon. Musumba once told us here how much money most of these companies were earning. He had a very good write-up. When he was appointed Minister, he kept quiet. He should come out and guide this Government about how we can get money from telephones. There is no reason hon. Musumba should come out with a very good study and when he becomes minister, he keeps quiet.  Let him come out and tell us what happened to the write-up of that money. Everybody knows about it, because it is very unfair for one company to pay tax on the fixed phones – (Interruption)

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  We have two Musumbas in this House; one is Salaamu Musumba and the other is Isaac Musumba. I would like to know which one he is talking about for clarity.  The two have serious interests in managing this country.  

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, really, what we want is that hon. Musumba whom we all know had a good study about these telephones –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He was still the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy.

MR BYANYIMA: Absolutely. He came out with a good write-up and all of us were convinced that the Government would generate money from these telephones. However, they are now only trying to target airtime. We strongly feel that we had a colleague who knew more about it and would be helping this Government. He is instead keeping quiet.  I think he should do something about it. 

Colleagues, when a telephone becomes commercial on the street, it ceases to be a fixed phone; it is a mobile!  Therefore, we should have uniform tax on all the fixed phones, so that at the end of the day we get money and have better roads and hospitals. 

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I appeal to Ministry of Finance to stop that deskwork of doing everything in the office.  They should go out and find out where our money goes and how we can get tax. For instance, some of us who own cows have been paying GT tax but nobody pays income tax.  We have had census, which is under hon. Musumba’s ministry. That should have helped us to make sure we get more money.

3.18
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I have very brief comments to make on this report. I thank the committee for a very precise report. When you say we are going to tax an item in order to discourage a certain practice, I think that is a wrong principle. If something is wrong, stop it but do not impose a tax in order to discourage the wrong doers. 

I am particularly concerned about the question of re-exporting used machinery, especially agriculture. Why do you permit it and then pretend to put tax on it, when that particular tax is not commensurate? (Interruption)

3.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Thank you hon. Awori, for giving way. I should inform you that taxation is a tool used world over to either discourage or encourage a practice.  However, if you are unhappy about this specific one, you should talk about the specificity and not the principle.

MR AWORI: Thank you, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee.  One thing I like about you is your competence in matters of taxation and economy. I take your advice, but I deviate a little on the specificity.  Indeed, I was referring to agricultural machinery and tractors especially. When you compare the kind of taxes we pay with what we get in return, definitely the two are not commensurate. That is why I say that we are trying to discourage a system by imposing a tax on it. We should not encourage re-exportation of agricultural machinery per se. 

What about the question of the scrap metal, we also have a problem there.  Why are we exporting scrap metal, why don’t we also put a heavy tax on scrap metal?  It is not scrap; it is an asset we are sending out for material, we have steel mills here, which need it. So to discourage such a practice, in order to preserve the raw materials for our steel mills, we should just say no export of scrap. 

Although I agree with my hon. colleague in charge of the budget committee, that the primary purpose of tax is to discourage a, b, c, d, I will go beyond that and say, the primary purpose of any tax is to raise revenue, the lifeline of any government.  Government cannot survive without revenue, and the only way to generate revenue for the Government is tax. So that is a necessary economic detail.

Two, the question of the hides and skins - I am sorry my hon. colleague is not here, hon. Nassar Basajjabalaba; I think he is the leading exporter of raw materials here.  I am disturbed to learn that when he tried to put up a factory in Mbarara to process in order to add value to the hides and skins, he was never given any incentive by the state.  

Instead they slumped on him heavy environmental conditions, which he could not meet, and therefore, that factory literally had to fold.  Now why do you want to put a tax on his exports and on the other hand, you do not want to encourage him to add value on the material? This is contradictory. That is why I wonder how this Cabinet works! One minister is proposing this tax and another minister is proposing another form of law -(Interruption)

MS KIRASO:  Thank you hon. Awori again for giving way. I would like to inform you again that Basajjabalaba’s enterprise is one of those that has benefited from funds from Government for strategic intervention. The point being that he would use those funds to add value to his products.  But failing that, I think Government has found no other alternative other than to increase tax on his raw exports.  I thank you.

MR AWORI:  I read between the lines and small prints; are you implying that Government intervention was a gift?  Otherwise, I would have liked to see the results of that intervention; and also my advice to the Government is that instead of giving him a small donation of Ug shs 24 billion, why don’t you relax the law and give him another incentive to set up this particular factory and add value.

Madam Speaker, these things sometimes worry me, as I said earlier, on the way this Cabinet works.  Yesterday my senior colleague who works out of State House and most of the time when he is here he is the Head of State, said, among other things in Washington that we the opposition should focus -(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI:  Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the hon. member holding the Floor as to which person he is referring to, who when he is here, is head of state and when he is out, is not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, hon. colleague whom are you not sure of what he or she does?

MR AWORI:  Madam Speaker, when I said “my senior colleague”, I assume the Government consists of three arms: the Legislature, Judiciary and Executive branches.  

He is the only person who heads all of them when they converge at the apex, so he is the Head of State; and when I call him my senior colleague I am a junior partner in the Legislature and he is a senior partner at the apex.  So he is all the time my senior colleague because both of us are in the industry of governance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon Awori, your senior colleague in this House is the Speaker of this House. Yes, the Speaker of this House is the senior colleague as far as we are concerned here, so please be straight; do not confuse us.  Are you talking about the Speaker of this House?

MR AWORI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  My immediate senior colleague is the Speaker; the most senior colleague is the Head of State. But immediate senior colleague is the Speaker, and the most senior colleague in the management of the state is the Head of State - the President.  

However, Madam Speaker, to come back to my point and wind up quickly, when he says that we in the opposition always talk about third term instead of production, adding value to our produce and agriculture and so forth.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to put it to the Government that production may be a responsibility of the private sector, but regulations encouragement incentives are basically the responsibility of the state not the opposition.  

We the opposition cannot come up with any kind of system to encourage production or addition of value to our exports. The only thing we can do is to provide oversight, when they do it a wrong way we tell them, “This is not the way to do it”.  But there is no way, even as a backbencher, I can introduce a bill in this august House that will encourage production as long as it has a bearing on the - what they call the treasury. 

So, Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my hon. colleagues who sit in Cabinet to constantly advise the President that sometimes our capacity to help him in that area is limited by the Constitution. He should not wait to be advised by us, they should advise him also.  This question of the person advising the advisors should stop; I think they should help him in that industry.

Madam Speaker, I would like to call upon the Ministry of Finance, particularly the minister who is an expert in taxation, to look at this matter of using tax to stop a bad practice.  Come with a legislation that will stop it but do not use tax per se.

3.28
MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I equally wish to salute the members of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for coming with a brief and to say its import. I wish other committees could emulate this good example, if we could emulate this good example we could save more time and also we could be more efficient.

Madam Speaker, I wish to seek clarification on two points on page 2 of the report.  The first point is number three, let me read for those who do not have copies. “The proposed tax on the exports of rawhide and skins is therefore a move in the right direction. Previously Government has lost revenue through collusion of officials and exporters leading to under-declaration.”  Madam Speaker, I emphasise the words “lost revenue through collusion of officials.”  

Now, may I ask the Minister of Finance to tell us, who these officials are?  Under the laws of Uganda, this is criminal, if you have stated here that there are officials, we are interested to know who they are.  These officials have caused loss to Government. This is taxpayer’s money; we are interested in knowing who are these officials?  How many of these were arrested?  How many of these were charged in the courts of law?  

Lastly, how sure are we that the new measures that are being put in place are not going to be a repeat of what has been going on?

Secondly, No. 5 on the same page: It mentions computerised driving permits.  Madam Speaker, sometime last year the Inspector General of Government queried the tender for the award of computerised driving permits.  

Also some time last year, one of the Parliamentary Committees in this august House was assigned the duty of finding out exactly what went wrong with this tender rating the computerised driving permits. 

Now the clarifications I am seeking, Madam Speaker, I wish to know whether all is well with these policies.  The IGG addressed many qualities.  Were these qualities answered before a final decision was taken to award the tender?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.31
MR FREDDIE RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.   I have about three observations to make.  Of course I stand to support the bill and to commend the work of the committee.

The first, Madam Speaker, is a procedural problem and I remember I raised the same problem when we were debating the last Finance Bill.  

I have always had a problem because sometimes I wonder which one should come first.  We have passed the budget, we have adopted the budget and part of it as you can see is based on the provisions of these bills.  So one wonders, assuming we do not pass these provisions, do you go back and change the budget?  Madam Speaker, as you may note, this used to be one of the longest bills we would always debate here, but much of it now has gone to the Customs Sector legislation.  So we have a bit of it.  My view is that we could always look through these bills before we adopt the budget. This is just a proposal.

Secondly, you will recall, Madam Speaker, the problems we had with BIDCO and the need to give special incentives. The problem of such special incentives not being supported by any legislation- I am aware that of course the Minister of Finance intends to bring to this House very soon a law revising the Investment Code, which would take care of that problem.  

I am one of those people who really support special incentives for strategic industries in this country; I have no problem with it but the only problem is that it does not have a legal framework.  So, Madam Speaker, I wanted to inquire from the Minister of Finance when he intends to bring the legislation revising the Investment Code to this House?

Thirdly, I think by no means the least, I have always had a feeling that a tax collector cannot be a good investment promoter, and I have a feeling that the two should go together.  If you want to milk a cow and get good milk, you must feed that cow.  

I am happy when I look in the media and I see a long list of the best taxpayers in this country.  I feel happy.  But I wonder whether we could do the same, to have another long list of what we have done for these investors to make them happy, making this climate investor friendly so that you can look and say, yes, these people are happy.  

BAT gives us these billions, this is what they get at the end of the day and the question remains: do you actually do that?  This is because the two should go in tandem.   With those few observations, Madam Speaker, I support the bill. 

3.35
MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to start by thanking the Committee for giving us a brief report and I would like at the same to criticise the committee why they did not go on to say, because of the narrow tax base.  

Madam Speaker, if we are going to widen the tax base, then we expect the minister in charge of planning, to show everybody in Uganda where the opportunities, which can be harnessed by the people, are. As long as the minister does not stand on the pulpit and shout not only to the Cabinet, but to all of us that the opportunities to grab are here and there, then we are chasing air all the time because you do not expect a small district to do anything about widening the tax base if they do not have sense of direction.  

We are not asking the minister to do what the Soviet Union or China did to actually do the plan and send out a blue print. But we are asking for guidance, to know areas where opportunities are, it is possible to do this.  

Madam Speaker, you also know from your constituency that many children in Uganda are walking bare footed. It is a pity that our children because of the shape of their legs and the feet cannot even wear the second hand shoes, which are being imported in this country.  In fact they are causing problems  We expect that the minister, when levying taxes on hides and skin to be directing that factories for producing shoes are going to emerge; I did not see it mentioned here. 

We are not only suffering from milk not being used locally, but also suffering from jiggers with our school children and the Minister of Planning is not shouting that there are opportunities here to be taken advantage of.

MR MUSUMBA: Point of order.  Madam Speaker, I have listened to the hon. member from Bulamogi, Kaliro District, formerly of Kamuli, very closely, and he has continued to say that he expects the minister responsible for planning to stand on the pulpit and shout. 

Madam Speaker, I have been in this House for several years and my method of communication is known.  I do not shout either here or in Cabinet or anywhere else, on a pulpit or otherwise.  Is the hon. member in order, to twice, in his address to this august House refer to the method in which the Minister of State (Planning) communicates to hon. members, both of Cabinet and of this House as shouting?  Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, even our rules do not allow ministers to shout at Members of Parliament, so you are out of order.  It is not the way we work in this House.

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, it was speaking in an analogy because I know the way the honourable minister in charge of planning speaks; he is a very humble and articulate man.  

But when I say “shouting”, Madam Speaker, I was meaning the way he did when he was Chairman of the Committee on National Economy; he was not shouting, he was persuading us, he moved us to even make a law for planning.  That is the sort of shouting I was meaning. but now when the minister has become a frontbencher, he has changed his tactics completely and we are still waiting for articulate planning from him because unless this country gets serious planners, not only physical planners but economic planners, we are in trouble.  

We are going to chase air, we are going to import foreigners, some are coming with briefcases to make mandazi, saying that they have got a license to produce this and they are not doing it, instead they are just importing other people to come and slowly increase their number.  

Madam Speaker, it is very important for our economists because economists at the macro and micro level are the most important element to move an economy.  If they give us a wrong specification, a wrong dose, we are not going to move. Engineers, doctors, teachers and everybody is not going to move, they will be stuck because of the wrong policy being –(Interruption)

MR ARAALI BASALIZA: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member is raising a very important issue about investment plan or policy. I would like to know whether there is an investment policy for this country.  

Madam Speaker, you find that most of these industries are concentrated in a few towns in the country here, Kampala, Jinja, Mbarara; but what about other towns?  Now if you want development, there should be equitable development.  What policy does the ministry have about investment, and how does it encourage investors to go and invest upcountry in other districts?  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify to members that we are dealing with the Finance Bill, and we did debate the policy statement in which we debated investment issues.  

I want to inform them also that when we are taxing, contrary to what my senior colleague, hon. Awori, was saying, when Government targets a strategic sector, they provide incentives; and one of the incentives in the tax policy is to tax less in that sector.  But if we have to go broadly and debate, I think we are going to lose direction. 

I would like us to go on track to raise revenue, and if there is a question why revenue is being raised on a particular sector more than is expected then the question should be thrown to either the committee or the ministry.

As we stand now we have exhaustively consulted with the Private Sector and with the ministry, and this is what we came out with.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Wambuzi Gagawala, please wind up.

MR WAMBUZI: Exactly that, that yes we should pass this Bill, indeed I support it to be passed in favour of the hides and skins.  But we ask the minister to explain to us when actually people will stop exporting the hides and skins because of the tax regime, which we are going to pass; and then the tax starts rotting, what shall we do? 

It will just increase smuggling because there is no shoe factory in this country, which is about to start making shoes either for export or for local consumption. 

Madam Speaker, it is very important that the first market to target or to create an industry is the local market, that is, the big schools and colleges to use shoes made in the country.  This is not about to happen as a result of passing this Bill, so we would like the minister to clarify to us exactly –(Interruption)  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Point of information.  Madam Speaker, we have various factories making shoes here in the country and most of them are indigenous.  There is one in industrial area, there are two in Jinja and one for Gen. Tumwine, which I do not know where it operates from, that is to mention but a few.  

MS KIRASO: The further information, Madam Speaker, that I would like to give is that precisely what hon. Wambuzi Gagawala is talking about I think would be the wish of everybody to see these people who are exporting hides and skins utilise them more within the country. But since we adopted the policy of liberalisation, I do not think it would be prudent to stop people from exporting.  We hope that, that tax will prohibit more exports and encourage more processing within the country.

MR WAMBUZI: As I said that I support the Bill, but it is very important for the minister to come back to this House and tell us how every home in this country is going to be part of the economy by the sort of earning power it is going to get as a result of all our policies.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

3.45
MR BAMWANGA STEVEN (Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Madam Speaker, while supporting the Bill I would like to challenge the Government that it is high time we stop paying lip service to our Private Sector. The mere fact that we are saying we should promote value addition to our locally produced raw materials in order to gain access to export market without considering also those materials, which are supposed to be used locally, is tantamount to saying that we only look at earning foreign exchange.  

For example, Madam Speaker, the case of limestone, the case of cement, most of these local factories produce for our local market and they will be saving us the burden of importing cement from Kenya or lime from outside Uganda. So we should not only emphasise value addition for export earnings, but also for our local industries; and we have cases in point where people have used their own money to invest in lime, cement and milk industries, but they do not have even working capital to add on value for our products.  

I have been visiting the Uganda Industrial Research Institute at Nakawa.  This is an area, Madam Speaker, which has got a lot of incubator pilot industries that our people in the Private Sector could have used to add value, for example, to milk.  

Some people are pouring milk, but if there was a little bit of money being given through the strategic intervention under the innovation and industrialisation fund from the Government it would have helped these people to set up small incubator factories.  

There is also the question of saying that they want to impose tax on export of rawhides and skins in order to stop collusion.  Does collusion deal with only hides and skins? Doesn’t it deal with export of flowers, fish and any other non-traditional exports? I think there must be something very hidden that you are saying we should put a tax on the rawhides in order to stop the collusion of the officials.

Now, Madam Speaker, I have been talking on the Floor of this House on a number of times about this Apex money. I was reading through the budget we are going to transfer this money to UDB when it is fully structured.  But when I looked at the amount of money that they are talking about was Ug shs 5 billion, these Ug shs 5 billion cannot make any change on the private sector.  

Most of the commercial banks, which have been accessing this money, Madam Speaker, have been trading in treasury bills, which do not create new investments in the Agricultural and Industrial Sector, but create artificial profitability by the banks, which trade in this Appex money. 

So, how can you find people who have no working capital to turnkey a lime factory in Kasese, to turnkey a milk freezing plant in Mbarara and you have got money being accessed by a bank in order to save the same money in buying the treasury bills in the Bank of Uganda? How do you widen the tax base without value addition?  Why can’t we channel all this Apex money to productive sectors of the economy because after all the money has come at reasonably affordable interest rates instead of expecting the Private Sector to access the money from the chunk banks which charge more than 55 percent when they are borrowing at about 6 percent. 

Madam Speaker, I would really like to ask members that while we are supporting the Bill, a lot of effort must be taken.  UDB has been mentioned for the last five years that they were going to restructure it; all of us will be beneficiaries including the Private Sector and Members of Parliament. Why can’t UDB be restructured immediately so that all this money that comes in from the Apex line of credit ends up in that bank for the benefit of everybody?  

As a farmer, Madam Speaker, I feel very hurt to find individuals who have acquired chunks of land but cannot get money to stock their ranches.  Having saved enough money to buy six square miles of land, and they cannot get the money to stock these farms! 
 
Milk is being poured in Western Uganda while our people in the North are dying of starvation. We could be a basket for food export in the whole region if really we could have our policies put right in order to take the competitive advantage through the Agricultural Sector.  Madam Speaker, I beg to support the Bill with those few remarks.

3.50
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Also I would like to thank the committee for the precise report they have presented. A number of other issues have already been addressed so I will limit myself to two areas. 

It is my contention that a lot of revenue is being lost through exportation of through hides and skins, in fact, the concept of value addition need not be over emphasised. We had an opportunity to visit some of the major importers of Uganda’s hides and skins and that includes Pakistan.  Indeed they were wondering what is wrong with us because we could generate more than four times the value of our raw hides and skins if we process them at least up to wet blue stage before exportation.  

What is happening is that sometimes even the consignments that are exported from Uganda are rejected on account of degeneration of value while in transit.  Therefore, processing these hides and skins at least up to wet glue stage would help us generate even more revenue and avoid losses.  

The Chairperson Budget Committee did say that the Hides and Skins Sector is one of those areas, which have been taken on for strategic intervention by Government.  I wanted to know explicitly what plans are in place to put in processing factories at least to add value to these hides. 

I do not know whether we have a timeframe how much has been earmarked for putting such a facility?  Otherwise, with this tax here on raw hides and skins I see that the exporters would rather wind up because, first of all, the value of raw hides and skins when exported is so low.  Now with the tax, I think we are not going very far unless we put a processing factory within the country. 

Madam Speaker, the second point - observation number 6 of the committee that Government went ahead to launch the computerised driving permits before the committee report was presented for debate.  This is not the first lamentation that this House is making, especially on matters concerning the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  Government wants to treat this House like an autopsy theatre to do post-mortems
 
I remember we had a lot of debates on BIDCO but before the committee came up with its reports things had already happened. Land was given out moreover a gazetted forest reserve was given out.  I can see the chairman wants to give me information –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: I would like to inform the hon. member holding the Floor that actually one of the reasons why the BIDCO report was not discussed in spite of the fact that it was ready, was because the people who had petitioned Parliament also went to court before we debated the report in this House.  So, when the report was lined up for presentation, I think our rules prevented that it would be prejudicial to court.  So, actually that was on the part of the public who had petitioned Parliament and the report is still pending.

DR EPETAIT: So, that is even more interesting –(An hon Member rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think let us finish with him then I will call you later.

DR EPETAIT: That is even more interesting because now if the petitioners went to court then Government should have also restrained itself until court disposed of the matter.  Otherwise, now both sides have had a problem because it was not proper for Government to proceed before the court disposed of the matter.  

So, I am really disappointed that this time round the computerised driving permit project again has had – and I think the hon. minister for –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You complete your part.

DR EPETAIT: So, despite the fact that this House had not debated the report, Government proceeded with the computerised driving permit project.  

I would like to urge the Executive not to treat or to undermine the authority of this House. Let us share responsibilities; the Parliament should not just be used for whitewashing what has already happened, I think it is not fair.  Let us follow procedures rather than bring things here like we are doing a post-mortem.

Madam Speaker, with those few remarks, I nonetheless would like to support the Bill, but caution on the issue of value addition on hides and skins. Thank you.

3.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama):  Madam Speaker, I will first respond to hon. Byanyima about widening the tax base. We did not go into the details, but I want to inform the House that the committee has secured funds from some donors and soon we shall go on a retreat with all the stakeholders, including Ministry of Finance, so that we can find a way of tackling new areas. I want to emphasise the fact that our tax base remains narrow, government is continuously focusing on traditional casualties and the traditional casualties include the formal sector, which is very easy to collect tax, airtime, fuel, beer, Pepsi-cola and all those.  

Hon. Aggrey Awori, for sure you must know that there are three major reasons why tax is levied.  One is to generate revenue, two is to discourage and when you discourage, you increase taxes and three is to encourage. When you encourage you reduce the taxes. For instance, in line with PIP, Government has reduced taxes on heavy trucks, which ferry foodstuff from the village. 

In the same spirit, if you look at the new amendment, the Government is putting tax on these mini-buses and encouraging very big capacity mini-buses by levying less tax on them. So, as an investor, you have to see which is profitable and pick from there. And by picking the alternative that is desired, Government achieves those three components.

Hon. Ndeezi asked about tax on hides and skins.  First of all, the tax on hides and skins was very low and because of this regional cooperation, we have interacted with our regional partners and what we discussed is that actually Kenya gets almost 10 times as much from these hides than we do and yet the export of Uganda was so huge than any of those three East African countries. I think the Government is moving in the right direction and we need to support it. The minister promised us – there are papers, which we accessed through our committee, we handed them over to the ministry and they are going to investigate. If they find people who have evaded tax, they will pay it retrospectively. 

And also, we were promised that they are going to increase surveillance on exportation of hides.
  
Finally, hon. Epetait, the issue of computerizing driving permits is really very regrettable because our report raises serious concerns and before these concerns were addressed, we heard that the ministry was launching them. Even this tax we have passed, which appears to be in line with this new project, we believe that since our schedule on very important item is getting less, in our next business committee we should line this report for discussion so that we can move together. 

With those few remarks, honourable members, I want to inform the House once again that most of the contentious issues were resolved with Government and that we are in agreement with most of the provisions provided by the Executive. I thank you very much.

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I just want to give an information on the computerized driving licenses, which is a project that has been going on for sometime and our Sessional Committee on the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication has been kept posted all the time on this issue. The computerized driving permits system is not being launched, it has already been launched and the problem was not that we have not contacted Parliament and I would like to apologize. 

The problem was actually with the IGG that wanted to see whether the people who had been procured were the right people to get the computerized driving licenses coming out and the face of technology was approved after IGG had cleared that it was correctly done. But our committee of Parliament and our chairperson has been following this.  

However, if the Committee of Finance would like us to present it to them, we would be more than willing to bring the background history on the computerized driving licenses. We have no problem with that. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will give time to the Committee on Finance to present their report probably during the course of this week.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I would not like the Minister to go without my clarification. First of all, I do not want to be like this man who was saying the Ministry of Information is not informed – Tamale Mirundi. The concerns of the committee were on revenue collection. The issue of the IGG was disposed of by the Committee on Works. (Mr Byanyima rose_) That is what the minister is saying. But when it came to our committee, we sought our clarification from the IGG about the person and the matters were cleared. 

But what remained to be resolved was the issue of revenue collection, who would control the database, where should face technology reside and most importantly, how would we stop leakages and the fees that had doubled unexpectedly? So, I think with matters of face technology, somebody should not come here and confuse the House until the report is tabled to this House. You cannot authoritatively know what is what.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said, some of us are not really informed about the issues that you have been investigating. So, you should not discuss this matter in the abstract. I will give you time this week on the order paper to present that report and then the Works Committee  people can come in.

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The majority of the issues that the honourable members have raised have been most ably responded to by the Chairperson of the Committee. I just want to clarify on two or three other points that were left unattended to. 

The first one was raised by hon. Byanyima who kept saying, “Musumba, when you were here in the 6th Parliament, you used to be very active, you brought here some write up that indicated what was happening in the telecommunications sector”. This was also echoed by hon. Wambuzi saying, “Musumba, you used to shout but now you are not shouting”. 

Madam Speaker, it is the freedom of any Member of Parliament to do a study on any matter that concerns this economy and make that presentation to this House. That person maybe a chairman of a committee or may just be an ordinary member of this House. In so doing, this honourable member does not have to consult anybody or be accountable to anybody. He or she is free to bring a matter that has intellectual dimension to this House without recourse to anybody. 

Today, Madam Speaker, everything I bring here has an element of collective responsibility. There are 60 other people with whom we must agree on anything that I bring here. You will not hear Musumba giving his opinion as a free thinker without the mandate of 60 other people who are members of Cabinet. Please, let us know that the responsibilities are different, the mandate is different and the accountability levels are different. While one can bring –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, much as I agree that we need collective responsibility, a colleague like hon. Musumba, who moved a Private Member’s Bill creating the National Planning Authority, who knows what our intentions were, should not claim that because he is a minister, National Planning Authority should be almost on the bed. It cannot rise, it cannot plan for this country, and do you think you are doing collective responsibility? I think you better be honest with yourself, if you cannot really work, making sure that bed of yours can be nursed and nurtured, then I regret why you moved that Private Member’s Bill.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, hon. Byanyima. I like your spirit and enthusiasm on this matter. I just want to set the record straight though. It is true that I came to this House and moved a bill that created the National Planning Authority but I did not do that as a backbencher. That was not a private member’s bill. That was a government bill brought in my capacity as a government minister.

Madam Speaker, where does anybody get the impression that the National Planning Authority is on a bed? I just presented before you in this House and showed you the amount of work that we are doing in the National Planning Authority and we have circulated to all Members of Parliament Phase 1 of our consultative process. I have appeared before the committee and the committee gave a report.  

Madam Speaker, in that report, it is stated categorically that in spite of its constraints in staffing and funds, the National Planning Authority is doing very well. It is on record, it is in the Hansard. So, hon. Byanyima, I beg to differ from the statement you made. I think the National Planning Authority - I can state here without fear of contradiction - is doing very well. Its position was endorsed by the committee report, which the committee chairperson presented to this House before you, recently. We have circulated documents for Phase II as part of our general wider consultation. I only intrigue the honourable member to find time and read them so that when we invite them for an interaction, they have something meaningful to contribute towards the development process of this country.

Hon. Ruhindi, asked a very interesting question of what should come first? Is it the appropriation first and then the measures to raise money to appropriate or you first put in place measures to raise money and then appropriate? 

Hon. Ruhindi knows actually that although this Finance Bill and the tax measures are being discussed today, they became effective on the 1st of July this year. And this was enabled by an instrument that is made under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act. Under that instrument, the minister signs a provisional (collection of taxes) order, which makes the rates that are pronounced that day effective. In other words, today, even if you changed a tax rate, the rates that have been applying are rates that are validly applicable. So, what we are doing today -(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker is the hon. Minister of Finance in order to mislead this House? We are aware of the Provisional Collections Act and that this new tax regime takes effect from the 1st of July, but may it be the wish of Parliament to change a tax for any reason, either upwards or downwards, this House is free to do so. So, is the honourable member in order to mislead this House and render this whole exercise that we are doing irrelevant, useless and a rubber stamp? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is not a rubber stamp and in its wisdom, it can amend, vary and alter. So, do not treat this House like a rubber stamp.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, you have ruled but had you allowed me to clarify before that ruling, I would have told you that what I am referring to has nothing to do with the powers of this House. The powers of this House are enshrined in the Constitution. You can lower the taxes and unlike what hon. Kiraso is saying, you cannot increase the taxes. 

However, I am saying that today, even if the House changed a tax rate, that decision would not have a retrospective effect. You cannot say, for example, that we have now lowered this tax and anyone who paid last week should be refunded. No, because under the law - I know there is a legal instrument that operationalizes tax rates even before they have been presented to this House. That is all I am saying. Whatever measures you take now, you are free to take them but they take effect from the day you have taken them. They have no retrospective effect. This is the point I am making. Madam Speaker, you have ruled but I am not in anyway misleading the House. It is not my intention.

I want to clarify to hon. Ruhindi that when we do the appropriation, this in part is the value that we attach to interaction in advance –interaction between the Parliament and the Executive in putting the Budget together. The appropriation laws, which we put in place, are actually following the laws that have already been put in place that operationalize our taxation regime.

He did ask about revising the investment code. This can be done, but Madam Speaker, we have done it already under the Customs Law. However, it is a valid point that an investor will want a one-stop law just like we have created a one-stop centre, which means we may want to extract what has already been put in the Income Tax Law and put it in the Investment Law. Otherwise, what we have validly passed under the Income Tax Law or any other law impacts on the Investment Code directly.  

Finally, hon. Wambuzi –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: The explanations the honourable minister is giving to the issues I raised are not quite satisfactory. Even the one he gave on the prospective nature of legislations we may pass now is not really in line with what I raised. All I was saying is can’t we find a way of doing things neater than we are doing them? What is the problem? After all these are very few bills we would pass before adopting the budget. We would be in line.

On the issue of taxation, what I am raising is that I know there is a harmonized commodity code, I know that some taxes are standardized, but there may be need for instance, to say we exempt you from Corporation Tax for these years, like I think was done under BIDCO. That is not provided for anywhere. If you know it is provided for anywhere, just quote me the legislation that for special incentives some of which for instance were offered to BIDCO, this is the provision either in the Constitution or any tax law. Give me that particular provision, then I will be happy. It is not a question of consolidating one law; it is a question of a lacuna, honourable minister. Thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, if there is a lacuna, it will be cured. Hon. Wambuzi Gagawala asked if we put a tax on raw hides, how it would ensure that our people get shoes because these second hand shoes cannot even fit their enlarged feet. You see, if we are to manufacture shoes in this country, this is a major and fundamental step of discouraging the export of raw materials through taxation and encouraging the value addition here.  Because export of a processed hide to wet glue or leather or whatever is tax free but yet to export one that you have not processed, we are now putting a tax so that we offer incentives to investors out there to come and add value in our country and eventually the people of Bulamogi may get shoes. I thank you Madam Speaker and I thank members for the support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are unable to proceed to the next stage of this Bill so we shall move to Excise Tariff Amendment Bill.

BILLS
SECOND READING

The Excise Tariff Amendment Bill, 2005

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff Amendment Bill, 2005” be read the second time. I beg to move.

HON. MEMBERS: Seconded.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, the Excise Tariff Amendment Bill seeks to introduce some amendments in the Excise Tariff Act, which will enable Government to be able to finance the budget that has been considered and passed by this House.

Madam Speaker, this Bill was laid before this House and you did refer it to the committee. We have since appeared before the committee and the matter has been discussed and we are ready for presentation. I beg to move.

4.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The Excise Tariff Amendment Bill, 2005 was laid on Table on 13 August 2005 and then referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for scrutiny. The committee has accordingly scrutinized the Bill and now wishes to present the report to the House.

Method:

The committee held meetings with the following:
1.	The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and his technical staff.
2.	The three cellular phone service providers of MTN, Uganda Telecom Ltd (Mango) and Celtel, Uganda Ltd. 

The committee also analyzed Excise Tariff Act, Cap. 338. 

The object of the Bill is to amend Schedule 2 of the Excise Tariff Cap. 338, to provide for new rates of Excise Duty to be charged on specific goods and to specify other goods on which Excise Duty is to be imposed.  

Observations:

There is need to increase taxes in some areas and even widen the tax base for the country to meet its new commitment and accomplish its continuing prograMs These new programs include elections and salaries for local government leaders after abolition of Graduated Tax.  

The Bill provides for the increase of duty on tobacco products in Uganda whose rates are still high in the region and has led to smuggling of similar products from Kenya and Tanzania where duties are low.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, those of you who have knowledge about smoking, smuggling of Super Match cigarettes in Uganda has in the recent past increased. They have been appearing in the media, anti-smuggling units have been very active and this has been brought by this excessive increase of tax on these products which can be cheaply produced by our neighbours.

This may compound a problem of smuggling, increased cost of production, policing borders and manufactures may close down their industries leading to loss of employment. 

The Bill also provides for increment of 2 per cent on usage charges of mobile cellular phones. This however, might affect the growth of the sector because it was reported that the development programs of the investors in the sector would be affected. Collections from these items are estimated to be shs 5.2 billion. This could be collected through expanded network and more usage of the phones, the service providers’ projections reveal. The increase of 2 per cent is directly transferred to the consumers, which is likely to inhibit usage and create inefficiency in the economy.

The duty on the cellular phone usage has been increasing over the last three years from 7 per cent to 10 per cent and now the proposed 12 per cent.

The regional tax varies from 10 per cent in Kenya, 5 per cent in Tanzania and 0 per cent in Rwanda. Actually, Uganda seems to be the highest in Africa. The increase might affect the local service providers in the sector since it would put them at a disadvantaged position in the region, retarding their upcountry expansion programme due to reduced usage.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, it was observed by the committee that if peoples’ behaviour tends to lead to reduction in usage, then this will inhibit the providers from expanding to new areas for purposes of coverage.

The proposed increase of 50 per cent on locally produced packaging bags and materials of polythene for local manufacturers will greatly affect the local production and possibly cause unemployment. Such items are produced in the neighbouring countries and attract less tax. Like the case of tobacco products, our local manufacturers may close down their factories due to smuggling of such materials, some of which are not environmentally friendly.

The committee further noted that currently alternative products are not yet developed in the region and their classification is still inadequate. The committee last year recommended that the imported products of this kind should attract 50 per cent under Tariff heading 3923.21.00 and 3923.29.00 of the East African Community Customs Union Tariff iteMs It was noted that these items do not attract high tax in the neighbouring countries, hence out compete our locally manufactured goods. Madam Speaker, the committee still stands by this position.

Recommendations: 

Government should examine the principles of equity and fairness of this tax to avoid distorting competitiveness in the affected sectors. 

Any duty that will encourage smuggling as a result of excessive increment of tax, which is high in the region, should be reversed since its compliance is bound to be negative and negatively impact on the economy. 

As we advance to towards the Customs Union for a common market in East Africa, Government should treat the private sector reasonably, particularly manufacturers in consideration of what is happening in our neighbouring countries. Failure to do this may lead the investors to be frustrated, leading to closure of industries, which will distort revenue projection and hence retard economic growth and development.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee requests this House to adopt the proposed amendments.

Madam Speaker, we agreed on all the amendments except we are not comfortable with air time. As indicated in this report, there are two ways of increasing revenue. You may lower the tax so that you get more people in the bracket and you get more revenue from more usage or turnover. The other alternative is to increase it, and Government has chosen the alternative of increasing it. Through our interaction with the service providers, it appears we may get more revenue if we maintain the status quo. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are free to debate.

4.30
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Once again, I thank my honourable colleagues on the committee for their report. This new tax and what I would consider IT should be looked at uniformly or in a holistic manner. I do not know how to consider it. But to look at it strictly from a mobile phone point of view is totally inadequate and probably unfair to service providers. 

Madam Speaker, it should have been comprehensive to cover all electronically controlled or managed communication systems If for instance, I decide to communicate through the computer, and yet I get the same effect, I will be cheating on those people who actually use the mobiles.  

Madam Speaker, the service providers have not been fair to us the consumers. When you look at their returns on their investments, it is definitely exaggerated in that whatever tax we impose on this service; they offload it on to the consumer. Like the new 12 per cent, they will just pass it on to the consumer. But nobody takes into consideration the balance of the money. Take for instance, from a technical point of view; this is common knowledge to most of us who use the mobiles that they are charging us per second instead of per unit. So, the person who is using one second and one minute are almost in the same category. 

I think Madam Speaker, the Minister of Communications and the Minister of Finance should jointly approach people in IT to figure out how the ordinary consumer can also benefit. Fine, the government is deriving revenue from it, but also the consumer has to be protected. I think this matter should have been looked into before we went straight into imposing an additional 2 per cent.

Madam Speaker, when I look at the figures given here, we started with 7 per cent, we went to 10 per cent, and now we have broken 12 per cent or we are about to break 12 per cent. Let us review these people’s revenue because the committee says it could inhibit the growth in that industry by making it too expensive. Now, when you look at the difference between 7 and 10, and 10 and 12, it is about the same in terms of the percentage increase. 

How much did these people make or how much are they making since we increased from 7 to 10 per cent? Did it inhibit the growth in the industry? We have moved from 10 to 12 per cent now and we are scared that this could inhibit the growth of industry. Let us compare. 

Madam Speaker, much as I appreciate these people’s role in our economy, they are making a fortune. Right now, MTN alone is making a million dollars a day. That is a lot of money to leave this country.  This company is not indigenous; it is a foreign investor. They came here to make money and they are allowed to take their money out.  

Why would we sit back and say that since we are charging them 50 percent corporate tax, no matter how much they generate, they can continue to take it out? We have to look at this. Let us sit with these people and look at their books and see their return on investment. 

I am a great supporter - as a matter of fact the greatest revolution that has ever happened in this country in terms of technology has been the introduction of the mobile phones. Nobody can beat that in terms of change. It was unthinkable a few years ago to make a phone call locally or internationally. You had to go and book and then wait. 

Nowadays I am even bothered. Somebody in a certain village in my constituency can telephone me in the middle of the night and say, “Hon. Awori, I have got a problem.” “What is your problem?” And you can tell the problem is that he has had too much to drink. Among other things - I keep hearing my colleague here heckling me, “Movement Oyee! Movement Oyee!” But this is not an achievement of the Movement.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I am forced to seek clarification from the honourable member holding the floor. He stated that MTN alone is repatriating US $1 million per day. He went on to say that we need to sit and look at their books. So how did you arrive at this figure of US $1 million per day without looking into their books? How did it happen?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, it was rhetorical. When I say, “Let me look at your books”, basically I am simply saying that, “Let us get together and see how we can work out a problem.” When you talk about US $1 million a year, I am sure last week you saw in the papers who the biggest taxpayers are. MTN jumped from No. 4 position last year, this year it is No. 1. 

You work it out arithmetically. If they can pay nearly Shs 60 billion in corporate tax, that is, after they have deducted corporate tax, how do you determine your corporate tax? It is 50 percent or whatever the percentage is. If they can pay that much in tax, how much did they gross? Let me qualify my remarks. 

I am the greatest supporter of this revolution and I am with anybody who fosters that revolution of communications in this country. It has helped us.   Only mention any particular person, I am mentioning those people who brought their money and their technology in this country to cause a revolution in the communications.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Is hon. Awori very grateful to the person who brought the money for investment and not grateful to the person who created that environment for investment?

MR AWORI: I am absolutely clear on that. MTN flourishes under dictatorship and under democracy. It does not matter who is in charge. So please, do not say that the environment here was so conducive. MTN even exists across the neighbouring countries, even here in DRC, where there is almost no government. So, what are you implying by saying that I should be grateful to somebody somewhere for inviting MTN? 

As a matter of fact, MTN was never invited here; they came on their own and we almost stopped them. I am aware that we almost stopped them because we made the conditions so hard that they nearly backed out. But when they saw Celtel flourishing under very difficult conditions, they decided to come in the big way. Celtel almost had a monopoly but because they did not know the business techniques, MTN came in and they have overpowered them. Now they are the basic service industry in terms of communications.  

So my honourable colleague I would like to tell you that I am most grateful to those who have caused the revolution, but not the midwife. However, in terms of taxation, again in regard to the telecommunications system, we are cheating ourselves. We have not sufficiently focused on IT. IT at the moment is the in thing in terms of global economy. We cannot survive without it. 

I am surprised that we have not set up a specific ministry for IT. It is under Communications, it is also under Ministry of Finance; it is under Investment. We are being shortsighted in terms of capturing this particular industry. Again, we are losing money in this communications –(Interruptions)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, sometimes I am amazed by hon. Aggrey Awori. He is the same honourable member who was criticizing the Government that the ministries are becoming too many, and now he is the same honourable member arguing that we have not formed an ICT ministry. So which policy are you following? Which is right and which is wrong?

MR AWORI: It is very simple; when you are reorganizing the Government, you can abolish the majority of these ministries or consolidate them under one ministry, especially the Ministry of Communications Works and Transport. A lot of those areas under that ministry are redundant. We absolutely do not need them. A few minutes ago we were complaining about the inefficiencies of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications in terms of roads. Some of them should actually become departments, not even ministries. 

But IT, as I said is so important that we need to bring its own empire, its own status. The others are redundant. There is the Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Gender, the ministry of this and ministry of that. They are too many, some of those should be cut down and then concentrate and focus on those, which are more meaningful in terms of our economy. 

So when you ask why I am advocating for the creation of the Ministry of IT, I am not being exclusive. I am not saying that do not remove the existing ones, which we consider cumbersome and unproductive. Let us have those –(Interruptions)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, in this Chamber we have a full Minister in charge of ICT and he is seated in front of us, and we have got a full commission, an independent commission, that is ICC; it is also under his ministry. Is he, therefore, in order to say that there is no ministry? Is he underrating the minister to say that there is no ministry of ICT, when actually the minister is seated in front of us?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he is not familiar with the structure of the ministries and their contents. That is the problem.

MR GAGAWALA: Madam Speaker, hon. Aggrey Awori stood here and said that the Ministry in charge of Works is useless and should be relegated to a department. Is he in order to relegate this ministry, which is catering for the budgets of most of the ministries? The development part of the budget of the Ministry of Works is actually to do with roads, and for us who come from rural constituencies roads are really a major thing. 

Is he in order to start persuading this House and misleading it that the Ministry of Works or the ministry in charge of roads is useless and should be relegate to a mere department and be wound up? Should we allow him to go on saying this? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is in the Hansard that a few weeks ago the ministry was thanked for meeting targets and percentages. So you cannot now turn around after ten days to say that it should be wound up because this House agreed that it was doing well.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I go by your observations and your ruling on the matter. I cannot doubt it but in terms of my honourable colleague’s concerns, definitely I did not say that this ministry is not performing. I said that this ministry leaves much to be desired, it is not performing to our expectations and in that case either the person of the minister or the ministry itself should be a subject to serious review.  

In regard to my honourable colleague’s concern that maybe I am not aware of the structures and the various ministries and departments that exist in this government, my remark was to set up a full-fledged Minister for ICT.

COL. BUTIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform the honourable member on the Floor that the nomenclature, the naming of ministries and the decision to create ministries, is a prerogative of the President. The distinguished Member of Parliament, who has a very shaky constituency, can wait when he becomes President to decide whichever, if he ever, to subsume and change and create a Ministry for ICT.

Secondly, I will not blow my own trumpet but one of the ministries, which are solving Uganda’s problem, especially the problems of infrastructure, the problems of roads and the problems of movement of people and goods is the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. Communications, which I am privileged to lead, is one of the departments that has – and you know very well that you were there before me and the honourable member is not aware that the Deputy Speaker herself was a Minister in the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. That is the ministry, which has brought a revolution in Uganda and I think you should praise that it can help you to talk to a constituency you could not go to before. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Awori, please wind up.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have attentively heard the comments of my honourable colleagues, but especially the last remark was off the point for the following reasons. One, I would like to inform my honourable colleague that indeed I am very firm in my constituency. A lot firmer than I was yesterday, a lot firmer than I was at the time I got to this august House; and my intentions are still honourable and I hope to realize them sooner or later. However, the most –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR AWORI: The question of whether I have authority to change ministers or not, we know very well that in this august House we have the right of oversight where we can advise the appointing authority if we do not appreciate what is going on in that ministry. I have never come up with a motion for a Bill here to the effect that such and such a ministry should be abolished. I know my parameters in terms of legislative requirements, so it is not all.

There are two other things: the fibreglass communication system is a matter, which needs to be looked into. It is a big challenger to the mobile. You should get the fibreglass communication system, which needs a very expensive infrastructure, and their charges are going to be a lot lower than this wireless communication. You need to look into that in form of taxation.

Last but not least, Madam Speaker, the committee observes that unless we check on our taxation system investors might go to the neighbouring countries where the taxes are lower. I do not think that is a serious concern. These people will go wherever they can make money, they will always offload taxation on the consumer and as long as the consumer is compliant, docile and ready to meet the excessive taxes, he will not mind. 

So with due respect to my honourable colleague, the chairperson of the committee, I agree with you but it is not really a serious consideration. I know the investors have been telling us that if we do not lower our rates, they will go to Democratic Republic of Congo, or to Kenya; they will not. They will always go wherever there is a ready consumer. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.47
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine are just a few questions here and there. One, I do not know whether the committee took time to analyse the growth rate of the telecommunications sector, especially with the rate of taxation that the excise duty was at seven percent vis-à-vis when it was at ten percent or when it was at 12 percent. So, I do not know how it was affected.

Secondly, we must also look at how to widen the tax base. In this country electioneering is hampering tax collection. When you look in the transport sector, this government is losing a lot of money, big sums of money, especially in the licensing sector of PSVs. We have got vehicles licensed to carry passengers and small cars, which are plying all our roads in Uganda, which have overtaken these vehicles and they do not pay PSV licences. Those, which pay PSV licences are now redundant at home and government is losing a lot of revenue but nobody has looked at that. If you go on our roads you will see one small car carrying ten passengers and a minibus is packed at home because it cannot compete with a small vehicle. We need to look into such sectors instead of increasing taxes on small bodies. 

When we fail in one direction, especially with auctioning, then we jump on these companies. The other day I had a chance to meet the Managing Director of UTL. He told me that this year alone they are likely to make as little as Shs 1 billion, and their rate of expansion is going down. This idea of saying that they are not going away, I think we are looking at how we can penetrate the population. How a common man can do business by using the mobile phone at a reasonable rate and whether he gossips when he calls is not our business. We can collect more by lowering rates and having many people on board who subscribe to those telephone companies. We have to look into that. 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, when my colleague talks of UTL being hampered to go to rural areas, the two licenses of UTL and MTN obligate them to cover the whole country latest by July 24th this year. But they never did it. We even came here as a committee and they said that they will reach everywhere expect 154 sub-counties. Up to now their license obligations have never been met and their duopoly has ended.  

The most important thing is not to look at the requirements of those companies but to look at what they have done for us and this one would require the Ministry of Works and Housing, plus Finance, to sit down and see what to do rather than having the committee to say, “Produce the tax.” Otherwise, those companies have failed to fulfil the obligations in their licenses. Thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, this is exactly what I am saying. How do you expect a certain company to comply with license obligations when every other year you are changing the tax policy? If I am supposed to cover 960 sub-counties at excise duty of seven percent then after one year you increase it to 10 percent, automatically that is going to affect my income and my rate of expansion. These are the reasons why these people are not fulfilling their obligations in their licenses. So, we have to look at that critically and see how we are going to increase the – in this country, not looking at the taxes alone. So I still believe that by lowering taxes the Government can have more money because the subscribers are automatically going to increase.

Madam Speaker, there is another, which I had. It was on proposed increases of 50 percent on locally produced packaging bags, especially polythene, the buveeras. Yes, the intention was to reduce on environmental degradation so that less bags are produced in this country. But then it was not harmonized with the surrounding countries, our neighbours whose rate of taxation is about 2 percent.  So -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: It was also compounded by poor classification because this includes the packaging for milk, bread and these other drinks you see in these papers. That is why we recommend that they should classify them. It also includes those, which you use when building, of gauge 1,000. So it is really a bundled together sort of thing.  

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you for that good information and actually it is true because before I came here to complain about the package of disposable syringes I was also paying excise duty on them because of poor clarification, which was happening. But at the same time when we increase the taxes we must also look at the countries, which are surrounding us, in order to harmonize these rates. 

You can imagine increasing by 50 percent and in Kenya it is 2 percent; what will happen? Automatically these polythene bags will flow from Kenya to Uganda and then the industries in Uganda will close in which case we shall lose jobs and even taxes to Kenya or Tanzania. So, it is usually better to first sit down and reach an agreement with these countries before you can increase your taxes. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.56
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (Bukanga County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine was that the committee, while cross looking at the tax, it is true that communication is not a luxury. It is important to drive the economy of this country. It is good but the problem is that the Government has been putting it at seven, ten, or 12, and it is already done. Let us be patient and the Government will sit down with these providers and especially looking at the coverage, because as I said earlier, we have been waiving tax on fixed phones and MTN and UTL are not using the fixed phones very well. When you look at them they are very few. 

But we are happy that it has been able to lay the optic fibre on Mbarara road up to Mbarara town and the eastern side. But let the Government sit with them and review the tax in the next financial year, not this particular financial year, so that these imbalances can be eliminated. Celtel for example suffers a tax on fixed phones yet the others do not. So the ministry itself will have to consider which particular companies can be allowed in Uganda to operate, because the duopoly is over, so that at the end of the day we have a better policy on telecommunications and balance the taxation. 

To think of reducing by two percent, we shall cause distortions in the whole budget and yet there are so many other factors to be considered. At the same time we must appreciate the work that has been done by the ministry and particularly the sector of communications. We cannot rush overnight to bring down the taxes; there are so many factors to be considered. Thank you.

4.58
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First I will respond to my senior colleague, hon. Awori. I would like to inform you that excise duty, VAT, is mainly borne by the consumers and even the increase is transferred to the consumers. If you have been watching carefully on your mobile phone, you should have seen that charges are higher. Corporation tax is also related to these because all of them depend on usage and if the usage is reduced, as I am convinced they are because of this increase, then even corporation tax will go down because they are all dependant on usage. 

As for the suggestion to determine their profits basing on the VAT that they pay, I do not agree with this. This is because profit is the net after you have deducted expenditure. Profits actually help government to collect VAT because then the tax is transferred. It is not the manufacturer who ends up paying VAT but actually the consumer. You may recall that it was said that Mukwano is the biggest payer of VAT. In actual fact he has never been the best payer of income tax at any one time. 

I agree with hon. Byabagambi that we must support the private sector. As I said during the policy statement debate, we must water the tree in order to enjoy its fruit. This business of stifling the growth of our very young private sector and overloading them with unrealistic tax is exposing them to unfavourable conditions and competition from our neighbours. This is extremely unfair and I think government should move consciously concerning this.  

However, I am happy to add that we sat with the minister, agreed and now we are moving together in the same direction. You mentioned something very interesting that hon. Byanyima also alluded to. You informed us that these companies have not reached everywhere and you also asked about their growth potential. 

Let me inform this House that according to the tables and information that we have, when excise duty was at seven percent, the sector was growing at an increasing rate. When it increased to ten percent, it grew but at a slightly decreasing rate. At the moment the curve is bending downwards, which means that growth is getting retarded.  

Technically for those of you who have bothered to understand the valuables of trade, you earn more on turnover than on hiked profit. I can see that government is trying to recover the money we waived off and they are targeting certain areas. However, should usage go down, we shall have a triple decrease in excise, in VAT and ultimately in corporation tax. You would rather bring so many people on board and get more money due to more usage. It is against this background that I urge the minister and the House to support the position of maintaining the status quo.  

Hon. Byanyima said these service providers have not covered a big area. Actually we interacted with them and they told us that this is because Uganda is a very hilly country. For our neighbours it is very cheap to expand their network because their terrain is not very hilly and settlements are in form of a corridor. 

They further argued that whenever they put a mast and it hits a mountain, they have to put another one. This is despite the fact that according to their calculations, some of those areas where they put masts do not have any people using them. Actually they have to fly to some areas to erect these masts. So their argument was that if less people use these masts yet putting them up is very expensive, this is going to limit their capacity to expand as it will impact negatively on their budgeting process. Therefore, I put it to you honourable members –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: I agree with you. In the beginning Celtel was like a route opener here and they had absolutely no competition. But immediately MTN came in there was competition within the country although now they have harmonized their positions and are all using one mast in the various areas. However, the most important thing is to know that when you get a license from government and you say we are going to cover the whole area, you must do that. 

Our intention here is to see that I can for example talk to my mother in Bundibugyo. They said they were going to cover all the sub-counties and we gave them a lot of liberty in this. We knew that they were going to cater for all 154 sub-counties and the World Bank gave this country money to cater for that. Therefore, what we want to see on the checklist is which sub-counties they have covered before we can even think of reducing this tax. That is what I want. We should not look at the number of mobiles in towns alone. We want our country covered.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following hon. Byanyima’s argument, he said that when Celtel was on its own it had very expensive costs in terms of infrastructure but with combined forces with MTN the cost went down. Technologically, is there a possibility that there could be a joint effort between the wireless system and fiber optics so that calls go by line to a certain point before they are distributed by mast? Is there any such possibility?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, let me first respond to hon. Byanyima. As you may know in business there is what we call skimming the market. When you venture as a pioneer, you have no competition and it is against this background that Celtel made billions of money and profits. 

One time I was invited to a function where the then Minister of Finance was giving Celtel a present for being the most successful investor to ever break even in a record of two years. I felt like crying because that was as a result of extreme skimming of the market. Despite this, when the other providers came they were humbled. Most of us shifted overnight because Celtel charges were too much at the time. Although you are saying that they are co-operating, I am not sure of this since I am not an engineer.

MR BYABAGAMBI: When Celtel came their connection fee was US $1,800 but now their connection fee is Shs 15,000, which is the equivalent of US $7.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: I said I am not an engineer. The little knowledge I know about telecommunications is that the east coast of Africa does not have a sub-marine cable. This sub-marine cable would really help us reduce the costs of communication.  

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the honourable member holding the Floor. I wish to inform him and this House that plans have been advanced and that it is in the programme to lay this cable. As a matter of fact in a few years this entire region including Uganda will be awash with cheap telecommunication through the method the honourable member is talking about. In fact I am very glad because the plans are progressing very well, the programme is well underway and money is being organised. Therefore, it is only a matter of time before this is operationalised.  

I would like to thank the honourable member for thinking ahead of many others and this is very good although the plans are already there. In fact I would like to add that although hon. Awori was talking about a minister for ICT, these are things that we have talked about so many times. However, the Government is more interested in the function than in the form. We are aware of the importance of ICT and the ministers concerned have full powers to handle these matters the way they should. I thank you, Madam Speaker, and the honourable member.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you honourable minister for the enriching information and hope that you have given us. I believe that will help us in understanding this. I want to go back to hon. Byanyima’s comments. As you may be aware, we recently got a district. However, our problem is that we are situated in the hills and because of this, getting telephone services is very expensive. 

This is because the only company that can get these services to us is UTL. They are the only ones who have the type of telephones that subscribe to the satellite and of course masts cannot work for us. UTL uses these satellite connections for hilly areas and other areas that have complications. I can see the minister smiling; it seems he is very aware of this. However, the fact that we have to be connected to the satellite has proven to be very expensive. It is against this background that we should encourage a policy that will lead to more coverage so that our people also are connected cheaply. I beg to move.

5.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the honourable chairman of the committee for a good short and concise report. I want to agree with everything the chairman said except for one. The entire report is agreeable to me except the proposal that we do not effect the two percent increase on airtime. 

Madam Speaker, I was listening to the two chairmen, one for the sector and the other for the former sector of the committee. I believe these are important people since they chair committees. The chairman for the telecommunications sector was very categorical. He said that the issue is not the taxation per se but rather how the industry is relating to their overall obligations and how equity within the industry stands as regards taxation. The issues he is raising go beyond a simple increase in airtime and I want to thank him because these are legitimate issues, which we must address. 

The Chairperson of the Committee on Finance is saying we should not increase VAT from ten percent to 12 percent. Madam Speaker, let me tell this House that taxing the telecommunications sector is not a punitive measure and it is not a “sin tax”. It is not the same as increasing taxes on beer, cigarettes, whiskies and stuff like that, no. And it is not as if we want to penalize our people or that we do not want the poor to also get access to telephone communication. That is not the intention. This is a purely revenue generating measure.  

Madam Speaker, we have a budget that we have to supply. Where are the sectors that would deliver the amount of money we anticipate to get from this source to this budget? From this source alone we are expecting not less than Shs 34 billion and that is what we have put in the Budget. 

If today this House said we have to reduce this tax from ten percent to two percent, we would need to find a way of raising the Shs 34 billion that we intended to raise from this source. If anything this House has already appropriated this money. I found hon. Byanyima’s proposal very attractive but we have already gone so far and even committed ourselves to the increase to 12 percent and the Budget already includes this money. 

Let us examine this -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, when you are dealing with figures it is not good to talk of generalities. Uganda was the first country in the region to introduce mobile phones and Kenya followed. At the end of 2001 Uganda had 276 subscribers while Kenya had 400,000. At the moment, because of their low rate of five percent, the percentage of people in Kenya who are connected are 4.6 percent while in Uganda they are hardly 1.5 percent.

DR EPETAIT: The minister was trying to analyse the debate between the two chairpersons of the committees and he went further to imply that the Chairperson of the Finance Committee had somehow described this tax increase on mobile telecommunication as a punitive measure, which he did not. If anything it came from him. In any case, Madam Speaker, you said that this is not a punitive measure. 

I believe the concern of the chairperson of the committee is to see how to help the ministry get the budget surplus that you are asking for. The explanation is that the higher the tax rate, the slower the growth rate of the industry, which will in turn choke expected revenues that the ministry has budgeted for.  

The idea of staying this tax is really for your own good. We are not describing this as a punitive measure on the sector or on the consumer. All we want is to see increased coverage and increased revenue as a result of more consumers coming on board. I thought this should be clarified.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, if hon. Epetait got the impression that I was referring to either hon. Byanyima’s submission or that of hon. Rwamirama to the effect that this is a punitive tax, then I beg to apologize. 

My statement that this is not a punitive tax was without reference to the two chairpersons’ submissions. I was simply stating that we sometimes impose taxes on those things that we want to discourage people from consuming. In fact it was stated in this House that as a tax measure we could levy tax on something to discourage its consumption and I gave examples of spirits, cigarettes and so on. 

I went on further to say that this is not a “sin tax” but that sometimes –(Interjections)- if I would be listened to because I have sat here, Madam Speaker, and listened to everybody. Therefore, I would have thought that at least everybody should also listen to me.  

I am saying that the –(Interruption)

MR OCHIENG: Point of clarification -(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: But what can I clarify before I make the point?  

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the Minister of Finance in charge of Planning is that he should inform the whole country as to whether there is pressure from somewhere. This is because the committee is saying the tax should not be increased, the minister is saying it should, while the chairperson is also saying that it should be allowed. I would like to know what made them make this decision. 

Do you realize that these service providers are only able to make their contribution to the Budget because of the money they are making? Do you also realise that this money actually comes from the public? Suppose they stop making this money, what will we achieve anyway?

Secondly, I have a problem in my constituency, which is located at the border. Every time I go home even before I reach my constituency I start receiving welcome notes on my phone that, “You are most welcome, thank you for choosing SafariCom”. Many times one has to use the Kenyan code to access Uganda and vice-versa. We have to constantly change from the Mango simcard to that of SafariCom, and the whole thing is a problem. We do not understand what is going on and the same applies to Celtel –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you had been here in the beginning you would have heard the presentations by the chairperson and the minister. You would have realised then that you should address your queries to the minister in charge of that sector. Please finalize, Minister of Finance.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to implore this House and say that we should be very careful in the decision we make in regard to this matter. The removal of the two percent increase that we have already reflected in the Budget and that we have already budgeted for is going to create a budgetary deficit in excess of Shs 34 billion, which we must fund somehow.  

The figures, however, keep varying. The chairperson presented a curve that showed that whenever there was an increase in tax rate there was a fall in the rate of expansion. He also argued that we would raise more money if we reduced the tax. We have heard this argument before and in fact with regard to the brewery industry we reduced taxes but I can assure you that we had a major shortfall. 

If I may give you some figures, in the financial year 2002/2003 when we had a seven percent excise rate, we collected Shs 20.85 billion. In 2003/2004 when we had a three percent rise we collected Shs 24.89 billion and in 2004/2005 we collected Shs 33.63 billion. This evidence shows that increased taxes do not necessarily result in reduced income or revenue for government. Therefore, I pray that this House allows us to go ahead with the proposal that we have made and especially because of the budgetary aspect that I have emphasized.

Like hon. Byanyima said, the process of consultation is continuing. Let me add that the growth of a sector like telecommunications is not entirely dependant on taxation. Some people were quoting Kenya but you have to realise that Kenya’s income per capita, the nature in which they divested and the sheer size of their economy, is different from ours. Therefore, it would be inaccurate to say that Kenya reduced taxes on this sector and collected so much money.  

We are the ones who liberalised this sector and this year –[Mr Byabagambi, “What about Rwanda?”] I am not a minister in the Rwanda Government so I cannot speak for Rwanda. As I was saying, this year we intend to liberalise even further and we believe that at 12 percent we will be able to fund our Budget as proposed in this House. I thank you, Madam Speaker and I entreat members to support this measure. I also thank the chairman.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall skip the next phase of this Bill for reasons that I do not want to go on record with. Let us proceed with the report on income tax.  

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005

5.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2005 be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Bill is calculated to bring into legal effect the measures that were spelt out in this House when we presented the Budget. 

If you will remember, in that speech we said that it is the intention of government to give tax relief or tax exceptions on interest that accrues on agricultural loans. This is because people borrow money for agriculture yet because of the gestation period and returns in the agriculture sector, they have a problem of paying the interest that is accrued. We, therefore, wanted lenders in this sector to be given an incentive so that they can continue lending to the agricultural sector.

The purpose of this Bill, therefore, is to bring that measure into effect. Furthermore, we hope to exempt people who invest in collective investment schemes so that they can maximise their profits as this will create equity in the process of administering our tax. The Bill was referred to the chairperson of the committee who summoned us to appear before him and the report is ready.

5.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, in the interest of time I will start with the objective of the Bill, which is to provide for the tax treatment of collective investment schemes and interest earned by financial institutions on certain loans. It is intended to amend the current Income Tax Act, Cap 340.

Observations:

The Bill proposes incentives, which are intended to encourage savings and investment in collective investments.

This approach is intended to mobilise small savers who would otherwise not be able to access securities markets. The scheme thus helps these small savers to maximise their returns while the investments are accordingly shielded from risks that small individual investors would be subjected to. 

The Bill further aims at the exempting some tax on personal loans for activities such as farming, forestry, fish farming to mention but a few which are aimed at fighting household poverty. The committee observed that this is in line with PEAP programme.  

Recommendations:

The efforts to mobilise small savings should be encouraged for creation of formal money markets.

The public should be sensitised about the benefits of savings and investment.

Conclusion:

The committee requests this House adopts the report and passes the proposed amendments in the Bill. The committee does not have any controversy with this Bill and agrees with the minister to beg the House to adopt the report and the Bill. I beg to move.

DR NKUUHE: The clarification I am seeking is in regard to the target. Sometimes you may intend to help the poor but you end up helping someone else. How are we to ensure that it is the right beneficiaries that get this? How will we ensure that it will not be another window for people who have information to take advantage of? In other words what safeguards have you put in place? What mechanisms are you going to use to identify the real beneficiaries and how are you going to prevent the abuse of a potentially good programme?

5.30
MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank the committee and the minister for thinking in favour of the poor. It is very important for the minister to remind this House of how women are suffering with micro finance institutions. People are actually committing suicide. I know that if we pass this good Bill the public will know that at least a saviour in the form of the minister has come to give them relief. 

Now a farmer will be able to borrow money and not have to worry about his house being taken. Likewise women will stop running and hiding away from the money lenders. I think it has to be clarified on the Floor this afternoon that borrowing from micro finance institutions is going to be different from borrowing from a commercial bank or from financial institutions that are going to lend money specifically for the activities that the Bill is addressing this afternoon. 

I support the motion and I believe that if this thing is explained properly, it will go a long way in convincing other members. This is because I realise that we are not all together in this and that some members are hesitant that we might be passing this law to help foreigners who are importing second hand commodities so that they can convert this money and go back to carry on their activities abroad. This is what is worrying us.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, for record purposes, the concerns of hon. Nkuuhe and hon. Gagawala are almost the same. I want to draw your attention to the Collective Investment Scheme Act, which was enacted in 2003. The Capital Markets Authority has already started licensing companies to operate collective investment schemes. These schemes collect funds from small savers who would otherwise not be in position to access securities markets and invest it for them. 

This is done with the objective of maximising returns and minimising risks for individual investors. The intention is good and I think the onus is on government and legislators to make sure that the incentives that we are passing in the Bill actually go out to benefit the intended target population.

As for people being smart and taking advantage of any loopholes, personally I have not seen any. However, since leadership is a continuous process, if anything that was not anticipated emerges midway, we should be able to address it. If you recall the Budget Speech, I believe this is in line with this speech and will target low-income earners and enable them to invest money and access capital cheaply. I thank you very much.

5.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): I thank the chairman very much for a very good report and I also thank members of the committee. Madam Speaker, the issues raised by hon. Gagawala and Dr Nkuuhe concern implementation. They are wondering how we will ensure that the people for whom this is meant actually benefit. This is how it is going to operate. 

Any institution that falls in our definition of a bank, and that includes micro finance institutions and any other financial institutions that extend loans, will be brought under the purview of this provision. They will be able to lend an agricultural farmer an agricultural loan and that loan will have interest, which interest will not be taxed. 

However, one will have to prove that one, the loan was an agricultural one and two, that the agricultural loan was actually received at a rate that takes into account the benefit to be derived from the tax relief. Much as the implementation will be made, it is going to be refined further to ensure that the people who are supposed to benefit actually do benefit. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, similarly we shall skip the next phase of the Bill and proceed with the next one on Value Added Tax.  

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, when the Budget was presented before you in this House, we mentioned that we would be carrying out a number of changes within the Value Added Tax Act. The purpose of this Bill No. 15 entitled the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2005 is to ensure that we bring in place rules that oblige the Commissioner-General of URA to issue practice notes and rules and to provide for things that are related thereto within the purview of the Value Added Tax Act. 

This was presented before you. The Bill was laid on the Table and you referred it to the chairperson of committee. We have since appeared before the chairperson of the committee and we believe that the chairperson of committee may be ready to make his report. I thank you.

5.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): This is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2005.

Once again in the interest of time, I will leave out the preamble and introductions.  

The purpose of the Bill is to provide for rules obliging the Commissioner-General Uganda Revenue Authority to issue practice notes and to provide for other miscellaneous amendments to the Value Added Tax Act, Cap 349.

Observations: 

The proposed clause No. 2 is to harmonise the VAT Act with the East African Customs Management Act, 2004. This is necessary because of the current regional integration requirements that started with the establishment of the Customs Union.

The current VAT Act does not provide for practice notes, neither are they covered in the Income Tax Act yet they are important tools in tax administration. This is addressed in the clause 3 of the Bill.

Private ruling is not covered under the VAT Act. This is also an important tool for dialoguing between taxpayers and the Commissioner-General. It is a confidence building mechanism, which is expected to lead to better tax compliance. The interpretation powers being given to the Commissioner-General will strengthen his/her decision-making ability and also make him or her accountable.

The committee observed that charging VAT on some of the crucial inputs like mobile toilets will hurt the efforts to provide sanitation to the most needy parts of the country. Environmentally friendly equipment and facilities should be encouraged. Such items include mobile toilets, solar equipment, lifesaving gear, headgear and speed governors.

In conclusion, the committee requests the House to adopt the report and the proposed amendments in the Bill.

I wish also to inform this august House that there are only two amendments, which we shall bring at a later stage, but we agreed with the ministry and we found no controversy since we are also trying to harmonise with our East African counterparts in the region. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson.

5.40
MRS LOYCE BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this Bill. I note with appreciation that the committee studied the Bill. 

Paragraph 4.1 proposed to harmonise our VAT Act with the East African Customs Management Act, 2004, which came into effect in January this year. My concern is related to recommendation 4.1.4 where the committee observed that charging VAT on some of the crucial inputs like mobile toilets will hurt the efforts to provide sanitation to the most needy parts of the country.

I would like to introduce another item, which is very important. We should continue to lobby the House to bring VAT of this item in conformity with what has taken place elsewhere in East Africa. Allow me to inform the House that in Kenya and Tanzania politically the Parliament their have already removed tax on sanitary towels and pampers. Pampers are those gadgets that are worn by children to protect them from the urine. I would, therefore, like to move that like the other East African countries we fall in step and grant our sanitary towels and pampers a zero rating.  

I would like the minister to clarify to me whether this has been catered for because the lobby has gone very far. This, if granted, would be implementing certain instruments that have been ratified by this country. One of them is the Beijing platform –(Interruption)

MS AMAJO: Thank you very much honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give my colleague is that studies have been done like we have said here before. Those studies indicate lack of protection or inadequate protection during the menstrual period for young girls. This is a major reason for girls dropping out of schools.  

There is a small project, which was done somewhere in West Nile, it is a pity I do not have the project writer. But it was a research, which was conducted and it confirmed what I have just said. Lack of sanitary towels is a major cause of girls’ dropping out of school. In this project, after the research a project is now in place, which is providing sanitary towels for young girls and this has caused a retention rate of over 80 percent of girls in school. Therefore, Madam Speaker, what hon. Bwambale is talking about is an affirmative action, which should see us make good use of the UPE programme. Thank you.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much hon. Amajo for that excellent information. In fact it was one of the strong points -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and member for giving way. I want to inform the House that we actually removed tax on these sanitary pads. They do not attract import tax and any duty. However, VAT has been levied and can be refunded but I think if we have to move affirmatively we need to pronounce ourselves on this and remove it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let hon. Bwambale conclude her contribution.  

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much. I am excited that the committee and the chairperson are moving in the direction that we were arguing for. We are aware 18 per cent VAT has been removed but what we are asking for is zero rating. It should be zero-rated. The Minister of Finance knows what I am talking about. When you remove the 17 percent, there is still that COMESA provision, which will bring back the four per cent. The calculations have been done that the best way to do it is to zero-rate it. This is exactly what Kenya and Tanzania has done, so let us not have double standards.

I also want to add very strongly that that was a political promise and pledge by His Excellency the President. In his manifesto he states very clearly that tax will be removed and other necessary steps for sanitary ware and pampers. Therefore, it is only prudent that the minister implements the policy of the President. Moreover at this material time of our political process it is very important that when we are talking about democratization in education and in schools we emphasize our national policy of the strategy for the girl child education.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Considering that 80 percent of our girls come from the rural areas and this 80 percent also cannot afford to buy knickers, could it not be actually prudent if we would propose also to exempt the knickers from tax? Because 80 per cent of our girls go without knickers in the villages; they do not have them and they cannot afford them.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much for that proposal. It is not a bad one. We are not asking for it right now. Allow me to inform you, honorable member that wearing knickers is optional but wearing a sanitary pad is no option. So we are going for first things first and you are being informed from the first source. 

I, therefore, believe that having introduced Universal Primary Education and increased the enrollment budget in schools from Shs 2.5 million to Shs 7.5 million, this has made the enrollment of girls to be 48 percent especially in the primary schools; and aware that most of the adolescence period now is occurring in the primary section; and knowing that there is poverty around and most parents, especially in the rural areas cannot afford the sanitary ware; and young girls who are producing at an early stage – I do not encourage it, but it is already happening, it is obvious – we need pampers for our children. 

I would like to persuade the committee to go a step further and persuade the members of the House to accept this amendment in clause 4 that VAT has been abolished and continues to be abolished and that the sanitary ware, towels, if you want to be specific, and the pampers – this is a serious matter, be zero-rated. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, I think you have already made your position.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the issue of sanitary towels had been addressed in our committee and we waived all the taxes except VAT, which is refundable. But the experience that I have had is that it is never done. So, I would request the minister, in the interest of gender budgeting, which we are accustomed to, to actually concede. In any case, why don’t we save them the bother of going to claim for this VAT and put it at zero? I can see all my committee members here are in support and I have no reason not to support it. I beg to move.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to come a bit late, but I should have got this from the previous mover of the proposal. I am wondering, as you suggested I thought this should go hand in hand with the zero taxing on knickers. How do you wear the – I have no idea but that is my imagination.  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, formulas, which do not isolate variables sometimes are very defective. In the effort of raising revenue, it will be dangerous when we exempt knickers. If we can exempt knickers, why not exempt dresses? We have seen the reason advanced by hon. Bwambale and the dangers she raised of the children. We need to address those ones by actually providing sanitary towels. Otherwise, you are going to overload this government with demands for both reducing tax and also for service provision. Where are you going to get money from?  

If the ladies say they wanted sanitary pads, why do you have to include others because you are going to cripple government? You are the same people who want money to build roads, where is the money going to come from?  

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, first and foremost, I want to know the percentage of the population of this country, which uses the sanitary pads. I come from a rural area. There are some things, which I have never seen in the villages. When somebody talks of sanitary pads, I only find them in town; these are for rich people. That is why I was bringing the issue of the knickers –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byabagambi, the reason those people do not have them is because they cannot afford them. That is why they are not using them in your village.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Then let us have the knickers also because they do not have them.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I belong to the Social Services Committee and we had recommended to the Ministry of Education that the Ministry should supply sanitary towels to the schools especially girls’ primary schools. If the ministry has supplied these sanitary towels, it means it must be included in the budget of the Ministry of Education. So if you have also to add the supplying of knickers, it will mean you will be inflating the Ministry of Education as far as sanitary towels are concerned.  

So I would say, since this recommendation is already with the Ministry of Education, if we remove the VAT and what you call zero rating then the ministry will be able to supply these sanitary towels to primary schools. 

We visited West Nile, Madam Speaker, and we went to Nebbi. We went to a primary school. In the first year there were 270 students in the school. By the time they reached primary seven they were 50 students. The reason was that they cannot afford these sanitary towels. When they come to that period when they need them they do not return to school again. So, removal of the tax will enable the Ministry of Education to budget for these sanitary towels and they distribute them to schools. Thank you very much.

MS MEHANGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the issue of sanitary towels not to be treated with ridicule. I really want us to take it very seriously. When we are asking Government to remove tax on these sanitary towels men should keep quiet because they speak about them with such ignorance that we really think –(Interjection)- alright I withdraw that statement. 

DR EPETAIT: I am really perturbed. If anything we have been seriously supporting the proposal. In fact we are even wondering why the minister is over contemplating on admitting this issue. I am a man and when we are talking about the welfare of our society there is nothing like supporting men or not supporting women. 

Is the honourable member in order to impute that these men in this honourable House are not concerned about the plight of our women when we are actually more concerned; and in fact moving in unison with them over the matter? Is she in order to impute that we are not caring?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the debate and lobby for this matter has gone on for the last four years and this is the first time we are almost making a breakthrough. The honourable member was concerned because one of the members said in his constituency he does not see those things and for him he thought it is only used by town people, but this is not the position. I know that hon. Mehangye appreciates your support and we know you are supporting us. That is why we are still here.

MS MEHANGYE: Thank you very much honourable Speaker. I had personally moved to withdraw it –(Interjection)- yes, I did withdraw it but really what I meant is that we know the issue practically while you are supporting, which support is very welcome. We are saying that when we are begging we should not ask too much so that government finds it difficult. So on knickers these younger girls can make knickers from our clothes, which we are making from Tri-Star textile so that we can leave the idea of knickers. But as for now the sanitary towels and pampers could get the taxes off. That is the information I wanted to give.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate our colleagues for the support they have given to this matter. I only want to educate hon. Byabagambi that when the girls in his constituency do not use sanitary towels, first of all, it is a problem of affordability. But also they have to pick old pieces of clothes and pack them there and get all sorts of infections; they also use toilet paper. 

I was also told in the camps that women use leaves. So, if you do not have these sanitary towels easily accessible to those girls in your constituency be sure you will have grown up women who will be illiterate; they will have left school but they will also be having all sorts of infections to go around with. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, chairperson, you want to conclude?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I do support and I am on record when we were removing this tax, but I would like to caution hon. Tibarimbasa on the way you are moving. Whenever you recommend that government buys a certain item for a specific – that involves expenditure and this means government must look for that money elsewhere. 

I want to tell you we are over taxing those who are paying tax too much. This is really healthy even if you do not look on the moral part of it. I think as government we have the responsibility to provide health care to these younger girls. But when you go to buy –(Interjection)- hold on, that is a cost and you are not controlling the population.  

You removed graduated tax and those people are not paying. You want to feed them at school; they are not paying tax. Who is paying, it is you who is paying tax. Now you want to buy them dresses? Who is going to pay? It is you. What sort of community are we bringing up? We must balance; we should not say, “Go and feed the children.” You must look for alternative source of money. So, we should not ask government to provide services in a sector and at the same time not to be seen to be supporting government to generate revenue.

6.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (MR Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a good report. I also want to thank the Chair.  

On sanitary pads, first of all I recall that at some function where you in the person of Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, Kadaga, were a guest of honour and you talked about it. I have also been listening to Byabagambi very attentively, and it is only fair to be reciprocated in that treatment.  

The issue of sanitary pads for women was raised and you summoned me very quickly and asked me whether it was true that there was still tax on sanitary pads. Even before I answered you, you directed that if it so happens, it must be removed during this budget. I do not know whether you recall but I believed those instructions. I am, therefore, in a difficult position because how can I disagree with the Chair? You are the one who gave me those instructions. You are in the Chair today and it creates a big problem on my side. 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, I want to request all Members of Parliament to support me in my bid to retain the 12 percent on airtime because –(Interjections)- if I may continue? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, please!

MR MUSUMBA: We are talking about the same kitty; they are not two different consolidated accounts. We are saying that this is necessary, really I agree but in the course of event I will also be appealing that my other matter be appropriately considered.  

Having said that, I accept that we shall zero rate sanitary pads. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I think you are navigating a trend of –(Interjection)- no, honourable members we are unable to vote on this matter today. So, let me give notice that tomorrow we shall take a vote on all these four Bills: The Value Added Tax bill, Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill and the Finance Bill. So, I appeal to all those in charge of both sides of the House to do the needful so that we can complete this exercise. We will finish these matters tomorrow. The House is adjourned until 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.10 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21 September 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)




