Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Wednesday, 11 September 2019

Parliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this sitting. A question was raised by hon. Alum Santa about a health centre and I do not see her here. However, the response has been prepared by the minister in relation to an urgent matter. The answer is here; please alter the Order Paper to accommodate a statement from the Minister of Health.

Honourable members, today the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2019 is here and we should be able to finish with it so that we can close that financial year and allow other processes to take place and the issues of the audits that would arise. That is now for the Auditor-General but let us perform our duty to appropriate what we handled at the level of the schedules to the supplementaries that were brought to this House in the course of that financial year. Let us proceed with business.

The Member of Parliament for Mityana had requested for a moment of intervention but now that he is not here - Next item. 

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. HENRY MAKUMBI KAMYA ON NEONATAL DEATHS IN BUKOOBA VILLAGE SEKANYONYI SUB COUNTY IN MITYANA DISTRICT

2.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Wednesday 4 September 2019, hon. Henry Makumbi Kamya, Member of Parliament for Mityana County South, raised concern over neonatal deaths in Bukooba village Sekanyonyi sub-County in Mityana District.

I would like to inform the House that a surveillance team under the leadership of the Director Clinical Services, Dr Charles Olaro, working together with the district health officer and the district surveillance focal person informed me that they had received similar complaints a day earlier and had commenced investigations.

The investigations were: to establish the cause of the death occurrence of the neonates; to determine the magnitude and the geographical distribution of the problem; and to identify some of the predisposing factors causing the problem.

Mr Speaker, the team established that it is indeed true that babies were delivered in different health facilities namely, Namutumba Health Centre II, Mityana Hospital, and Nsambya Hospital. Out of the eight children that died, six were verified and the death occurred between zero and two days from the time of delivery. The neonates presented with the following signs and symptoms: high fever, yellowing of the skin and difficulty in breathing before death.

The preliminary investigations established the main causes of these neonatal deaths as neonatal infection and fetal distress due to delayed labour. Four out of six deaths were due to fetal distress due to delayed labour while the other two were as a result of neonatal infections. 

Mr Speaker, the risk factors identified were poor community attitude towards use of insecticide treated mosquito nets where some communities claimed that they experienced too much heat and therefore were not using the insecticide treated nets. Some community leaders interviewed also revealed that some mothers use herbal medicines in addition to the medicines given at the health facilities.

The district health officials have been advised to continue sensitising mothers on the need to report to the health facilities from the onset of labour and also health workers were urged to attend to the pregnant mothers in labour in time. The health workers at the facility have also been urged to ensure hygiene is maintained at the facility level. 

This is aimed at reducing on the infections and also ensures that mothers do not introduce herbal medicines to be applied on the baby’s umbilical cords to avoid infections because this is where the suspicion was. Mr Speaker, our teams remain in investigation mode to follow up on any mother and ensure that these standards are being followed at the health facilities. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now that the member has not heard the response, he cannot ask a supplementary question. Thank you.

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE STATUS OF PLEDGES BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF INDIA, H.E NARENDRA MODI DURING HIS ADDRESS TO THE HOUSE-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Why don’t you handle the amended one?

RESPONSE TO AN ISSUE RAISED BY HON. ALUM SANTA ON NO DRUGS AT ATIPE HEALTH CENTRE III IN OYAM DISTRICT

2.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Mr Speaker, hon. Alum Santa the Woman representative for Oyam District also raised concern on no receipt of drugs for Atipe Health Centre III in Oyam District. She indicated that they were receiving drugs for a health centre II and not health centre III.

Mr Speaker, in January 2018, the Ministry of Health received a formal request from Oyam District Local Government requesting the upgrade of five health facilities that included Atipe Health Centre II. Subsequently, in March 2018, we approved this request and sent an engineering team led by the engineer George Otim to ascertain whether Atipe Health Centre II conforms to the required health centre III standards since it was constructed by partners.

The teams established that they meet the criteria and on 23 January 2019, the Atipe Health Centre II was officially inaugurated as a health centre III. However, this was after the Budget for the Financial Year 2019/2020 had been finalised.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, Atipe Health Centre III truly receives essential medicines and supplies to a tune of 8.394 million which we know that it is for a health centre II.

Mr Speaker, allow me to assure the honourable member that in the Financial Year 2020/2021, we are going to increase funding for the essential medicines and supplies to a tune of 23 million for this health centre in order for this health facility to be functionalised as a health centre III. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Are there any supplementary questions from Oyam?

2.13
MS SANDRA ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said last time, this is the only health centre III that we have and besides that, the World Vision has put in a lot of money with the promise that this will function as a health centre III.

Therefore, the supplementary question that I would like to ask the honourable minister is that given the surrounding situation, would it not be easier for you when the supplementary budget comes to address this problem?

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, we need to negotiate with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because it is not only Atipe. When you start this then you have to do it for all the rest. Therefore, I would like to request the honourable member to wait since we are not far away from the next financial year. 

Ms alum: As I was walking in, you were saying that we are getting, is it eight or nine millions yet on the ground we are getting only Shs 4 million and not even the Shs 8 million you are talking about. That is why, with all the problems in the health sector and as far as that health facility is concerned, we beg that you do something about it as a ministry.

Ms opendi: Mr Speaker, the 4.7 million is for non-wage expenditure for operations at the facility level. The 8 million that I am talking about are for the medicine and other supplies. 

It is not true that you are receiving only Shs 4 million. This is what goes to them and the other budget for medicine, as you all know, goes to the National Medical Stores. However, let us see how to handle.  Thank you.

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED by Hon. Ntende Robert ON The status of pledges by the Prime Minister of India, H.E Narendra Modi during his address to the House on 25th July 2018, notably; building a Conference Center in Jinja in memory of Mahatma Gandhi and credit extension to Uganda to establish cottage industries

The Deputy Speaker: Do we have a response from the Government on this? I do not see the Minister in charge of General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister. She requested yesterday that she would come today to respond to this; I do not see her here. Let us go to the next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE 

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2019

The deputy speaker: Chairperson, we are going to the Committee of Supply to deal with the figures from there but before we do that, are there preliminary things you would like to brief the House about first?

2.16
The vice-chairperson committee on finance, planning and economic development (Mr Patrick Opolot):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee did a reconciliation of the figures. The House should take note that on 28 March 2018, Parliament passed a resolution authorising funds to a tune of Shs 1,325,255 trillion to be spent.

Again, on 9th June, Parliament approved a total Supplementary Expenditure of Shs 377, under Supplementary Schedule No 3. The committee scrutinised the Hansard and the reports of the approved figures and found that generally they conform. However, there are some amendments to be made, which we propose we can handle at committee stage. I beg to report.

The Deputy Speaker: How many amendments are you proposing?

Mr opolot: They are 13 for recurrent expenditure and one for development expenditure.

The Deputy Speaker: For clarity such that when we go to the Committee of Supply we are able to deal with this properly, did you compare the figures with the schedules that were already approved by the House?

Mr opolot: Yes, we did.

The Deputy Speaker: And there are variations with the figures that are in the Bill?

MR PATRICK OPOLOT:  Yes, there are variations. For example, there is money, which has been in the Appropriations Bill for Vote 014: Ministry of Health of Shs 1.3 trillion that was not voted for. It was for the management of the nodding disease but went directly to hospitals and districts. So, we have to appropriate to the votes the funds went to.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, I think it is clear. We can now go to the Committee of Supply. 

Committee of Supply

Clause 1

The deputy chairperson: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 stands part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

The Schedule 

The deputy chairperson: Chairperson of the committee, do you have anything to the Schedule to the Bill? I wish the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was here to guide but since he is not, we will go with what the committee has brought.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT:  Mr Chairman, on page 4 of the Bill, we recommend that we delete Vote 014 because no funds were voted for it. The funds will be allocated to the relevant votes where the money went, which we have taken care of.

The deputy chairperson: Honourable members, the proposal is that the allocation under Vote 014 be deleted. I put the question to that proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014, deleted.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, on page 7 of the Bill, we propose to delete Vote 144: Uganda Police Force. The justification is that it is redundant and has no money indicated.

The deputy chairperson: Isn’t there a figure assigned to it?

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: There is no figure and no money voted and allocated to it.

The deputy chairperson: Honourable members, the motion is for deletion of Vote 144 from the Schedule to this Bill. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 144, deleted.

The deputy chairperson: Honourable members, can we participate in this process? I am assuming that we know what is going on. 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT:  Mr Chairman, we propose to insert Vote 145 immediately after that - we voted Shs 17 billion as Recurrent Expenditure for Uganda Prisons Service. However, all the money was captured as Development Expenditure - see page 18. 

Therefore, we have to take Shs 17 billion back to the Recurrent Expenditure. That is why we have to insert Vote 145 for Uganda Prisons an amount of Shs 17 billion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is correcting the record removing the amount that was appropriated by us but wrongly assigned under development expenditure when it should be under recurrent expenditure. The purpose for bringing this Vote 145 under this particular provision is to cure that anomaly. I will put the question to that amendment that this new Vote be part of this schedule.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, on page 7, we propose just after 155, to amend and include Vote 165- Gulu Region Referral Hospital, an amount of Shs 110,628,000 that was Voted for Nodding Disease interventions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you recall that we deleted the provisions under Vote-014, which was Ministry of Health and I think the understanding was that this money was sent to the Ministry of Health, which is not true, because it was actually sent directly to the districts because that was not properly captured here. Now, this first one is coming up for Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. I put the question to that amendment.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)


MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, we go to page Vote 301. We make a correction there. Where there is “Libya” it is “Lira University.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to delete the word “Libya” and in its place put the word “Lira” because that is what is referred to here. I put the question to that.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, we go to page 10. Immediately after page 504, we need to introduce Vote 508- Gulu District Local Government, an amount of Shs 78,470,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is the same with the Vote for Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, on page 11 of the Bill, Vote 527, the Bill has Shs 1,000,008,597. However, there were funds also allocated for nodding disease, which we have to bring in play- Shs 267,292,000. Therefore, we amend the figure to read Shs 1, 275,889,000 as the total figure for Vote 527 Kitgum District.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, that is clear. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, we also have Vote 531 still on page 11. There was supposed to be an additional of the nodding disease money of Shs 34,619,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What vote is that?

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Vote 531- Lira District.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: The correct amount now should be Shs 507,416,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the reasons are similar. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, on page 12, under Vote 547, we have an amendment of the figure because there was an additional Shs 324, 516, 000 for Pader District for Nodding Disease. Therefore, the total now comes to Shs 1,004,036,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the reason is clear. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: On page 13, Vote 570- Amuru District Local Government. There is an addition of Shs 78,300,000 to cater for the nodding disease syndrome thus bringing the right figure now to Shs 474,286,000. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: On page 14, Vote 585- Lamwo had Shs 376,260,000, there is an additional of Shs 175,151,000 bringing the total to Shs 551,411,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, I would like to take you to page 13 which I missed. Under Vote 571, we insert a line for Vote 572- Oyam District. It also received money for nodding disease. That is Shs 36,552,000.


THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to insert that new Vote 572 for Oyam District. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, we go to page 15 under Vote 615-Omoro District. They also received an addition of Shs 219,727,000. Therefore, bringing the total to Shs 1,909,178,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Page 18; Vote 145: Uganda Prisons Service

You will recall that we have transferred Shs. 17 billion to recurrent and so it leaves that with Shs 1.0 billion. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: That is the final amendment to the schedule. There was an amendment to the total. 
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 957,039,843,000 – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We do not have a total in the Bill. 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: They had a global total – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where?

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: At the end. They had 1,709 –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is not a global total. That is only for – 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: That was the whole total of both development and recurrent expenditure. That is what the Bill – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. What is the total? 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: The total should now be Shs 1,709,431,310,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that amendment now of grand total is the summation of both recurrent and development expenditure. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The schedule as amended

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the schedule as amended stands as the schedule to this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title to the Bill 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the figure on the long title of the Bill will be a consequential amendment that the drafting people will have to insert. I put the question that the Title to this Bill remains as, “Title to the Bill.” 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of supply do report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the committee of supply report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, as we move to commit this Bill for the third reading, I would like, with a lot of humility, to implore you to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to execute or to enforce the decision taken by Parliament the last time we took a decision on a similar matter. 

It was decided that the head of the technical team in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes and makes a public apology from the Bar because this problem seems to be continuing every year. 

Last time, you took a decision on this matter, Mr Speaker. You were very strong on the matter and you told the minister that this mistake should not be repeated again; he pledged not to repeat it again. 

However, the minister was able to share with the Budget Committee that he is normally failed by his technical team. I remember the last time you chaired a session, like this, Parliament actually took a decision that the head of the technical team, who is the Secretary to the Treasury, should come and make a public apology from the Bar. 

Therefore, while we are now going to complete this exercise – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is from the Bar of Parliament, for clarity. 

MS OGWAL: Yes, it is from the Bar of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, as we proceed to conclude this, we do not want to carry the baggage to the next year because it will be the same thing. The minister is always very humble. He comes and apologises and pledges not to do it again. Though again, the technical team have continued to defy the decision of Parliament. As such, this problem will continue. Therefore, can we put it to rest that the Secretary to the Treasury comes and makes a public apology? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Clerk, please extract the records as decided previously. Communicate to the affected officer and we pick it from there. Thank you. That decision was already made. 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of supply has considered the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2019” and passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of supply be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the committee of supply. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2019

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION ACT, 2019”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. Thank you very much, chairperson and members of the committee for a good job done. Both the chairperson and the honourable minister should be able to thank the members for –

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg for your kind indulgence. I raised a very urgent matter of national importance on this Floor of Parliament a month ago over bad roads in Agago District. 

This issue concerned the road from Corner Kilak via Adilang to Abim, which is in a very sorry state; it is impassable. There is also the road passing from Lukee Bridge to Bulugi in between there via Patongo and Kalongo and the road passing from Adilang to Namukora via Paimol, Lapono and Omiya Pachwa. 

Mr Speaker, you directed that the Minister of Works and Transport reports back in two days but it is now one month and I have not received any response yet, whether public or private transport has not been paralysed. People are not able to use the road, especially between Adilang and Patongo, Lukole and Kalongo, where the only hospital we have is located. 

Mr Speaker, I beg for your guidance on how we should proceed on matters of this kind.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, this matter came as an urgent matter that should have been dealt with promptly. It is now a month since it was raised and we have no reason for the delay. You want to say something about this?

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, first, we would like to apologise to the honourable member for the delay. However, I would like to promise that the Minister of Works and Transport will tomorrow attend to this issue, by not only coming to the House to update but something will be done about the situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we expect this response tomorrow in the afternoon at 2 O’clock. Please, be there. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of leaders from Agago District Local Government. They are represented in the House by hon. Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo, hon. Edward Otto and hon. Franca Akello. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming the leaders from Agago. (Applause)

Furthermore, in the public gallery this afternoon, we also have pupils and teachers of Kalongo Girls Primary School from Agago District. They are represented by hon. Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo and hon. Franca Akello. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. Thank you. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE LAW REVISION BILL, 2019
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion was moved for second reading, was moved and spoken to and question was proposed for debate. However, the debate could not kick off; we deferred the matter to allow the chair of the committee to report. 

2.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Law Revision Bill, 2019 is a Government Bill. I believe that the Government side is –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When the motion was read, the chair of the committee was not here. I guess the minister is just paying you in the same currency. (Laughter) Anyhow, proceed.

MR OBOTH: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. This Bill was first read on 23 May 2019. This House referred it to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny, pursuant to rule 128 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I would like to request you to permit me read the abridged version of the report. However, we have the minutes of the proceedings and the report itself, which I beg to lay though I request all you to refer to the abridged version.

The object of the Bill is to provide for the revision of laws by the Law Reform Commission. The Bill is further intended to empower the Attorney-General to cut off the dates for enactment to be contained in the law revision and to appoint the dates for the coming into force of the revised editions.

Law revision itself is the process of updating law without changing its substance. It is aimed at presenting the law in its correct form at any given time, thus facilitating the administration of justice, law enforcement, legal education, research, law reform, efficient use of the law and access to justice.

In Uganda, the body that is charged with law revision is the Uganda Law Reform Commission, as established under Article 248 of the Constitution and the Law Reform Commission Act, Cap 25.

The Law Reform Commission is directed, in Section 10 of the Law Revision Act, to among others, study and keep under constant review, the Acts and other laws comprising the laws of Uganda, with a view to making recommendations for their systematic improvement, development, modernisation and reform with particular emphasis on the elimination of anomalies in the law. 

They are also mandated to repeal obsolete and unnecessary laws and the simplification and translation of the law, the reflection in the laws of Uganda of the customs, values and norms of society as well as concepts consistent with the United Nations Charter for Human Rights and the African Charter of Human and Peoples’ Rights as well as the development of new areas in the law by making them responsive to the changing needs of the society in Uganda.

In securitising this Bill, the committee interacted with highly technical stakeholders such as the mover of the Bill, the Attorney-General, the Uganda Law Reform Commission and the Uganda Law Society, among others, given its technical nature. 

Mr Speaker, the committee, therefore, established that there is a definite need for the law revision in Uganda such as the need to keep the country’s legislation updated, modernised and essential.  The law book of a country is a living organ, which evolves over time through amendment or repeal. 

The constant legislative changes made in the law by repeals and amendments, necessitate the periodic revision of the law as a means of providing users and implementers of the law with an updated version that reflects the changes made, from time to time.

Further, some changes may happen as a result of decisions by court cases where the courts declare certain provisions of the law null and void. In other instances, regional and international obligations binding on the state necessitate certain changes in the law, to conform to the obligations contained in the conventions. 

Where court decisions have affected the law, unless Parliament amends that particular law to represent the position of the law as decided by court, the law, as contained on the law book will stand as it was enacted by Parliament without reflecting the changes made by court. These laws include the Succession Act cap. 162, the Witchcraft Act cap 124, the Penal Code Act cap.120 and many other laws.

This necessitates a revision of that law to reflect the change made to it. These are just a few reasons the committee established as the need for this Bill. 

I implore the House to refer to the comprehensive committee report, which is uploaded on the iPads. 

Allow me mention that whereas the Attorney-General is given powers to order the preparation of a revised edition, the Bill does not prescribe what happens when the Attorney-General does not exercise the power. 

The committee notes that there is need to have the law books of Uganda revised particularly in order for the law books to be updated. 

The committee notes that most jurisdictions within the Common Wealth carry out a law revision exercise in the specified period ranging from five to ten years. 

Of great concern to the committee was the establishment that whereas the Law Reform Commission is empowered to study and keep under constant review, the Acts and other laws comprising the laws of Uganda with the view to making recommendations for their systematic improvement, development, modernisation and reform, it has not produced a Revised Law Book of Uganda since 2000.

The exercise could not take place simply because the existing law had put in place a cut off of 31 December 1995, meaning that although the Law Reform Commission could carry out its law reform function, it could not produce a Revised Law Book since the cut-off point as prescribed in the laws (Revised Edition Act) had expired. It is the opinion of the committee that putting in place a revolving cut-off date would remedy the anomaly in the law.

These recommendations and many more are contained in the report, which is in the possession of Members. I implore us all to refer to it. 

We also have made a few proposed amendments that I will present at the appropriate time. I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. Honourable members, the question has been proposed. For purposes of reminding you, the motion that I now propose for your debate is that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision Bill, 2019”, be read for the second time. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am raising a procedural issue. In 2015, a Bill entitled “The Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters), Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015”, was before Parliament. 

This Bill was moved by the then woman member of Parliament for Serere District, hon. Alice Alaso. Now I am hearing the same Bill of 2019. The procedural issue I am raising is, what happened to the first one? How do we proceed, given the fact that we have one of 2019 and yet, the 2015 one was saved?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that one was passed. That was related to the revision of penalties in criminal matters. Hon. Sseggona presented it very well and this Parliament passed it about three weeks ago. 
This one is about law revision; revising the laws. It has nothing to do with the penalties that were contained in the previous Bill. This is a new one. We are proceeding very well.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I need your help. Isn’t this also law revision? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, law revision is a function by the Law Reform Commission. However, the law that is existent, which is the Laws Revised Edition Act, which is the authority under which they have been appointing commissioners to revise laws was last done in 2000. This volume was done in the year 2000. There has been no other revision since then. The committee has just reported that there is a gap in legislation because that previously provided a timeline which was in 1995. Therefore, they could not do anything. 

The purpose of this is to empower the Law Reform Commission and the Office of the Attorney-General to be able to commission the revision of laws; all our sets of laws, bind them in new volumes like these and call them Laws of Uganda, maybe, 2020 because this one is 2000. The functions are different. Is that clear now? 
If you recall, this particular volume – actually they had to appoint special commissioners because the law would not allow. They appointed Vastina Rukimirana, Ms Anne Bedson – some American lady. I worked with them. That time, I was working for the Law Reform Commission. They had to specifically appoint commissioners for law revision for them to carry out the function of revising laws. 

They are now saying that the function should be done by Law Reform Commission and the Office of the Attorney-General. That is what this one is about. Are we together?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you for that guidance. Given the fact that that is in that line, you can see the House was more or less in the same category with me. (Laughter) That is why when you called for debate, nobody came.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that you allow us to defer this to tomorrow so that we refocus and come when we are ready? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, on the contrary, the proper procedure we should adopt is to put the question so that we go and look at the provisions of the Bill. This is empowering the process of revising and prepublication of the laws. The principle is clear. This was last done in 2000 and because there is no enabling law for them to do it again, probably, if we do this, the next one will be 2020. There is no principle to debate. Can I put the question to this motion for second reading? 
We then deal with the amendments as proposed by the committee?

Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision Bill, 2019” be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LAW REVISION BILL, 2019

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 1 is interpretation. Could we stand over and come back to it later?

Clause 2

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, under clause 2(1), we propose to insert the words “on the consultation of the Commission” immediately after the word “shall”. Immediately after the sub clause (1), we propose to insert a new sub clause and renumber the sub clauses accordingly.

“Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Attorney-General shall ensure that a revised edition is prepared every 10 years from the date of the last revised edition.”

In sub clause (2), insert the following new paragraph immediately after paragraph (d): “(e) The Clerk to Parliament or his or her representative.”

The justification is as follows;

    1. To require the consultation of the Law Reform Commission before the Attorney-General orders the preparation of a revised edition in recognition of the functions and powers granted to it under sections 10 and 11 of the Law Reform Commission Act. The Law Reform Commission is obligated to keep the laws of Uganda under review at all times and the committee is aware that a revision of laws is preceded by a law review exercise.

    2. To include the Clerk to Parliament among the persons to assist the Commission in preparing the revised edition in recognition of the Clerk’s role as the custodian of Parliament’s information and documents and will be instrumental in explaining the rationale for various enactments that have been revised.


    3. To impose an obligation on the Attorney-General to prepare a revised edition periodically.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the amendments. I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR OBOTH: We propose that clause 3 be substituted by the following: 
“3. Attorney-General to approve printing and publication of the revised edition.
    (1) The Commission shall after a revised edition is prepared submit the revised edition to the Attorney-General for approval.
    (2) The Attorney-General may upon receipt of the revised edition in subsection (1) approve the revised edition or any volume of it and order, by a statutory instrument, the printing and publication of the revised edition.
    (3) An instrument made under subsection (1) shall be laid before Parliament for information.”

The justification is to;

    1. require the Attorney-General to approve the revised edition before the same is laid before Parliament in order to give them legal validity.

    2. require that the statutory instrument is laid in Parliament for information purposes. Since currently, Parliament does not have a mechanism for reviewing a statutory instrument; the proposal to lay the revised edition in Parliament for the nullification of Parliament will be redundant and impractical.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the committee chairperson is saying that the Attorney-General “may”. If they have revised the laws and they are in line, why should it “may”? It should be “shall” unless he has an issue with what the Commission has presented. “May” means he can refuse to do anything.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In the proposed new sub clause, “the Attorney-General may upon receipt of the revised edition in sub clause (1) approve the revised edition or any volume of it and order, by statutory instrument, the printing and publication of the revised edition.” The contention is on the word “may”.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, the use of the word “may” is justified for the reason that this provision gives options: he may approve the revised edition or any volume of it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the key word is in sub clause (1), where it says: “Submit the revised edition to the Attorney-General for approval.” It is only upon approval that the word “may” comes in. If he does not approve, then you cannot command him to do it.

MR RUKUTANA: Meaning this is after approval?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR RUKUTANA: I have no objection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are supposed to first approve under sub clause (1) and the word “may” now becomes operational because they have given you the latitude to approve or not to approve. Therefore, the word “may” is properly there. There is no controversy, honourable members. The proposal is to delete the existing clause 3 and in its place, put what the chairperson has proposed. I put a question to those amendments as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR OBOTH: Substitute for clause 4 the following: 
“4. Bringing a revised edition into force 
(1) The Attorney-General shall, by statutory instrument, appoint a date on which…” -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What are you proposing?

MR OBOTH: We are proposing that clause 4 be substituted as follows: 
“4. Bringing a revised edition into force 
(1) The Attorney-General shall, by statutory instrument, appoint a date on which the revised edition shall come into force. 

(2) An instrument made under subsection (1) shall be laid before Parliament for information.”
	
The justification is – 

    1. The proposal to have an annulment process in clause 4, in addition to the one prescribed in clause 3, is unnecessary since Parliament already had an opportunity to give views on the revised edition.

    2. This is a consequential amendment arising from the amendment of clause 3, which required the Attorney-General to approve the revised edition before the same are laid before Parliament in order to give them legal validity.

    3. To require that the statutory instrument is laid in Parliament for information purposes since currently, Parliament does not have a mechanism for reviewing statutory instruments; the proposal to lay the revised edition in Parliament for the nullification by Parliament will be redundant and impractical. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, we have had other provisions, which allow for parliamentary approval of instruments; we have done that – No, that is not the reason I am saying this. There are those instances where Parliament receives statutory instruments. In this case, they are being clear that it will only be for information because the substance is that we are now publishing this and the instrument publishing this set of laws is this and it is laid before Parliament for information.

However, that is not because there are no mechanisms for doing this; we have been passing the other ones which are subjected to parliamentary approval and sent to the committee that handled the Bill to process the instrument and come back. Probably, in the next revision of our rules, we might have to create a mechanism for dealing with statutory instruments of this nature - the annulment procedures and all those issues - so that we know that if an instrument must be approved by Parliament, who does it and what processes take place in doing that.

Honourable members, this is clear; can I put the question to the amendment? The proposal is to delete the existing clause 4 and in its place put what the chairperson has read. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 13 is talking about permanent secretaries. However, there are entities, which have secretaries or executive directors. I would like to move an amendment so that we do not just say, “permanent secretary/ accounting officer”. The justification is that there are some instances where instead of a permanent secretary we have a secretary or any other person. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Accounting officers play financial roles but this has to do with implementation of legislation.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, every Ministry, Department and Agency (MDA) belongs to a particular ministry and every ministry has a permanent secretary. So, it suffices to limit this activity to permanent secretaries.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Because he is the head of the administration of that sector.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the Education Service Commission, for the example, is headed by a secretary. The Health Service Commission is headed by a secretary.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: They are under the ministries.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No; those are self-accounting entities. We would say, “The permanent secretary or head of the institution.” It is justifiable because he knows what I am saying. Supposing it is the Health Service Commission, I will say since I am a secretary, I have nothing to do with this. We should take care of that area. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I get the concerns of the honourable Member from Budadiri. However, is he saying that the secretaries to the Health Service Commission, Judicial Service Commission, etcetera, are not permanent secretaries? They are permanent secretaries by all stretch of legal imagination, and these are constitutional matters that we cannot reduce to create another meaning here. The moment we have permanent secretary/secretary, it will be a different meaning. That is my limited knowledge of that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I now put the question to this? - The Clerk to Parliament is a permanent secretary; the Secretary to the Judiciary is a permanent secretary; and the Secretary to Defence is a permanent secretary.

MR OTHIENO: Mr Chairman, now we are getting two contradicting positions. The Attorney-General is telling us that all those secretaries fall under a permanent secretary, and he is the legal advisor to Government. However, we are now getting another position that even those are also permanent secretaries within their right. I am now getting confused. I need clarification from the legal advisor to Government to tell us the true position.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I clarified that every MDA is under a ministry and every ministry has a permanent secretary. Some departments or commissions have permanent secretaries, for example the Judiciary; the Judiciary has a Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Judiciary. The Education Service Commission also has a Permanent Secretary. 

Even if there is a secretary or not, that particular entity falls under a particular ministry. When there is a permanent secretary, he or she will report in accordance with these provisions. Where there is no permanent secretary and there is only a secretary or some other accounting officer, he or she will fall under the ministry.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to this now since it is clear? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 14 stands part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 1, agreed to.

The title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.24
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.25
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision Bill, 2019” and passed it with many amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.26
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING 

THE LAW REVISION BILL, 2019

3.26
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision Bill, 2019” be read for the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE LAW REVISION ACT, 2019” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, learned Attorney-General, for this. I also thank the chairperson of the committee. Give our thanks to your committee members for processing this Bill and enabling us to pass it. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL GRADUATE SCHEME BILL, 2018

3.27
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg that the Bill entitled, “The National Graduate Scheme, 2018” be read for the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by Members for Kilak, Kumi Municipality, Igara, Agago, Nakasongola, Busongora and even the chairperson of the committee. Honourable member, would you like to speak to your motion?

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Bill intends to establish the National Graduate Service Scheme with a secretariat which will do the operations, management and administration of the scheme. It intends to bridge the gap between school life and the working world. 

The Bill intends to provide employment training for the youth through work related learning. It further intends to enhance graduates’ employability and self-employment through career guidance, job placement, mentoring and connection to enterprise role models. 

The Bill also intends to enhance the technical capacity of graduates over and above their qualification achievements prior to their employment. The Bill further intends to provide mechanisms through which experience, practical skills, patriotism, volunteerism, discipline, hard work, professionalism, attitude and social responsibility can be imparted into the graduates prior to their employment.

Mr Speaker, the Bill still further intends to provide graduates with opportunities to have practical exposure and a wide network. It will enable youth to provide their technical and professional services to the communities that nurture them. 

The Bill will also close the gap of low absorption capacity due to low staffing levels. Mr Speaker, you might be aware that every year, on average, Shs 150 billion is returned to the Treasury because of the technical words, “low staffing levels”, which they use. There are no human resources to utilise those funds.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, the Bill intends to create an updated record of stocks of graduates for better planning of Uganda. Honourable members, nobody here in Government knows the number of graduates that come out every year, not even the Ministry of Education and Sports or Uganda Bureau of Statistics or National Council of Higher Education. Therefore, this Bill is going to enable the Government to have the statistics so that it can plan because there is no way you can plan for the unknown. 

In brief, the Bill intends to do all I have listed above. Honourable members, I beg that you support this Bill so that we enable our young women and men who are stranded or seated idle in the villages. 

Mr Speaker, it is saddening that a parent educates his or her young children and at the end of it all, they are seated with them at home. Remember that the parents sold land or cattle and both parent and child are frustrated. It is so common in the villages –(Interjection)- and even in towns; thank you, honourable minister, for that support. The youth walk on the streets for over three years and at the end of it, they are being asked for experience. We all know here that there is no school for experience. Therefore, this Bill intends to cure all this. 

The Government bench and honourable colleagues, I beg that we analyse and debate this Bill positively, objectively and we support it. The purpose is to empower Government to ensure that it deploys these young men and women to both Government and private institutions. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion I now propose for your debate is that the Bill entitled “The National Graduate Scheme Bill, 2018” be read for the second time. To kick off our debate, I will ask the chairperson to report.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, we have a minor technical problem and I would like to beg the House to bear with us. We completed consideration of this Bill. We consulted all relevant stakeholders. However, yesterday, I was informed by the technical people that they need three more days to complete and polish up the report. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I beg that you give us more time so that we present the report next week on Tuesday without further delays or procrastination. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the absence of the report of the committee, which has already done the work, we will not be able to proceed. However, the motion is moved for second reading and spoken to. When it comes back on Tuesday, the ministers responsible for the sector should be in the House to be able to deal with questions that may arise in the course of the debate, so that we do not again delay this matter any longer. This matter is deferred to Tuesday next week where it will be handled and completed. 

Thank you, hon. Waira for the initiative. Now that it is here, we will finish it. (Applause) 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO DEVISE LONG-TERM MEANS OF STOPPING THE RAMPANT MURDERS AND ROBBERIES SUFFERED BY BODA BODA RIDERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, you will recall that this matter was debated and several matters were raised. However, when it was due for conclusion, certain issues were raised that required the response from the security section of the Government. The Minister of Internal Affairs is here and he would like to respond to some issues before we take a decision on this matter.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, first all, I would like to state right from the beginning that we have no problem with the prayers of this motion urging Government to take steps to curb and stop the killings of the boda boda riders. We welcome the “urging” because the boda boda industry is now one of the biggest industries that earn income for our small scale earners and those who have funds to invest in the transport industry. It is an important industry, which is providing services, which others could not afford.

By the time this motion was moved, Government had already taken some of the steps, which we believe in the long run should be able to improve the security of the boda boda riders and those that they carry. You will recall that last year and this year, His Excellency the President concerned himself personally with the issue of security in this country. He addressed this Parliament and he enumerated a number of steps, which Government was to take in order to address the general security situation. I do not need to go through those details because even last week, my senior colleague presented them in this Parliament.

Concerning specifically the issue of boda boda riders, His Excellency the President directed the Prime Minister to form a Cabinet subcommittee to look into the issue of transport by boda boda generally and the security of the boda boda riders in particular. That committee is inter-ministerial because by nature, the boda boda industry touches a number of ministries. The Ministry of Works and Transport is involved because it is the one that licenses the various categories of motorcycles, including the tricycles that we call tuk tuk, which are slowly becoming part of our transport industry.

It also involves the security organs because of the very nature of what we are debating here. It involves the Ministry of Internal Affairs because of the traffic issues. It further involves Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) because of the concentration of many units of boda bodas in Kampala. 

Therefore, the Prime Minister’s Cabinet subcommittee was constituted of many of these people plus some technical staff and experts in the industry, both from the private and Government sectors. I am aware that the Prime Minister has had two meetings with that subcommittee and he is the chair. The discussions on that matter have not been concluded.

However, I am happy to note that many of the issues, which were raised here, are being raised in that committee and are being addressed; for example, the issue of grouping the boda bodas in various parts of the city and the areas where they operate. The other is giving them specific identities including reflective number plates and helmets so that they can be able to be identified wherever they are. We believe that that is a very significant step towards identifying who is using the boda bodas and where they are coming from, and therefore, ensuring that the security of each of them is guaranteed. 

The same committee is also addressing the issue of setting up colours and also companies that can manage the administration of these reflective number plates, so that they are not copied and are security tight. 

Since these consultations have not been completed, I am unable to specifically answer some of the questions and issues that were raised. However, I am sure that many of them will be addressed. Therefore, it is only prudent that once that committee has done its part and Government has come out with a position of addressing the issue of the boda boda industry, we will come back here and present a comprehensive list of steps, in addition to what has done, to address the boda boda industry generally and the security angle in particular.

In principle, we support that motion and ask the movers to work together with the Government committee. We shall definitely incorporate them so that we come out with a comprehensive position regarding the issue of the security of the boda boda riders and users and the industry in general. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker:  Honourable minister, thank you for the response. The minister agrees with the motion, that it should have been passed yesterday. Can we do that? 

3.45
Mr david abala (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his report, which is not typed. 

Last week, the honourable Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo, the Minister of Internal Affairs, made it clear that the line ministries would sit to discuss so that they come up with a joint statement. He told me it would be done in two weeks.

At this stage, I need to be helped on behalf of my people, the boda boda riders, and Ugandans; are we going to take this statement, which is not typed, as the statement from all the line ministries? We need to know so that we are aware as we take a decision. 

Secondly, we had some prayers but at the same time I need guidance from you, Mr Speaker. I remember the Speaker ruled sometime back that after the ministers have responded, we would add prayers. To that, I would like to appeal that we stay the motion until tomorrow when we bring other prayers. Otherwise, I am worried about this statement, which is not official. I need to be helped.  Thank you.
 
The Deputy Speaker: The minister’s statement is official because it is on the record of Parliament. Honourable members, this motion urges Government to take steps in dealing with issues of security of the boda boda riders – This one is specifically on the boda boda riders and users; let us not mix things.

The honourable minister says that there are already some steps that have been taken and so, Parliament urging them to do it will cause no conflict. Therefore, he agrees that the motion should be passed also to help facilitate what they are already doing to come out with this. Do we need to delay this motion again?

When they finish whatever they are doing on the security issues and what they have decided should be done to guarantee security of the boda boda riders and other users, they will come back to brief Parliament with that comprehensive decision. So, do we need to delay this motion? Can I now put the question to this motion?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, I now put the question that Parliament, by resolution, urges Government to devise long term means of stopping the rampant murders and robberies suffered by boda boda riders. I put the question that this motion be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, of course, they will extract a copy of this resolution and pass it on to you. It might facilitate what you are doing and help this process.  Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CONGRATULATE TEAM UGANDA AND MISSION UGANDA FOR THEIR OUTSTANDING PERFORMANCES DURING THE FEDERATION OF THE EAST AFRICA SECONDARY SCHOOLS SPORTS ASSOCIATIONS GAMES HELD IN ARUSHA-TANZANIA AND THE EAST AFRICA COMMUNITY MILITARY GAMES AND CULTURAL EVENTS HELD IN NAIROBI-KENYA RESPECTIVELY

The Deputy Speaker: I have just received notification from hon. Lydia Chekwel that they will be ready to proceed with this motion tomorrow. There being no other business to handle today, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 3.49 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12 September 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 


