PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - FIRST MEETINGTHURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA5631Thursday, 8 September 2022This afternoon, we had a meeting with a team from the Executive. Of course, the team and the meeting was not meant to persuade us to change our position. We are still holding our position as the Legislature. (Applause) Nevertheless, whatever is to be done is the role of the Executive. We have given our position as the Legislature, that we are not in for whatever is happening. So, it is left to the Executive to ensure that it does not - Honourable members, on 25 August 2022, the Chief Opposition Whip, Hon. Nambeshe, directed a question to the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, on budget allocation to the Contingency Fund pursuant to section 26(1) of the Public Finance Management Act. The Chairperson of the Committee on Budget is ready with his response and he will be presenting it. However, allow me to first amend the Order Paper that will have the Computer Misuse (Amendment) Bill, 2022 so that the Attorney-General will be able to contribute to it since he is going for another engagement. Remember, we have only one legal adviser in the country. So, we will look at that Computer Misuse (Amendment) Bill, 2022, and then continue with the rest of the business, as usual. Thank you for standing by your word. Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of Urban Council Speakers from Bugiri District. You are most welcome. (Applause) They are IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 28TH SITTING - FIRST MEETINGParliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. As we continue to receive news - yesterday, we got a statement about Kasese; we are receiving news about the disasters in the country. As legislators, I want us to have a day or two to show that we can improve the environment. Let us show the public that we need to conserve the environment. At an appropriate time, I am going to send you to your constituencies to plant trees -(Applause)- because the issues of climate change have become so terrible that day in, day out, we have people dying - we have floods and we have environmental degradation, which need to be handled. We have existing laws, but we need to act beyond the laws that are available and see what we can do as leaders of this country; how can we impact on whatever is happening? Yesterday, there was a statement from Hon. Lumumba on what is happening. Some of us are even ashamed of mentioning the names of what is happening outside there. (Laughter) 5632THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022 [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRrepresented by the Shadow Speaker, Hon. Basalirwa. You brought a very good person. They are also represented by Hon. Taaka, the Woman MP. Thank you very much.  (Mr Mbwatekamwa rose_)You cannot have a point of procedure on the communication of the Speaker.MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In yesterday’s session, you promised that some of us who had matters of urgent national importance would be given an opportunity first in this sitting.We appreciate the opportunity you give us to speak because that is what brought us. The matters are still burning and -THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are reacting before I go to matters of national importance; the next item is “Matters of National Importance”.MR MBWATEKAMWA: Most obliged.MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, according to your communication today concerning Nyege Nyege –(Interjections) - although my friends are saying, “Ah!” we must fight for the integrity of Parliament - to be independent - because it is an arm of Government. Honourable members, as Parliament, when we pronounce ourselves on a matter, the Executive we work together with, must listen to us because we are the choices of the people whom we represent here in this House. Therefore, it is not good if Parliament pronounces itself against such an event and Cabinet appears to be supporting it - because there is information in the media that the Executive has already endorsed it. Moreover, this event brings moral decay to our country. Madam Speaker, if the Executive sees that this is better, let the ministers first clear their children to go to Nyege Nyege before they send other people’s children. As Parliament, we should be strict on this matter and say, “No!” to Nyege Nyege  because it is a culture that is bringing moral decay to our country. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Government - 2.12THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am now speaking as the Minister in charge of National Guidance. This matter has been on this Floor for the third day - the other day, yesterday and today - and like we spoke yesterday, we believe in consultations and harmonising positions.Indeed, like the Rt Hon. Speaker said, we had a meeting today, under her chairpersonship, and I can say all of us were smiling in the meeting - and I think the major concern being raised by Parliament are issues to do with immorality. And, definitely, all of us agree that there is nobody that would want his or her child or any Ugandan to be engaged in immoral activities. We definitely agree. In any case, consider the fact that we are also Members of Parliament and we are part of this House.We agreed that there is need for strong regulation, regulation being a function of the Executive; and we continue to consult and have agreed that the Executive will handle this matter. So, we beg that you give us time because we are handling this as the Executive and - the point I am making is that the Executive arm of Government is handling it.THE SPEAKER: What is the motion about? Honourable minister, under what rule are you moving the motion?2.14MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Madam Speaker, under rule 59, I want to move a motion without notice because we are discussing this matter endlessly. If it is okay with you, I could move 5633THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022a motion right away. These are the old  rules; rule 59 - motion without notice. THE SPEAKER: What is the motion about?MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that we have discussed this issue of Nyege Nyege  all this time. You have given a position that this should not take place. However, Government is requesting for time to consult.Therefore, the motion that I would like to move is; “Aware that it is the Government’ s responsibility to promote our cultural values and morals. Also, recognising that Nyege Nyege Festival is now a controversial event and there were attempts previously by the Minister for Ethics and Integrity to stop it; Aware that after this festival took place in 2018, we all saw on social media what happened;Also, with the adverts going on, we cannot have people drinking the whole day and night in this country as if they have no work to do;Aware that -”  THE SPEAKER: You have already moved the motion. MS OPENDI: Okay, the motion is on Nyege Nyege .THE SPEAKER: Members, do you second this motion? And, this time I would like Members to second it by standing up. I am not going to allow the chorus. What do you want to achieve out of your motion?MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, what I would like to achieve - because  Government looks determined to have this Nyege Nyege  Festival. We cannot fight with the Executive. In the spirit of harmony, let us allow Government to do its part; for us, we have given our stand. Madam Speaker, the motion that I want to move is, moving forward - because the excuse being given is that it is just a week away. The other year, when Fr Lokodo fought it, it was a day away. So, can we ban Nyege Nyege from taking place in this country? That is the motion that I want to move. The country has other means of promoting tourism.  We have just had the Karamoja Cultural Festival and the Bugisu Cultural Festival, which did not have these controversies. The controversies come because of what has been taking place at this festival. So, this is the motion that I want to move; moving forward, let us ban this festival from taking place in this country. We can promote tourism and our cultures in other forms. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to first find out if it is within our mandate as the Legislature to ban it. Or can we legislate to put stringent measures that can make us better - not Nyege Nyege  this time? (Laughter) You have something better than Nyege Nyege .2.18MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): I want to thank you. The motion brought by the Hon. Sarah Opendi is brought in a very good spirit, and we are all concerned about the morals of the country. As the Chairman of the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus, as Muslims, our views on those issues are very clear - if we had our way. There are two things that the Executive should come out on very clearly as we address that issue. One, what is Government’s position on festivals of that nature? Can we know them? Tomorrow, if somebody wants to do that, how do they do it? I am aware, for example, Madam Speaker, that there are some musicians in this country who cannot hold shows. Each time they want to hold shows, the rules change; particularly, Bobi Wine, cannot hold a show in this country. So, what is Government’s position on festivals of that nature? 5634THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022 [Mr Basalirwa]And, if we agree on that Government position, what is the position of the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity on matters of that nature? Can they be tabled here so that we get to know them? Finally, our role -THE SPEAKER: I hope Government is hearing.MR BASALIRWA: Our role as Parliament; we can make a recommendation that it should actually be banned? Our position should be very clear on that. However, the responsibility of executing that recommendation becomes an executive function. That is why it is important for us to know their position as the Executive. Are they pro Nyege Nyege festivals of that nature or are they against them? We need to understand it and then, put it on the table. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I first hear from Government? That is a very important question.DR BARYOMUNSI:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The position of the NRM Government is that Ugandans should enjoy their country. (Interjections) Yes, provided they are not breaking the law and not in breach of our customs, our culture and expectations.THE SPEAKER: Are you saying the position of Government or of the NRM Party?DR BARYOMUNSI: I was clear that the NRM Government -(Interjections)-  yes, which is in charge of this country as of now. Our belief is that Ugandans should enjoy their rights and freedoms provided  -(Interjections)- I am answering a specific question raised by my honourable friend.THE SPEAKER: Let the minister finish. You do not determine it because you are not the Speaker. DR BARYOMUNSI: I was directly answering the question raised by Hon. Basalirwa regarding the position of the Government of Uganda on festivals. And, I am saying, the position of Government is that Ugandans should enjoy their country, but within the ambits of the law.Therefore, that is why you have seen assemblies, carnivals and Imbalu launches and all these functions where people gather; except when we had the lockdown during COVID-19. Generally, the position is that Ugandans should be able to freely enjoy their country within the law.But of course, Government has the cardinal function of regulating how Ugandans enjoy these rights and freedoms. And -(Interruption) THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am perturbed by the way this Parliament and the country are proceeding on this very sensitive matter, particularly where this Parliament has pronounced itself.  They are making it look like the Rt Hon. Anita Among has colluded with Government. I thought it was a mistake; it is the institution of Parliament.When the Speaker makes a pronouncement or a position, it is the position of this entire House called Parliament. (Applause) Therefore, the way you go about it is very dicey in this situation.Secondly, honourable ministers, Parliament cannot act in total exclusivity; this is Government. It is the Parliament, the Executive and the Judiciary that form the three arms of Government. Therefore, once Parliament has made the position, it is you, the Executive, to see how you put in place measures to put it into effect.However, when the outside world is seeing us as Parliament taking a position, but somehow, it is being debated; then you, the Executive, seem to be on your own or above the position of Parliament; that is very dangerous. You can do everything you can in your offices. Please, do not run down this institution called Parliament. (Applause) Even before coming back on the COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5635THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022Floor of the House, you are already publishing in the papers. You are in the media. You are holding Parliament in contempt and you are senior Members. Now, you try to come and say, “Yes, we are in charge of this country.” Yes, you are; but all of us are. Being the Executive does not mean you are in exclusivity of the entire country called Uganda. I thought the pronouncements of the Speaker were in good faith and well-founded. It only needed the three arms, to harmonise the position. However, by you going to the press or the public and taking a position contrary to that adopted by Parliament - the No.3 of this country is the Speaker of the Republic of Uganda.The Speaker has made a decision on the Floor of this House, but now, No.5, six or seven comes out to counter-command the same. What country are you making us live in? Therefore, Madam Speaker, yes, we could have differences here and there, but please, be careful. Do not belittle this House. This is our only shelter. It is the shelter for all Ugandans. You want to run it down - that the Speaker’s decisions and those of Parliament are ineffective? That cannot be allowed. Madam Speaker, as long as I am still a Member of this House, I will fight to the last end to protect the sanctity of this House. The Executive must listen to this. Some of you are elected Members of the House. Tomorrow, you will not be on that frontbench. You will be on the backbench. Do not believe that once you are there, you are above everybody; above the law or institutions of this country. Can you please work within? Harmonise your positions with that of this House. This is our own House. Therefore, is the honourable minister procedurally right to try to go against the position of this House - and he is doing it while standing and holding the Floor and proceeds as if no position has been taken by this Government? THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I gave a disclaimer before - we do not have the time - one thing I want to remind this House about is that nobody will overrun this House as long as I am the Speaker. If you think you are going to overrun this Parliament of Uganda, you will not do it. I was elected by 415 Members of Parliament . (Applause)Secondly, the decision of this Parliament on Nyege Nyege  still stands. Thirdly, the Executive should do its part. Let them do whatever they want to do; we made a pronouncement. Can we go to the next item?BILLSSECOND READINGTHE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mbwatekamwa, the Bill is only two clauses. After it, we will not have anything to do. I have 11 of you. All of you are going to speak. Today, you have me here. (Applause)Honourable members, the Computer Misuse (Amendment) Bill, 2022 is a Private Member’s Bill introduced by Hon. Nsereko, the MP for Kampala Central and now, delegated to Hon. Kimosho, the MP for Kazo. It was read for the first time on Tuesday, 19 July 2022 and referred to the Committee on ICT and National Guidance, pursuant to Rule 129(1) of the Rules of Procedure.The committee is now ready with its report. The minister is here, the Attorney-General is here and Hon. Kimosho is ready to move the motion on the Bill. However, I have come to learn that there is a minority report by Hon. Gorreth Namugga. We will allow all of them just to give a brief of what is there.2.29MR DAN KIMOSHO  (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Computer Misuse (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read for the second time.5636THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Anifa, Hon. Rusoke, Hon. Kateshumbwa, Hon. Mpindi, Hon. Kabanda, Hon. Omara, Hon. Nathan Itungo and group; Hon. Aber – by the whole House.Honourable members, when you do not support the Computer Misuse Bill, yet, you are the same people who will be running here and there saying “They’re abusing me” - Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are welcome. Can you speak a bit to your motion?MR KIMOSHO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The object of this Bill is to amend the Computer Misuse Act, 2011 to:1. Enhance the provisions on unauthorised access to information or data;2. Prohibit the sharing of any information relating to a child without authorisation from a parent or guardian;3. Prohibit the sending or sharing of information that promotes hate-speech;4. Provide for the prohibition of sending or sharing false, malicious and unsolicited information; and5. Restrict persons convicted of any offence under the Computer Misuse Act, 2011 from holding public office for a period of 10 years; and for related matters.I beg to move. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Kimosho. Can we have the chairperson of the Committee on ICT and National Guidance make a presentation? Honourable members, in the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have the Archbishop of Gulu Diocese, His Grace, John Baptist Odama. (Applause) You are most welcome. It has been put here, specifically, that he had come to listen to the proceedings on Nyege Nyege.  (Laughter) Unfortunately, we have finished. You are welcome, Archbishop. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is also here to welcome you. (Laughter) Yes, chairperson -2.33THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUID-ANCE (Mr Moses Magogo): Madam Speak-er, I am here to present the report of the sectoral Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okot Ogong, is that what they do in PAP? (Laughter)MR MAGOGO:  Madam Speaker, I am here to present the report of the sectoral Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance on the Computer Misuse (Amendment) Bill, 2022. As already mentioned by the mover of the Bill, it was first read on 19 July and sent to our committee. This report has been uploaded and I am sure, honourable members have had access and read it. Therefore, I will not go through it verbatim.The committee held eight meetings. If allowed, I would like to submit the minutes of the committee meetings.We also received written submissions and engaged 27 stakeholders. I beg to submit this as part of the report.Madam Speaker, this Bill is made up of seven clauses – and, as I said, I am not going to go through the report verbatim.Out of the seven clauses, according to the observations and recommendations of the committee, two were recommended for deletion, four were recommended for adoption with amendments and one was recommended to be adopted as is.5637THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022Dear colleagues, computers are very good devices for business, education, entertainment – everything – but if not properly used, they can be a challenge and that is what the Bill wants to address. While considering the Bill, we found out that there was an insertion about social media to be added.The committee observed that the information technology evolution has created a new medium of communication called social media, which is not fully regulated in the existing laws.The committee further observed that social media is the commonest platform for computer misuse and noted the need to regulate it. The recommendation by the committee is that provisions be included in the Bill to regulate social media and, clearly define what social media is.In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee has examined the Computer Misuse (Amendment) Bill, 2022 and recommends that it be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to report.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. In the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have students from Rajamangala University of Technology in Thailand. They are here for a working visit to undertake capacity building and innovative skill transfers for women in Sheema Municipality. They have been brought by Hon. Kateshumbwa. You are most welcome. Please, stand and wave. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause)Honourable members, we also have students and teachers of Arrochar Primary School from Apac Municipality. They are represented by Hon. Betty Engola and Hon. Patrick Ocan. Students, please, stand up. You are welcome. Thank you for coming. (Applause) You are very smart and thank you for giving us Ocan.Honourable members, you have heard the report on ICT. Any minority report?2.38MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleagues on the ICT committee for the submission of the majority report. I equally thank all the stakeholders that we interacted with during the course of processing this Bill, inclusive of the Attorney-General, who, 100 per cent, advised that there was a lot of duplication. I am here to present a minority report on the Computer Misuse (Amendment) Bill, 2022 and this is moved under Rule 205 of the Rules of Procedure. Areas of dissent We fundamentally differed from the position of the majority report on the following grounds: 1. Unauthorised access; 2. Unauthorised sharing of information about children; 3. Hate speech;4. Unsolicited information; 5. Misleading or malicious information; and6. Social media. Madam Speaker, we believe – as was advised by the partners and other stakeholders we interacted with – that there was a lot of duplication, and it was very unreasonable to insert these new clauses. Although the mover of the major report has not gone into details, I would like to highlight a few of these areas. Clause 2 of the Bill intends to amend section 12 of the principal Act by criminalising the sharing of information about or relating to any person without prior authorisation from such a person. 5638THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022 [Ms Namugga]Section 12 intends to prohibit unauthorised access and interception of any programme or any person’s data. It also intends to increase the fines for the offence of unauthorised access, under section 12 of the principal Act, from two hundred and forty currency points to seven hundred and fifty currency points. This looks to be excessive. In that regard, we recommend that unauthorised access and interception – that is, clause 2 of the Bill – should be deleted since it is a duplication of the existing laws and unjustifiably delimits the freedoms of Ugandans. Madam Speaker, the second one is unauthorised sharing of information about children. This is also a duplication because clause 3 of the Bill seeks to protect children from being exposed digitally without the consent of their parents or guardians. We note that children are already protected under section 8 of the Data Protection and Privacy Act, 2019, which provides as follows:“8. Personal data relating to children.A person shall not collect or process personal data relating to a child unless the collection or processing thereof is;a. carried out with the prior consent of the parent or guardian or any other person having authority to make decisions on behalf of the child;b. necessary to comply with the law; orc. for research or statistical purposes.” Madam Speaker, reading section 8 of the Data Protection and Privacy Act, clause 3 of the Bill leaves no conclusion, but it is the same as that in the principal Act. Madam Speaker, furthermore, section 4 of the Children’s Act protects the privacy of children by stating that, “Every child shall have a right to safety, privacy, information and access to basic social services.”  Madam Speaker, we believe that this is also a duplication of the existing law, and clause 3 of the Bill should be deleted since it is a duplication of the existing laws.Madam Speaker - THE SPEAKER: There is a point of clarification. (Interjection)  He needs to understand something; maybe he has not understood. MR BUMALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sit on the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance with my sister, Hon. Namugga, but I am failing to understand when she says, “We recommend.” Maybe she could tell us who else - THE SPEAKER: Maybe we need to find out how many members signed. Hon. Gorreth, how many members signed?MS NAMUGGA: Madam Speaker, I should inform the House that I signed the report alone. THE SPEAKER: So, what happens? In English –(Interjection) - listen to me. Sit down. In English, when I am alone I say, “I” and when we are two I say, “We”. So, you say, “I recommend”, not “We recommend.” Do not misguide the House. MS NAMUGGA: Madam Speaker, I am not misguiding -THE SPEAKER: I am the Speaker; I have made a ruling. Can you continue?MS NAMUGGA: Madam Speaker, I am presenting on behalf of the Opposition – the minority.  THE SPEAKER: No. You are presenting on behalf of Hon. Namugga, who is a member of the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance. MS NAMUGGA: Madam Speaker, as a member of the Committee on Information, 5639THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022Communication Technology and National Guidance, I have a minority report that I am presenting now, and I beg to continue. Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER: Have you corrected that you are presenting as Hon. Namugga, a member of the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance? MS NAMUGGA: Madam Speaker, I am presenting as Namugga Gorreth, the Member of Parliament for Mawogola County South, and member of the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance.  Madam Speaker, the other part is on hate speech –(Interjections) – Madam Speaker, I beg to be protected. THE SPEAKER: Are those issues that you are raising part of the clauses?MS NAMUGGA: Yes. THE SPEAKER: Now, if they are part of the clauses, then we should look at them clause by clause. MS NAMUGGA: Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER: I am saying, go and look at them clause by clause. If you are talking about hate speech, look at the clause on hate speech. Attorney-General?2.45THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We did appear before the committee and participated in this process. There should be a distinction between duplication and clarification. What we see in this Bill is more of clarification on what was in the Bill - making it clearer. So, it is not duplication per se. Madam Speaker, as we go clause by clause, we will be able to explain each clause to show what the changes are and show that they are not a new clause, but a clarification of what was in the Act already. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Shadow Attorney-General, are we moving clause by clause?MR NIWAGABA: I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker, to allow our Shadow Minister to complete her report, then we go clause by clause. THE SPEAKER: You see, one thing that we have agreed upon is, there must be decorum in this House. If you cannot respect a Presiding Officer, nobody will respect you. Never! (Applause) MS NAMUGGA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. MS RUSOKE: My colleague, you should respect the Speaker and when the Speaker is speaking, you are supposed to politely resume your seat. So, is it in order for you to create your own rules in this House? THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, we are going to go to Committee Stage. MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, I am just respectfully imploring you that you pardon the Member, where she has gone astray. And, I pray that you allow her just a little bit of time to conclude the minority report. (Applause) THE SPEAKER: I have given her permission. MS NAMUGGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to submit on the report. However, I wish to also say that, if there is any way that I tend not to be polite, I really beg that you forgive me. Thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: So, have you finished the report? MS NAMUGGA: Madam Speaker – 5640THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, let us listen to the conclusion of the report. MS NAMUGGA: Madam Speaker, presenting a minority report is not one of the easiest jobs, but allow me conclude. I conclude by saying that the entire Bill should not be left to stand as part of our laws, as the clauses are already catered for in the existing legislation; and in some, offends the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The fundamental rights to access of information electronically, and to express oneself over computer networks, are utterly risked by this Bill. If passed into law, it will stifle the acquisition of information. The penalties provided in the Bill are overly harsh and disproportionate, when compared to similar offences in other legislations. If the Bill is passed, it will be a bad law and liable to constitutional petitions upon assent. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you for the minority report. Honourable members –(Interjection) – Yes, procedure? This is a very small Bill; we should not spend a lot of time on it.MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you. We have listened to the majority report, and we have also listened to the able submission from the minority report. These are not very voluminous reports and since they have been with us, I beg to move that we straightway go to Committee Stage and consider clause by clause and allow a debate to happen at that stage. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is that seconded? MS NALUYIMA: Madam Speaker, I wish to second the pre-current speaker over this matter that we move to Committee Stage. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now put the question that, “The Computer Misuse (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read the second time. (Question put and agreed to.)BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGETHE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022Clause 1THE CHAIRPERSON:  Clause 1, chairperson. A deletion?  MR MAGOGO:  As already mentioned, there were two clauses proposed for deletion. Clause 1 was proposed for deletion because it was part of clause 7, and until we discuss clause 7, is when the justification for clause 1 can be made.MR ATWIJUKIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, I concede. DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, we concur with the chairperson and also tell Parliament that the ministry supports this Bill.THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 1 be deleted as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 1, deleted.Clause 2MR MAGOGO:  The recommendation and proposal from the committee is that clause 2 be amended –a) in the proposed subsection (1), by inserting the words “intentionally” and “immediately” after the word “who”, and b) by inserting immediately after the proposed subsection (1), the following - “(1a) A person shall be deemed to have obtained authorisation under subsection (1) where the person –(a) obtains consent from the person to whom the information is about or relates, or 5641THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022(b) is authorised by law.”Justification1. The element of “intent” is an essential element in the commission of a criminal act. In common law, a mental element of a person’s intention to commit a crime is paramount to securing a conviction.2. To achieve clarity by specifying the circumstances under which a person would be deemed to have been authorised under the proposed subsection (1).MR ATWIJUKIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with this proposal.MS NAMUGGA: Madam Chairperson, the clause should be deleted because it is duplicated. THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, we are on clause 2.MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, we do not support the proposal made by the committee. This is already in the Act. The purpose of this removal of “intentionally” is to tell the public and whoever cares to listen, that if you are not sure about the information you are sending, do not send it. So, the issue of whether it was intentional or not should not arise; we propose that the Bill be kept as it was proposed.THE CHAIRPERSON: So, do you agree with the committee’s position?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: The committee wants to insert the word “intentionally.” We are proposing that the proposal of the committee to insert the word “intentionally” be rejected and the Bill remains as it originally was.THE CHAIRPERSON: So, can you reframe how it is supposed to be?MR KIRYOWA: We propose that it reads as follows: “a. A person who, without authorisation, accesses or intercepts any programme or another person’s data or information;b.  V oice or video recording of another person; or c.  Shares any information about or that relates to that other person, commits an offence.” I beg to submit.MS AISHA KABANDA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I just seek to understand the interception of a programme; for example, now we are being broadcast even on YouTube as well as on several channels. If somebody records me speaking now, without my permission, and shares that video, does this seek to make this a crime? I just want to understand.THE CHAIRPERSON:  That is about unauthorised access, which is a clause on its own.MS AISHA KABANDA:  That is the one we are working on.MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  We are being transmitted live, which is authorised. So, whatever is there is authorised to be published. However, what we are talking about is if, for example, I was having a private communication with you and a third party intercepts that information and then sends it out. That is unauthorised.MS AISHA KABANDA:  With your permission, Chairperson, recently, we received information that helped us a great deal. For example, when a child was being beaten badly by a mother. Someone recorded it privately and shared it, and the police acted on it. How do we protect such people who have very good intentions in this law?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  Clause 3, which we are going to discuss, has provided for that; where it is in the public interest, where it is for the protection of a minor, it is an exception provided for in the next clause.5642THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Aisha, what the learned Attorney-General is saying is that we maintain the Bill as it was. He does not want any change and the committee was trying to make the changes.MR NIWAGABA: The position of the committee seems to reinstate the earlier position in the Act by bringing in the question of intention. So, why don’t we go with the proposal of the committee that brings in that question of intention?THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we first hear from the Attorney-General?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, there are two kinds of criminal offences. Both of them have what we call ill intention; the mens rea, for each of the criminal offences. However, there are offences, which are called strict liability offences, where the strict liability offence gets you, and then you must explain away. So, the proposal in the Bill is to make it a strict liability, meaning that when you receive information about someone and you send it out, you are presumed to have committed an offence, but the mens rea, - the criminal intention - will have to be dealt with in the hearing. The argument that I did not intend to send it - I sent it by mistake - cannot arise; the fact is that you sent it and the moment you sent it, then you went into a criminal liability.MR NIWAGABA: My junior - but now at your age, you become a senior. The proposal on the Bill still refers to “without authorisation”. So, it cannot be a strict liability because I would have a defence that I was authorised. My role, as the accused, would only be to explain who authorised me; the authority could be by law, for example, the Access to Information Act or some other mode of authorisation. So, if you relate your argument to what is provided in the Bill and the principal Act, vis-a-vis what the committee is suggesting, which do you think would be the better version?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: The proposal in the amendment Bill is the better proposal to answer it directly.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Members, you mean you do not have the old Bill? I can hear people asking which is - when you are coming to look at the Bill, you should have the old one and the new one, so that you can compare them. MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Attorney-General and Chairperson, thank you very much for your well-thought submissions. For evil to thrive, you need one ingredient: Good men and good women like you, Madam Chairperson -THE CHAIRPERSON: What amendment are you making? Please, if you get up, make amendments and we move on. MR KATUSABE: I am making an amendment, Madam Chairperson. THE CHAIRPERSON: No. I don’t want a preamble. Let us go to the amendment. MR KATUSABE: The amendment - Madam Chairperson, before I even dive into that - is that this is a very bad law if -(Interjection)-  please give me attention and get my point. Attorney-General, in legislation, especially Bill processing, three fundamental parameters must be factored in: 1. Content specification; 2. Boundary demarcation; and 3. Pseudo scenarios.For any Bill, you must be ready to see the ground and on three grounds:1. What the trade-offs in a Bill are;2. Concessions in that Bill; and3. Possible conflicts.Who, in the judiciary system -THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, can you conclude? We have many clauses.5643THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022MR KATUSABE: My conclusion is on the burden of determination. The Attorney-General - and I hope we will come here to really answer this – the burden of determination.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 stands part of the Bill?(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 2, agreed to.Clause 3MR MAGOGO:  In clause 3, the proposal is -THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t it part of clause 2, Attorney-General? It is part of clause 2. It has remained as it is in the Act. It has remained as it was; it is unchanged.MR MAGOGO:  The proposal of the committee is that clause 3 is amended by substituting the proposed subsection (1) with the following –“(1) A person shall not send, share or transmit any information about or that relates to a child through a computer unless –i) the person obtains consent of the child’s parent, guardian, or any other person having authority to make decisions on behalf of the child; ii) the person is authorised by law; oriii) the sending, sharing or transmitting of the information is in the best interest of the child.” The justification is to enhance the protection of children by providing for additional circumstances under which information about or that relates to the children, may be shared.MR KIMOSHO:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson and Members. The amendment is in the interest of enhancing the Bill and I concede to it because it enriches the Bill. MS NAMUGGA: Madam Chairperson, clause 3 of the Bill should be deleted since it is a duplication of the existing laws.THE CHAIRPERSON: Quote for me the law, which has been duplicated.MS NAMUGGA: Madam Chairperson, clause 3 of the Bill seeks to protect children from being exposed. This is a duplication of the Data Protection and Privacy Act. Two, it also duplicates the - let me get back, Madam Chairperson. This duplicates section 8 of the Children’s Act, and the Data Protection Act. Madam Chairperson, it reads:“1.  A person shall not collect or process personal data relating to a child unless the collection of all processing thereof is carried out with prior consent of the parent or guardian or any other person having authority to make a decision on behalf of the child; 2.  necessary to comply with the law; and3.  for research or statistical purposes.” And further when it comes to section 4(1) of the Childrens Act, it also protects the privacy of children and it states: 1. “Every child shall have the right to safety, privacy of information access to best social services; and 2. A person who contravenes the provision of subsection one commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 120 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years.” So, Madam Speaker, I submit that this should be deleted, since it is a duplication of the existing laws.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable Attorney-General.5644THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I have had the opportunity of reading the minority report and I think we are mixing up two things. Data protection is about, for example, if you get the child’s name, age and place of birth; that is protected under that section that you propose under section 8 of the Data Protection Act. You cannot process that data without their permission. It does not deal with, for example, if you take a picture of a child and send it out without their permission. The Children’s Act provides that every child shall have the right to safety - yes, and privacy. But this section is saying that you should you transmit it - this one is a section that gives a right, but this one is the one that creates the offence for you to transmit. They are not contradictory. In fact, if anything, we should be saying this one clarifies the rights and the protections that are given to a child.THE CHAIRPERSON:  They are actually complementary to each other.MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: They are complementary. I propose that we take the committee position.THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed by the committee? (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.Clause 4, agreed to.Clause 5MR MAGOGO: The committee proposes an amendment that clause 5 is amended in the proposed section 24A as follows:(a)  In the proposed subsection (1), by inserting, immediately after the word “computer” the words  “unless the sending or sharing of the unauthorised information is in public interest”.(b)  Insert, immediately after the proposed subsection (2), the following: “For the purposes of this section, “unsolicited information” means information transmitted to a person using the internet without the person’s consent, but does not include unsolicited commercial communication.” Justification1. To allow the sharing of legitimate unsolicited information in public interest;2. The insertion of the definition of the phrase “unsolicited information” is to achieve clarity; and 3. The exclusion of unsolicited commercial communication in the definition of “unsolicited information” is to ensure consistency, since unsolicited commercial communication is already regulated under section 26 of the Electronic Transactions Act, 2011. MR KIMOSHO:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson and members. I agree with this proposal.MS NAMUGGA: Madam Chairperson, clause 5 is a duplication and we recommend that it should be deleted. Section 26(1) of the Electronic Transactions Act regulates unsolicited commercial information to consumers and ICT services and products. The intended amendment is couched as criminalising unsolicited information, which lacks a definition of what exactly amounts to and constitutes unsolicited information. Therefore, the absence of clear parameters of what constitutes unsolicited information renders clause 5 ambiguous and in conflict with the right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed by Article 29; and the right of access to information and a limitation on the enjoyment of the stated rights and freedom, 5645THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022contrary to Article 43 and Article 2 of the Constitution of Republic of Uganda.Madam Chairperson, sharing information that is already in the public domain is an offence, according to this clause. This violates Article 43(1) of the Constitution. It also cuts off investigative and citizen journalism, among others. All information coming into possession of an individual or an entity could potentially be categorised as unsolicited information. Clause 5 could be misused or abused by Government and its agencies to curtail the sharing and dissemination of information, which would limit freedom of expression and access to information. This clause will be subject to other constitutional petitions, similar to section 5 of the principal Act. We recommend that clause (5) be deleted.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe just for clarity, “unsolicited information” has been defined. “Unsolicited information” means information transmitted to a person using the Internet without the person’s consent, but does not include the unsolicited commercial communication.Yes, Minister?DR BARYOMUNSI:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We appeared before the committee, as the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance. Some of the laws being quoted by my sister actually fall under our sector. We do not feel that the proposals offend other provisions. What she is calling “duplication” is basically re-enforcing other existing provisions. Probably, what we could do is cross-referencing this law with other laws. However, as long as the provisions do not offend the other provisions, which is our view, there is no problem. Therefore, we have no problem with the proposals being given.MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: I think the honourable minister has stated it well. I do not see any contradiction. Madam Chairperson, you have guided that “unsolicited information” has been defined. That was our issue with the Bill. We are okay with the provision.THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.)Clause 6MR MAGOGO:  The proposal of the committee is that clause 6 be amended in the proposed section 26A(1) by deleting the words, “any misleading or”.JustificationTo avoid contradiction with the Supreme Court decision in Charles Onyango Obbo and Another v. Attorney-General, CA No.2 of 2002, which declared section 50 of the Penal Code Act that provided for criminalisation of publication of false news, as unconstitutional. MR KIMOSHO:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the justification for the amendment is clear and I take it in good faith.MS NAMUGGA: Madam Chairperson, I also recommend that clause 6 be deleted because in the case of Charles Onyango Obbo, as stated by the majority report, it is our considered position that clause 6 contravenes Article 92 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda that is restrictive of retrospective legislation. The said provision restricts Parliament from passing any law that alters the decision or judgment of any court as between the parties to the decision or judgment.The Bill seeks to reintroduce the same offence. This is tantamount to overturning a court judgment by legislation. This is unconstitutional. We cannot continue to legislate in abuse of the Constitution of the 5646THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022Republic of Uganda. There is no need to add this clause, which is unconstitutional. Under the law of torts, a person who publishes false information against another can be sued for defamation. Cyber harassment is prohibited under section 24 of the principal Act. Therefore, we recommend that this be deleted.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Maybe for clarity, again, we are not offending Article 92. We are only trying to avoid a contradiction.MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with the committee and the minority report that to add “any misleading information” would, indeed, offend the decision of Onyango Obbo. As such, we accept. We also propose that in the heading, where we had “misleading or malicious information”, “misleading or” should be removed. It is not to say that we agree that people should be at liberty to send false information about other people, but that is what the Supreme Court has said. We shall go back to the Supreme Court, eventually, at some point to clarify that. We agree with the position of the committee.THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.)Clause 7MR MAGOGO: It is the proposal of the committee that clause 7 be deleted. The justification is that the additional penalty instituted on leaders and public officers, on top of the criminal sanctions created under the Computer Misuse Act, is excessive and discriminatory. The existing laws provide for sufficient grounds under which a leader ceases to hold office or may be disqualified from holding office.MR KIMOSHO:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have reconciled our position and it is already taken care of. So, there is no problem in deleting it.MS NAMUGGA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 7, we agreed with the committee that this is already catered for.THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 7 be deleted as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 7, deleted.New clauseMR MAGOGO:  It is also the proposal of the committee that we insert a new clause immediately after clause 6 as follows:“Misuse of social media (1) A person who uses social media to publish, distribute or share information prohibited under the laws of Uganda or using disguised or false identity commits an offence.(2) Where the information under subsection (1) is published, shared or distributed on a social media account of an organisation, the person who manages the social media account of the organisation shall be held personally liable for the commission of the offence.(3) For the purposes of this section, “social media” means a set of technologies, sites and practices, which are used to share opinions, experiences and perspectives, and include You Tube, WhatsApp, Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, WeChat, Tik Tok, Sina Weibo, QQ, Telegram, Snapchat, Kuaishou, Qzone, Reddit, Quora, Skype, Microsoft Teams and LinkedIn. (4) A person who contravenes subsection (1) is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding five hundred currency points or [Ms Namugga]5647THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022imprisonment not exceeding five years or both.(5) For the purposes of prosecution under this section, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the information published, distributed or shared on a social media account –(a) which is verified by a social media operator, has been published by a legal or natural person;(b) is published, distributed or shared by the person or organisation in whose name the telephone contact is registered; or(c) which is registered using an email address, which has been used or submitted as data by any data collecting entity, is published by the person or organisation in whose name the email address is registered.”Justification To provide for regulation of social media -(Interruption)THE CHAIRPERSON: Let them first agree then you get clarification.MR KIMOSHO:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson and members. I think in the spirit of enhancing the Bill, we accommodate the proposed new clause.THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. MS NAMUGGA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the insertion.THE CHAIRPERSON: You agree with the insertion -MS NAMUGGA: Apart from the penalty. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Suggest a penalty. MS NAMUGGA: Madam Chairperson, it seeks to increase fines from two hundred and forty currency points to seven hundred and fifty currency points; to us, this is excessive. We recommend that this remains two hundred and forty currency points instead of seven hundred and fifty currency points as a penalty.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Attorney-General. Let us first handle the issue of penalty.MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, the decision of the penalty really is for the Legislature to determine what they believe is the correct penalty for any offence that has been committed. The committee talks about “seven hundred and fifty” currency points, and the Member talks about “two hundred and forty” currency points; we can meet halfway. The penalty for these offences, honourable members, should actually be deterrent. It should stop you; and they are not corrective. Therefore, when you are looking for a deterrent penalty, you are looking for something that stops you from doing something and not just a corrective one. I would really propose that the five hundred proposed in the Bill is not excessive, in my view.MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I want to agree with the Attorney-General -(Interjection)  You know, once somebody shares a bad thing about you, you get to know that indeed, we have to penalise people as a deterrent measure; even that five hundred is small. (Applause) I want to propose that we lift that figure to “eight hundred” currency points because we are deterring people -THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, when you start talking like that, it is as if nobody has ever shared information about you. Let it be shared one time; that is when you will know that it is very bad. Even what the committee is proposing is very small; if I were the one to propose- I put the question that the new clause be inserted as proposed.5648THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022(Question put and agreed to.)New clause, inserted.New clauseTHE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I hear you saying that you are going to court. If you want to go to court, please do; let us create work for the court. Let us not leave everything to remain here. They even write about the judges; so, they will judge.MR MAGOGO:  It is also the proposal of the committee that we insert a new clause immediately after clause 7 as follows:THE CHAIRPERSON:  Members, can we maintain some silence? There is a point of order from -MS AMERO: Madam Chairperson, it is the norm of this House to refer to the Speaker as “Madam Speaker” or “Madam Chairperson”. I have listened to my colleague, from the time he started presenting, he just stands up and says, “It is also”- who is the colleague addressing if he cannot address the chairperson of this House. (Laughter) Is he in order not to address the chairperson of this House?THE CHAIRPERSON: Of course, he is not in order. (Laughter) Honourable member, can you address the Chairperson? And, address the Chairperson, not the House.  (Laughter)MR MAGOGO:  Madam Chairperson -(Laughter) Madam Chairperson, it is the proposal of the committee that we insert a new clause immediately after clause 7 as follows:Amendment of section 30 of the principal Act The principal Act is amended in section 30 by repealing subsection (3).Justification Subsection (3) of section 30 contradicts subsection (2) of the same provision, which allows for the prosecution of a person who commits an offence under this Act outside the territorial jurisdiction of Uganda.THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Dan?MR KIMOSHO:  I concede, Madam Chairperson.THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Namugga?MS NAMUGGA: Madam Chairperson, as we previously stated, we had recommended that this section 30 be deleted because it was already catered for in the principal Act.THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, you see, the principal Act was limiting the territorial jurisdiction to Uganda. By deleting this subclause, it means we should even go for those who misuse computers when outside the country. We have the means and technology to get to them. So, we agree with the committee on the deletion. THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: The proposed amendment does not offend any of our laws; I have no objection to it.THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the proposed new clause be inserted as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)New clause, inserted.The title, agreed to.5649THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME3.31MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. (Question put and agreed to.)(House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE3.31MR DAN KOMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Computer Misuse (Amendment) Bill, 2022” and passed it with amendments. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE3.32MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the whole House. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the whole House. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.BILLSTHIRD READINGTHE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20223.32MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Computer Misuse (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read the third time and do pass into law. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Computer Misuse (Amendment) Bill, 2022 be read the third time and do pass. (Question put and agreed to.)A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2022”.THE SPEAKER: The title settles and Bill passes. (Applause)I want to thank the House, the Attorney-General, Hon. Kimosho and the Minister for Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance. I also want to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance plus its members; the Shadow Minister for Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance; and my very good brother, the Leader of the Opposition.  Honourable members, I want to thank all of you for passing this Bill, and we wait for assent from the President. Those people who think they should play around with people’s names must answer for it. (Applause) We are here to legislate; we make the laws. For them, they are there to write; we shall legislate and the laws will catch them. Honourable minister?  5650THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20223.35THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also add my voice to thank the House for passing the law, and particularly, thank Hon. Muhammed Nsereko, represented by Hon. Dan Kimosho, and members of the committee for processing the Bill.  Indeed, I want to agree with you that there is an increasing tendency for people to abuse communication, especially in light of technology and, therefore, we want to thank the mover and author of the Bill.  But also, to alert the House that we are actually reviewing all the laws related to communication, and we shall soon come to the House to amend most of the existing laws so that we can protect ourselves. This will guarantee freedom of expression, but ensure that people communicate responsibly and not misuse communication platforms.  So, I want to thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and the members. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, next item. Chairperson, do you want to say anything? 3.36THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUID-ANCE (Mr Moses Magogo): Madam Speak-er, on behalf of the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, I take the opportunity to thank all members of the committee, all the stakehold -ers that we engaged, and also to commend the mover of this Private Member’s Bill.  The support we got from the Attorney-General and the minister in charge, and the entire House - that eventually, our proposals have been debated and accepted. Thank you so much.  THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Attorney-General, you are going to implement.  3.37THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Once the law is put in place, as the Executive, we will be very happy to implement it in all fairness so that everyone enjoys their country, as they wish. Thank you.    THE SPEAKER: Honourable members –  MR KIMOSHO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of my colleague, Hon. Nsereko, I want to thank you for the support and cooperation that you rendered to this Bill.  I want to emphasise that the gesture of this Bill is to allow Ugandans to enjoy their freedoms and rights without trampling on the freedoms and rights of others. I thank you, and may God bless you. Amen.  THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Mbwatekamwa; matters of national importance.  3.38MR MBWATEKAMWA GAFFA (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The burning matter that I am bringing is that in the last financial year, during discussion of the budget for this financial year, the Committee on Education and Sports, in their report, had included some of our village schools that were supposed to get Government funding.  Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that they withdrew schools from that list and inserted their own schools – both the Committee on Education and Sports and the Committee on Budget – and what is so hurting is that the so-called Government schools, the good ones like Buddo and Ntare, are the ones going to benefit from the new budget.  Madam Speaker, we have schools like Kakanju in my constituency that had never even benefited from anything; not even a penny from Government, and it has been a government-aided school for the last 30 years.  MATTERS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE5651THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022Madam Speaker, we have schools in Bukedea that were left out.  (Laughter) It is a shame that Government can facilitate schools like Ntare and Buddo – the schools that have rich parents, who can pay the bills - and ignore schools of peasants who could benefit from -  THE SPEAKER: The ones in Bukedea. MR MBWATEKAMWA: Even the ones in Bukedea, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I do not know if it is the intention of Government to make sure that they keep on supporting the rich and leave out the poor.  THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  MR MBWATEKAMWA: My prayer, Madam Speaker, is: When are  we likely to get equity from Government? Can the Prime Minister come up with a list of schools that are supposed to benefit this year? Madam Speaker, allow me to table a list, which contains the well-to-do schools - Buddo, Ntare etc. - that are going to benefit this financial year, leaving out our schools like Bukedea Secondary, Kakanju Secondary and Kyamunga Secondary schools, among others. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, thank you so much. You are very lucky to have brought all your issues when the Prime Minister is present.3.42THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I request the Member to give me a copy of the paper. I will instruct the Ministry of Education and Sports to come here and give us an update of what happened.THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is giving us one week to bring a list of all the schools that ought to benefit, but are not benefiting, so that we can compare with what you have. 3.43MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): On the week we are giving the Prime Minister, I do not know whether it will be enough for her; because she is very busy with Nyege Nyege. (Laughter) Unless she says she is getting out of Nyege Nyege in order to have time to respond.My concern is that the Prime Minister may ask for a week, get involved in Nyege Nyege dancing and does not come back here in time. That is my concern. MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister has a team of Cabinet ministers in the Ministry of Education and Sports, and the technical people. As she engages in Nyege Nyege, the technical people will be doing -(Laughter)3.44MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, some of us watched a video clip of someone called Yiga, who stripped and showed his bums on camera, to insult almost everybody in the public. There is a law on public nuisance; Yiga has not been held over breaching that law. We have not heard the minister for ethics say something, which depicts very negatively on the Government and Uganda, as a society. My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that we hear from the Minister for Ethics and Integrity whether they have sanctioned such behaviour or whether it is part of the happiness of all Ugandans; and to hear from him why they cannot hold such a person against the law on public nuisance.THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as you respond to that, the assignment on the schools must be - there is an issue of coding and support to both primary and secondary schools.5652THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20223.46THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Much obliged,  Madam Speaker. My sister, Hon. Kabanda, the issue you are talking about is being investigated - THE SPEAKER: Of public nuisance, it is unacceptable, and that is why we are passing these laws, that you people were refusing. These laws are coming to help us in such situations. So, honourable minister for ICT, follow up on this because that was really terrible. Please follow up and let us know what could have happened. And, as the Prime Minister said, it is being investigated? Let us get information about it and I will communicate, on Tuesday, how far it will have gone.MS KABANDA:  Much obliged, Madam Speaker.3.47MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I have an urgent matter in my constituency. A section of the staff working with the Kumi District Local Government has not gotten salary for September, and I would love to get an explanation from Government about this. To set an example, those under the health department have not been paid. So, we would love to get a position from Government because the district is reporting a shortfall. How can a shortfall occur on salaries?THE SPEAKER: Non-payment of salaries to local government staff?MR AOGON: Yes, non-payment of salaries.3.47THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Rusoke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, I was in Masindi. The money was remitted a long time ago, but the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) had not paid. I left an instruction that she pays by Friday. I have received a whistleblower from Kikuube for the first time. I have as well instructed the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) and the Chief Finance Officer (CFO) to report to our ministry on Friday at 11.00 a.m. I have even alerted the Inspectorate of Government (IGG), the Anti-Corruption Unit and the CID as they come - if they have not paid, they will just be carried to the police and prosecuted, as we engage and pay our people. Otherwise, the money was released.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is there a way we can get information if the local governments have been paid other than waiting for whistleblowers?MS RUSOKE: Madam Speaker, whenever the finance ministry pays, they furnish members of Parliament with information; unless they have not given for this month’s salary, but for other releases, we have been getting them. For example, I got mine.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, maybe you need to interest yourself in this and ensure that all the salaries have been paid; and if it does not hurt anybody, you can give us copies. We are representatives of those people and tomorrow, they will ask us how much their district got, yet we do not know. Just like the Road Fund, we need to get information on how much goes to our districts. So, follow up and get a schedule for all the districts, indicating how much has been disbursed, which districts have paid and which ones have not paid.MS RUKOSE: Madam Speaker, I promise to give you that information latest Tuesday next week. It will be on all the districts that have been paid, and those that have not been paid; and the reasons must be there from the finance ministry. I oblige that I will give you that information. THE SPEAKER: Okay, we will be glad to get it.MATTERS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE5653THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 20223.50MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to give information to the honourable minister that the issue that we are talking about is not just about releases; it is about wage shortfalls. They relate to a situation where funds were released, but they were not sufficient to pay the salaries. This is a letter from the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) for Kole District, indicating that they only have funds to pay for July and August. That means in September, most of the civil servants do not have money. They are not going to receive their salaries and they have actually been notified. So, it is an issue of wage shortfalls. What we need to know is whether there is going to be additional releases or they are going to go without salaries?MS RUSOKE: Madam Speaker, matters to do with wage shortfalls is in the docket of the finance ministry, but what other districts have been doing - I will give an example of Ntoroko District; their wage Bill was very low, they came to us, we advised them to write to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and their wage bill was raised to Shs1.4 billion to cater for everybody. So, please, write to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to address that.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are in a better position to communicate to finance because these people are under you.MS RUSOKE: Madam Speaker, this is what I am going to do immediately I leave here – to check with all my 135 districts, the 10 cities and the municipalities, and find out those weaknesses. I promise that it will be my ministry to write to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to plead and direct them to give us money.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. (A Member rose_) First, allow the Prime Minister.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, salaries attract the first call in this country. Therefore, everybody will be paid their money. I am directing the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development to do the needful.THE SPEAKER: Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you have been directed. (Applause) We want our money. Hon. Mbwatekamwa, can you give - why do you want to Nyege Nyege  the Prime Minister? (Laughter) 3.53MR HASSAN KIRUMIRA (NUP, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the 5th of September, armed men in civilian clothes attacked and abducted a one Jakana Nadduli, the son of a former minister, and he was whisked away to an unknown place. Mr Jakana Nadduli had unfortunately had an accident in March, and his intestines were cut and re-joined.The information we are getting is that he was kicked in the stomach. The parent, Al Hajj Nadduli, does not know where the son is. He was coming from hospital. My prayers, Madam Speaker, are that:1. The security minister should ensure that this son of a former minister accesses the doctors and gets medical attention. 2. The security minister should ensure that Al Hajji Nadduli, a former minister, has access to his child. 3. If he committed an offence, let him be produced in court because it is past the 48 hours stipulated in the law.Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Prime Minister, this is the son of one of the historicals of this country.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker and colleagues, I am hearing this for the first time. 5654THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022The matter will be investigated and a report brought to this House.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members –(Mr Niwagaba rose_)- Yes?3.55MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): These matters of abduction really hurt us, as citizens of this country. The press reports are now averse with so many abductions. The infamous drones are back. People are being abducted and their places of detention are not known. Sincerely speaking, what does the NRM Government want with the citizens of Uganda?THE SPEAKER: Hon. Shadow Attorney-General, one thing we need to know is, who is abducting? In the investigation, we need to understand who is doing the abduction. This is because you may be blaming the other party when you are the one doing it. So, we need to, first, appreciate and understand who, and after we have known, then, these people should be brought to book.THE SPEAKER: This is a very serious matter. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need to come out clean and expose the people who are abducting people. Really, if people are going to be abducted, left, right and centre, then what happens? Will you even walk from here up to the gate? We really need to understand who is doing this. Maybe somebody is covering his face and claiming to be from Government, when he is not.3.56THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with you that it is highly probable that some other jackals could hide where the Government is absent. When Government proves that it is absent, other people fill the vacuum.Secondly, where people are observing that Government is also involved in abducting and they cannot account, you can’t ask the citizens to account. Yesterday, my office received complaints from a family in Nansana over their daughter, a one Teddy Nalubwama, who was abducted five days ago. To date, she is a no-show and Government cannot explain. She was abducted by people in uniform.So, the Nyege Nyege Prime Minister said that they will investigate –(Interjection)-  So, we -THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I know you as a very respectful person - MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I actually brought that in jest. I know the Prime Minister understands my frustration. It is not to insult her and I would like her to take it as that.THE SPEAKER: Of course, I know you would not want to insult a woman.MR MPUUGA: Certainly – THE SPEAKER: Especially, a lady. MR MPUUGA: I would earnestly withdraw it, if she is offended. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. MR MPUUGA: After withdrawing that statement, Madam Speaker, I would like her to declare here that they are in charge. Remember, we were in your Office with the security and internal affairs ministers. They promised to come and account for 15 citizens that had disappeared. So, will they account for these ones? They have never come back to you. They have never reported to me and the Prime Minister is proud to be in charge. Would you, please, tell this Parliament that you are in charge or you actually know where these citizens are, and you are holding on to them as ransom? Are you in charge?THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, as far as I know and see, the Prime Minister is in charge. (Applause) However, we all need to invest in investigating what is [Ms Nabbanja] MATTERS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE5655THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022happening on security issues. It is terrible. Let us investigate what is happening on security. That is why the Prime Minister said, “We are going to investigate”. Prime Minister, do us a favour. Today, they will assassinate one person; and tomorrow, you will hear that they have assassinated me. I want to tell you, honourable members, that I have got a report – I had only shared this with the Leader of the Opposition. Now, I can officially tell you that I have got a report on plans to assassinate me. Yes! MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, we cancel that demon. (Applause)  Madam Speaker, this Government respects the rule of law. We are always praised for the security of this country. Anybody who tampers with the security of this country will be dealt with. Therefore, I want to inform this House that the NRM Government is present, not absent. We are in charge. These small punctuated areas will be addressed. And, we are investigating the matter, Madam Speaker. (Members rose_)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we have said, the investigations must take place. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, investigate what is happening. Start with mine because it is not hearsay. Follow it up with the Minister for Internal Affairs. It is a reality - Yes, up to now, my car is being trailed. Honourable members, we need a report on those arrests and the assassinations. We seriously need a report in two weeks’ time. Whoever thinks he is going to assassinate Anita - I was put in this Chair by God. If anybody wants it, I have my village to go to. However, since it is God who put me here, I will serve until I get tired -(Laughter) It is Prime Minister’s Time. We shall continue after she has finished. STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK, 13-15 SEPTEMBER 20224.03THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS  (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, I move under rule 28 of our Rules of Procedure that requires me, as the Leader of Government Business, to make a statement in the House regarding the business of the succeeding week. I am, therefore, submitting the following business for the succeeding week - that is, 13-15 September 2022. The Competition Bill.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister. That now takes me to – Hon. Obua, you are the Government Chief Whip. Do not be taken by the Bettys of this world talking –(Laughter)- Give us your report on the outstanding Bills.4.04THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP  (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, during the 24th Sitting of the First Meeting of the Second Session of the 11th Parliament of Uganda held on Tuesday, 30 August 2022, you directed my office to provide an update on the status of Bills in reference to the Government Legislative Agenda presented by His Excellency the President at the State-of-the-Nation Address held on 7 June 2022.Sixty-two Bills were presented for consideration in the Financial Year 2022/2023. Three Bills have been passed and one is ready for the Second Reading. Nineteen Bills are budget-related legislations, with key timelines as per the Public Finance Management Act. The status of the remaining 39 Bills is contained in this document. Madam Speaker, I would like to beg for your indulgence: Should I go through them or should I lay them on the Table for the record of Parliament?5656THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022THE SPEAKER: You can lay them on the Table.MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table two documents; one is a document dated 7 September 2022, addressed to the Speaker and signed by the Government Chief Whip, forwarding the status of the Bills. The second one is a comprehensive document highlighting the status of the 62 Bills in total, that were presented as the Legislative Agenda of Government. I beg to lay. Thank you.4.07THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP  (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, while the Prime Minister, under rule 28, has the mandate to submit the Government Business of the succeeding week, every other last sitting of the week, after keenly observing, you will realise that most of the business has not been reflected on the Order Paper of the subsequent weeks. This is a concern, and that is why I am wondering whether we should proceed thus.THE SPEAKER: As the person responsible for making the Order Paper, we include in it what has been provided. If it has been given as what is to come in the proceeding week, it will come. I am waiting for them to come. Of course, it is in our interest that we really handle them. That is why we wanted an update from the Government Chief Whip on what has been presented and what is left. What the Prime Minister is bringing will be brought on the Order Paper. I can assure you, we shall finish the Bills.MS NALUYIMA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the Prime Minister or the Executive gives us the update on the status of the Markets Bill? Local Governments, up to date, strive very much, whereas we took a lot of time to pass the Markets Bill. I beg to submit.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, like I told you last week - I think the Member was not here - that I have no powers. That Bill is before the President; let us wait. The President will definitely write to you because it was passed here.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know where your dissatisfaction is coming from. I equally feel it. We passed the Bill here. It has not been returned unsigned or signed. When it was raised here, we wrote to the PPS. We found out that the Bill - in between here and Entebbe, I do not know what could have happened. It must have gone to Najjanankumbi. We were asked to send another copy, which we have sent, and it will come. It will be handled.PRIME MINISTER’S TIME4.10THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS  (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I got a question from Hon. Ssasaga –(Hon. Basalirwa rose_)THE SPEAKER: Do you want to smuggle something into the Prime Minister’s Time?MR BASALIRWA: It is not to smuggle. The issue raised will help you, Jajja . (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: You are even persuading Jajja . MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Speaker, yes, -(Interjection)-  I am a muzzukulu of the Prime Minister; so, she will not be offended. The Basoga are descendants of - it is in that context; many people did not know it. So, Jajja , the information I want to give over the issue of Bills - and I have seen it several times here. One time, we are going to have a problem; somebody is going to challenge the legality of our Bills because of delays by the President to assent to them; because the Constitution gives timelines. We have addressed it as the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, and I have been seeing it here. PRIME MINISTER’S TIME5657THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as you engage with my colleague, the President -(Laughter)- draw his attention to the fact that the Constitution gives timelines. Madam Speaker, if we do not respect those timelines, our Bills will be challenged. So, as the Bills go, sometimes the President returns them here beyond the time required by the Constitution, and sometimes we are in a dilemma on how to deal with them. Ideally, if the President does not assent to the Bill within the time prescribed by the Constitution, then we cannot deal with them. So, please remind him that he has constitutional timelines to respect for purposes of us not overthrowing the Constitution. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what your muzzukulu and colleague of the President is saying -(Laughter)- is correct. For instance, the Fisheries Bill was returned; but the President had signed it on the 8th of August. We only received it yesterday, ,yet you know we have a constitutional deadline that you must return the Bill after it has been sent back within 14 days.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker and colleagues, I commit to remind the Head of State, but I want you to also note that he is an experienced President, and he has been doing this work for quite a long time. I believe he knows what he is doing.Madam Speaker and colleagues, the President can never sleep on the job; you know he is an able President. That is why he has been given the mandate year-in-year-out by Ugandans. Question 1Question one came from Hon. Ssasaga John, Member of Parliament Budadiri East, that Busoga University was closed on 1 December 2021 by the Minister for Education and Sports, citing reasons like failure to comply with set minimum standards of the National Council for Higher Education. However, the circular dated 1 December 2017, clearly stated that the closure of the university was not going to affect students who had completed their courses by that date. Unfortunately, an update on the graduation ceremony has never been organised for the affected students, who completed, and they cannot get their certificates to enable them register with the relevant ministries to get formal employment. His prayers: 1. When will the graduation ceremony be organised for the affected students?2. When will the affected students get their transcripts and certificates? Madam Speaker and colleagues, currently, there is no legal entity known as Busoga University. And, as such, no university organs are in place to process transcripts, issue certificates and organise graduation ceremonies. A letter from the permanent secretary will be provided later. Madam Speaker, there is a management taskforce in place as of now, to manage the establishment of the public university. As soon as the process is completed and the relevant university organs are established, then the graduation ceremony will be held and all relevant documents will be issued. Question 2Hon. Stephen Kisa, Member of Parliament, Luuka District said that he is a regular user of the Jinja-Kampala Highway and it has been about four years since Government compensated people, and a contractor was obtained to construct the Jinja-Kampala Express Highway. His prayer is: Can Government give a progressive status on the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway? 5658THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022Madam Speaker, the Kampala-Jinja Mainline and the Kampala-Southern Bypass, collectively form the Kampala-Jinja Expressway Public Private Partnership Project. The proposed project comprises 77 kilometres of the Kampala-Jinja Mainline Expressway, and 18 kilometres of the Kampala Southern Bypass; Urban Expressway to be constructed as follows:i) The first 3 kilometers will be four lanes on each side; ii) The next 17 kilometers will be three lanes on each side; iii) The remaining 57 kilometers will be two lanes on each side; and iv) The 18 kilometers of the Kampala Southern Bypass will be two lanes on each side. The project links to Kampala Flyover Project along Jinja Road, Kampala Northern Bypass at Namboole and Kampala-Entebbe Expressway at Munyoyo. Madam Speaker, the procurement process for the project is ongoing, and the bidders are expected to return their technical and financial bids in January 2023. At the moment, Government is continuing with the land acquisition process, and 44 kilometres have been acquired to date. The target dates for the acquisition of the right of way are:i)  December 2023 for Kampala-Namagunga and Kampala Southern Bypass; andii)  In June 2024, for Namagunga-Jinja. Madam Speaker, the construction of the Kampala-Jinja Expressway is a five-year project scheduled to commence once these processes are completed. Question threeQuestion number three came from Dr Bayigga Lulume, the Member of Parliament, Buikwe District. The Rural Electrification Agency had its activities halted and taken to a vote where we thought that improvements were going to be effected. According to Hon. Lulume, they have not seen any improvement at all and that our people would like to have power lines extended to their villages. His prayer is:Can the Prime Minister inform this august House when the activities of extension of power lines in Buikwe District will resume? My response is that the Minister for Energy and Mineral Development is implementing two energy schemes that include the Government of Uganda Lot 8 Project; and the grid intensification under Energy for Rural Transformation (ERT) in Buikwe District. Madam Speaker, under the Government of Uganda Lot 8 Project, the following works have been done: i) The installation of nine transformers in the areas of Ssugu, Kirangira, Mutwe, Nakatyaba, Bukasa and Mutale areas. These works commenced and were handed over to Umeme on 3 August 2022; ii) The installation of five transformers in areas of Yalelo Fish Farm, Butembo Town Council, Buwagajo Town Council and Nawa Town Council. The commissioning and handover was done on 21 July 2022; and iii) Pole erection has been completed in the areas of Kanyenye. The installation of the transformer is scheduled to be done this month. [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME5659THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022Madam Speaker, Government, through the grid intensification under the Energy for Rural Transformation Lot 3, has installed and will continue to install more transformers in areas of Gimbo, Kokola, Tega, Monde, Kabanaga, Nakawungu, Natwala, Buzama, Kikooli, Makonge, Kyambogo, Bulyantete, Katungulu and Nsakya. These works are also scheduled to be commissioned in September and October 2022. Madam Speaker, the works in Buikwe District have progressed considerably well and are nearing completion in various schemes earmarked to be commissioned by the end of 2022.Question 4Madam Speaker, Question 4 came from Hon. Atima Jackson Lee Butu, the Member of Parliament, Arua Central Division, Arua City. According to Makerere University School of Public Health, teenage pregnancy cases rose by 25 per cent, and as a country, we have fallen short of our pledge made at the East, Central and Southern African Community Health Conference held in Lusaka, February 2020, to reduce it to 13 per cent. In his constituency, Arua Central Division, there are many teenage mothers who seek help to continue with education to fulfill their dreams. His question is: What is Government’s plan to address the high number of teenage child-mothers who got pregnant during the COVID-19 lockdown and have been abandoned by their families?My response, Madam Speaker is as follows: According to the Ministry of Education and Sports Report, 2020, between 15 to 20 per cent of school dropouts are triggered by child marriage and teenage pregnancies. Madam Speaker, Government is taking appropriate measures to address this challenge. Measures taken so far include the following: 1. The Vice President’s Office, the Office of the Prime Minister in collaboration with the Ministry of Education and Sports, together with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, have developed the National Guidelines to Return Child Mothers to School, and this is in black and white. Countrywide roll-out of these guidelines is underway. Honourable colleagues, I request you to take part in this strategy through the continuous sensitisation and mobilisation of our country.2. Two, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has developed the second National Strategy to End Child Marriage and Teenage Pregnancy. This strategy was officially launched on the Day of the African Child, 16 June 2022. The key areas of focus of this strategy are:i) Strengthening family and community capacity to support children to end child marriage;ii) Changing the negative and harmful social, religious and cultural norms and practices that drive child marriage; iii) Strengthening birth registration and certification; and iv) Economically empowering families through the existing Government livelihood programmes, including the Parish Development Model, the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme, the Youth Livelihood Programme, Emyooga and Operation Wealth Creation. v) Creating awareness to increase uptake of sexual and reproductive health services and information.Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports, under the able leadership of Mama Janet, the First Lady, launched a national multi-media campaign to end child marriage, teenage pregnancy, defilement and promote positive parenting. 5660THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022Madam Speaker, the campaign is currently running on various media houses at national and sub-national levels. In line with the above, Government is undertaking the following interventions, specifically in Arua District and Arua City:1. Sensitising school management to accept child mothers back into school settings, to enable them pursue their education dreams; 2. Implement a nutrition programme under the Child Sensitive Social Protection, targeting lactating and pregnant child mothers. This is intended to enable them give birth to healthy babies whom they can leave under the care of their parents and grandparents while they return to school; 3. Sensitising and encouraging households, especially grandparents and caregivers, to accept and take care of the babies of the teenage mothers to enable them return to school; 4. Strengthening the referral pathway so that child mothers are able to access education, healthcare and protection services; 5. Providing sexual and reproductive health services to child mothers, including HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted infections screening. 6. Promoting positive parenting among parents and caregivers, among others; and sensitising children to refrain from sexual activities at their tender age. Question 5Madam Speaker, Question five was presented by Hon. Tumwine Anne Mary, Ntoroko District Woman Representative. She said that there is a growing concern in the Uganda Police Force recruitment and deployment in the country, which has resulted in many of them committing suicide and others becoming deserters, which puts the country at the risk of increased thuggery and killing of innocent Ugandans. The Special Police Constables (SPCs) are disgruntled over the inhumane nature in which they are being treated; denying them fundamental opportunities in the course of their duty; and warnings of being dismissed from work for speaking up on issues affecting them at work.They are denied the chance to enjoy equal privileges with their counterparts at the workplace, which include:1. Lack of access to loans from commercial institutions for their personal development and to educate their children;2. They are denied promotions or consideration to join other departments, yet they have trained and have the required qualifications to join the regular police force. Instead the police recruit new individuals from outside the Force:3. They are not entitled to belong to any pension scheme, hence, have no retirement plan, yet they are always deployed within the stations and are loyal to the service in the Uganda Police Force;4. They have no opportunities for further training to gain more skills that are required in improving services in the Uganda Police Force;5. Whenever they open up, seeking their issues to be addressed, they are threatened with sacking and non-renewal of appointment, thus, getting frustrated; and6. They have written to high offices in the police, but have not seen things change or improve. Madam Speaker, his prayers are: 1. What plans does Government have to ensure that this human resource in the Uganda Police Force is not wasted and their welfare is improved? [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME5661THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 20222. What strategies have been put in place to ensure that the regular Uganda Police Force, where majority have worked for decades, has a retirement plan?Madam Speaker, my response to this is that Special Police Constables (SPCs) are appointed under section 66 of the Police Act whenever there is need for their services. They are usually identified by the officers in charge at the area police, through LC 1 chairpersons, to beef up security in that area. Honourable colleagues, after identification, the SPCs are trained for about three months or even less and then deployed after signing a renewable contract of one year. This contract is renewed on satisfactory performance, and as long as the need for their service still exists. The renewal is premised on the recommendation by the respective commanders, and they can also be relieved of their duties through a formal process.Madam Speaker, SPCs are, therefore, not employed on permanent and pensionable terms like the regular police officers, and are, thus, not entitled to gratuity and pension. Given this status, they are not liable for promotion and deployment in various departments. Honourable colleagues, the access to loans by SPCs is a private arrangement. However, the Uganda Police Force always recommends them to their respective financial institutions and, sometimes, they are served.Madam Speaker, as a strategy, the SPCs, who qualify for recruitment as regular police, are always recruited from within, and are given priority before the police go out to get more recruits, in addition to the on-job training in various areas to enhance their skills. Madam Speaker, those were the questions. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister. The questions have been responded to. Is there any supplementary question?4.35MR WAKAYIMA MUSOKE (NUP, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a question to the Prime Minister. The question emanates from the circular that was given to schools by the Uganda National Examinations Board, stating that all schools should pick up stationery from the headquarters of the Uganda National Examinations Board. The unfortunate bit is that they told all the schools to pay subscription fees for Uganda National Student Association (UNSA) and SESMAT – that is a group for science students. My concern is that some schools have paid the examinations fees, , are unable to pay subscription fees. What should those schools do? Is paying subscription fees a pre-requisite for getting stationery from the Uganda National Examinations Board? When did the Uganda National Examinations Board turn into a debt collector for private groups such as SESMAT and UNSA? Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I request that you give me time to investigate this, get more details from the colleague, and then come back here and report.THE SPEAKER: Please, give more information to the Prime Minister.4.37MR ELISA RUTAHIGWA (NRM, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This afternoon, I received a message from a resident of Rukungiri Municipality, who has a sister currently in Saudi Arabia. She went to Saudi Arabia in January, but faced very hard conditions at her place of work, but managed to leave that place. Currently, she is in Saudi Arabia at the home of the company that recruited and took her there. The company is called Six Stars International. The family is worried that she is going to fall victim of organ trafficking. I request 5662THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022Government that we work together and help this family to assist this girl come back. She is called Beatrice Kanyesigye. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, there are a number of our children who found themselves in that situation and we have helped them. So, I request for details so that we can team up with the ministries of Gender, Labour and Social Development and that of Foreign Affairs to have our daughter back.MS ABER: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Prime Minister. We have seen these cases, time and again, on social media, and they keep coming up. Wouldn’t it be proper that we got a status report and the list of those who have gone out of the country through the different companies that exist, so that we first ascertain if those people are safe? Secondly, can we get a report from the embassies where these people go to work? Let them give us reports of how many cases have been reported. There are cases of our people who have gone to seek for greener pastures, who are never even reported. Those that are reported - we can bring it on the Floor of Parliament - but those who actually go through this torture and even die; we fail to trust them. So, we would really love to have a status report in the House.  I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is also a report from Hon. Nkunyingi Muwada on - he actually wanted to raise it today. So, what we can do is to also get a report from him, put it together and see the impact. (A Member rose_) First get information from the Prime Minister.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, you have put it rightly and I thank you. On the issue of people going to work in those countries, especially those that go to the Arab countries, sometimes the reports we get are disheartening. Therefore, allow me to recommend that for all Members who have questions regarding that, I am going to direct the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development to team up with the Minister for Foreign Affairs to bring us a comprehensive report so that all of us can make an input and we see how to - (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us all put our issues together so that they are handled at once as a report. If we can have that, deliver it to my office and I will forward it to them, if you cannot reach the office. 4.42MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have just been reading the disaster alert from the Office of the Prime Minister, signed by the permanent secretary. Reports from the Uganda National Meteorological Authority are forecasting heavy rains from September to December; and a lot of floods, landslides and all the related impacts. Rwenzori and Elgon subregions are already experiencing a lot of disasters, and Madam Prime Minister, you are aware. I am aware you have sent a team to Bundibugyo and Kasese to do a rapid assessment. However, my concern is on the alert; apart from the emergency response that you normally do, I do not see from this alert the preparedness, especially for the mountain areas. We are supposed to do a geohazard mapping or disaster mapping so that we guide people settling in those areas that are likely to experience such, to move away in time before the actual disasters happen. Therefore, I do not know what, as Government, especially the Prime Minister’s office – the one in charge of disaster response in terms of preparedness; how do we prepare our people so that we do not lose lives and property; and so that we minimise the impact of these disasters, because they will happen. That is my concern, Madam Prime Minister.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The issue of the disasters in the Rwenzori area was [Mr Rutahigwa] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME5663THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022handled yesterday, and maybe what we need to do as I said before, is to be the first people to inform our voters on what is happening. Now that you have got that letter, we should go and talk to our people and let them know that there is going to be a disaster. Let us be prepared. And, as leaders, we also agreed that we should have a week of tree planting. Let us not just talk about degradation, but let us act as leaders. So, the Prime Minister yesterday made a presentation here, but as leaders, let us inform our people of what is happening because they may even listen to you more than the Prime Minister. Since they voted for you, they think what you say is the gospel truth. So, Hon. Richard, let us get time - whether it means going to the radios, whatever it takes; let us educate our voters. Yes, Hon. Acon then Hon. Bashir.4.46MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that on 11 July 2022, the National Forestry Authority went to Otuke and slashed down the crops for the community and the people of Otuke East constituency. And, I remember we raised this issue on the Floor and you promised that these people will be compensated. To date, nothing has been done. I had requested by then that if Government cannot give money, let food be provided to the families whose crops were slashed down. Could you please respond? If you are ready, my truck is there to carry this food for them today. Thank you. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, he knows that an assessment was done. As for the food, I promise that we shall give you food. But colleagues, this is my appeal and an appeal from the President. It is true that a lot of destruction has taken place and our ecosystem cannot handle - and that is why it is giving way. We have a plan that we brought here - a policy - and you people approved it in this House. A disaster management plan was brought here by the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness. I want you and I, like the Speaker has said, to educate our people. Let our people know that when you are dead, you cannot do anything else. In those areas, there are those that we are handling in the enclaves of Bududa, Manafwa and other areas. Yes, we have a plan to do urbanisation, especially in the hilly areas, but we request you to help us to sensitise the people because it is not easy for us, as Government, to convince your people.We bought land in Kasese - he is aware; but we are still struggling to have them go and share that land. We bought it in Muhokya. Yes. So, colleagues, we request you to convince your people. Even those that we relocated to Bunambutye in Manafwa and Bulambuli - his place; they are going back. We compensated them, gave them a home, but instead of taking - they marry another wife to take to the new home and then the older ones are killed. Therefore, colleagues, I think as Government, we are going to be forced to evict them forcefully. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: At least Hon. Nambeshe has not done it. (Laughter)4.50MR BASHIR LUBEGA (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, remember that Mubende benefited from a very good project - the Mubende-Kakumiro-Kagadi Road. As leaders from Mubende, we raised a red flag against the way the drainage system was constructed, which is very narrow and shallow. We came to your office and you convened a meeting with UNRA. A team came to Mubende, but they have not undertaken any 5664THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022corrective measures. Last night, we got a very big downpour and almost the entire central business area was submerged due to the poor drainage system. Classrooms at St Charles Lwanga Secondary School were submerged and the compound flooded.The Katawa stream and the well, which is supposedly the sole source of water for the low-income earners in Mubende Municipality, was silted. Madam Prime Minister, we want to undertake corrective measures to assist our people in Mubende. The only well that was constructed by the Catholic Church was washed away. We seek Government support to ensure that our people in the municipality are helped. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Madam Prime Minister, receive only five questions and answer at once.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, it is also helping me to do some exercise – protect me from these Nyege Nyege  boys. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: This Nyege Nyege  man of Kasilo. MS NABBANJA: And, I know he will go there -(Laughter) – that was a light moment. Mubende is one of the districts that are developing at a high rate. We appreciate the communities in that area. Like he has said, after they had reported, we had a meeting, but now that the Minister for Works and Transport is here, why should I suffer when I have the General here?4.53THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT  (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the concerns. Hon. Bashir was in my office yesterday on other matters. On the issue of Mubende, I think this happened last night; but we will send a team to address it. However, I would also like to appeal to the authorities in the districts and municipalities to manage waste. Waste disposal in our municipalities and cities is terrible. All the waste ends up in the drainage. That is why sometimes we get this flooding.Therefore, I request that as we address the narrow strips or drainages, we also have a proper waste management arrangement and system in our cities and municipalities. I beg to submit. 4.54MR PATRICK BINGI (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am concerned about the grounded agro-processing facilities that were established under the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme 2013/2016 with funding from the African Development Bank. Fortunately, my Kigando Subcounty in Butemba received a maize mill serving close to 3,000 locals. On a sad note, this facility was only operational for barely two years because of the substandard machinery and equipment that were installed. Right now, the facility is redundant. My humble question is: Does Government have any plans to revive these facilities? If so, when are you putting a smile on the faces of my locals from Kigando-Kyankwazi?MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, today we had a meeting with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. They brought a report about all CAIIP facilities; on their coolers where they preserve milk, but they do not have even a cow. (Laughter)We have taken stock. We are going to put those machines to good use. There are machines like yours across the country. I promise that the trade ministry will come here with an inventory of what is happening on those machines. It is not only in Butemba. Thank you.[Mr Lubega] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME5665THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 20224.56MR JOHN MUSILA  (Independent, Bubulo East County, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I should say I do not know how many megabytes or gigabytes of fright we have after you communicated that you are threatened with assassination; we are frightened. That is not the point though. My point is about Bunambutye, which the Prime Minister has just mentioned. We are happy that Government has made good interventions for the last five years or so. We have about 263 households settled within. However, the matter of concern is that recently, from the 11th May onwards, we had more than 23 families from the districts of Bugisu settled in Bunambutye. The concern - it was an issue, but now a concern – is, the promise of the Prime Minister was that they would be helped with food, some amount of settlement fund, water and everything else for about six months. Madam Speaker, I wish to announce to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that they paid for only one month of May. To date, nothing more has come in. They have nowhere to go and have resorted to destitution, completely. These 23 families from Namisindwa - I got three, Bududa 11 and the many other districts - were put on the lower side; the eastern side of the resettlement camp where there is no water. They have to move to a drinkable water source about two or three kilometres up. Otherwise, Madam Prime Minister, I want to appreciate one thing; the sensitisation in Bugisu over the landslides has been done well. I can attest to you that in Hon. Nambeshe’s district, and my own district where we have had mudslides and some landslides, we sensitised people and have not suffered fatalities, especially human fatalities. We are doing our best as the local area MPs together with many other local leaders. The issue of concern and my prayer is that, the Prime Minister attends to the salient issue of facilitation of these families recently moved to the Bunambutye resettlement camp. Respect, Madam Speaker. MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, it is true that recently, we relocated 23 families and some food was given to them. I believe we are supposed to give them food for six months, but we had some shortfalls because of the famine in Karamoja. All the food that we had, had to be taken to Karamoja. I promise that as we settle down, we shall send food there.Secondly, I request that - because he is talking about water. We had that programme, together with the homes. We sat with the Members of Parliament in my office. We still have Shs 2.1 billion and the UPDF Engineering Brigade is constructing; they had wanted to connect water to all those places, but we agreed together that let this money build more houses, so that we can secure as many lives as possible. We agreed that let construction of as many houses as possible be done and connect water next financial year; that is it brother; we agreed together! Now, the UPDF Engineering Brigade is on site and have started constructing those many houses we agreed on, out of the Shs 2.1 billion this financial year. However, still in this financial year, we shall also see how to connect water. Otherwise, we wanted to have as many houses as possible. Madam Speaker, we have a programme under Give Directly, where we are going to give Shs 7 million per household in the four districts of Bugisu subregion, so that these people can be relocated. I believe you know that because you are one of the people that helped us to lobby this NGO. We are going to connect as many districts in Mt Elegon subregion as possible. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I request that those people who will be paid Shs 7 million be convinced to shift down and leave those areas, which are dangerous. Thank you so much. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.5666THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20225.01MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must appreciate Government. However, you are aware of the challenges of compensation in Teso subregion. You are aware that Government gave Shs 50 billion for the people in Teso, Lango and Acholi subregions. Madam Speaker, if you go back to our constituencies right now, you cannot talk about the NRM Government because it has been long since Government committed to compensate the people of Teso subregion. To date, we have a number of districts, including Kumi, where I come from - even from Bukedea, which happens to be in my immediate neighbourhood - the compensation has had no effect. May I get clarification from the Office of the Leader of Government Business as to whether this compensation is going to be done or not, so that if it is not going to be done, we stop talking about it? Madam Speaker, why has the Office of the Attorney-General failed to implement the recommendation of Government in relation to compensation of our people who lost cattle? Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, maybe you need information about this compensation. First, the 50 billion that was given originally for Lango, Acholi and Teso subregions must be audited; they say it was given out, but that money must be audited first. Two, before we plan for more compensation, let us have the first batch audited. Hon. Opio and every honourable member from that side will agree with me; let that one be audited; institute a team to audit that money first.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, like you have said, the President launched this programme in Soroti last financial year, and Shs 50 billion was given out. I request that you allow me to instruct the Attorney-General to give us a report on who benefited from this money. Afterwards, we can institute a forensic audit so that we get concrete information on who received this money.THE SPEAKER: And, maybe just for information, there was additional money that was budgeted for, but which has not come through. I think that is what Hon. Christine is talking about. Shs 30 billion was budgeted for, and they said that after that, they would get a supplementary, but even that has not come through. So, Prime Minister, take it up yourself with the President, because it was a Presidential pledge - we will discuss it when it comes. 5.04MR BUMALI MPINDI (Independent , PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The NRM Government is known for affirmative action and the inclusion of persons with disabilities in the development agenda. However, the Office of the Prime Minister has been giving out foodstuff and other essential items to areas that have been affected by disaster, but consistently living out persons with disability, yet they are the most vulnerable. I want to ask the Prime Minister, whether this is a policy now from the Office of the Prime Minister or the negative attitude by her staff towards persons with disability.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mpindi, do you want to say that when they are distributing food, when they get a person with disability, they do not give it to them?MR MPINDI: Madam Speaker, the information I received from our members is that they are left out; they do not receive those -THE SPEAKER: No, that is not correct. Have you confirmed that information? Because really, how can you give out food and you jump one person.MR MPINDI: Madam Speaker, what happens - and I will give you a scenario – is that, for example, if someone is a wheelchair user and they have gazetted the place where they are PRIME MINISTER’S TIME5667THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 SEPTEMBER 2022going to distribute the foodstuff from, and that person cannot reach there, or is visually impaired and the staff do not take into account to look for them, they just give out food to whoever comes and forget about those people who need to be looked after.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, I want you to appreciate that it is the NRM Government that has been supporting the people with disabilities, and the NRM Government is known for being all-inclusive.Madam Speaker, whenever we take food and non-food relief supplies to districts, we use local leaders to distribute. I believe the local leaders know where these people are. Please, if some of your people were missed out by omission, please let us know. We are still in charge; we can always help. (Laughter)5.07MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue I raise relates to human rights observance in this country. The country is facing serious challenges regarding human rights. Ugandans are being arrested without following the law. The Constitution states that if one is to arrest a Ugandan, the arresting officer must first identify themselves. Secondly, the arresting officer(s) must inform the person they are arresting, in the language they understand, why they are being arrested. Thirdly, they must be taken to a gazetted detention facility; and fourth, the detention must not be beyond 48 hours. That is what the Constitution states, Madam Speaker.However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, those constitutional provisions have consistently been abrogated. I want to find out whether you have plans of ensuring that we get back on the constitutional order. Relatedly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Speaker has raised an issue to do with her personal security. If really the Speaker is facing assassination threats, where does that leave the rest of us? In your communication, you said the matter will be investigated; that is a casual statement. Are you planning, for example, to enhance her security and the security of the others? Really, if the third highest person in the country can face assassination threats, how about Hon. Kayemba Ssolo, a peasant from Bukomansimbi? What about a humble Basalirwa from Bugiri? How have we reached this level of threatening assassinations? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I come from a community, in this country, that has been a victim of assassinations: Muslim clerics. So, when I hear about assassination threats, I do not take them lightly. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, over and above the issue of investigation, is this something that concerns you? I am sure by the time the Speaker mentioned it on the Floor – in the words of Chinua Achebe – the handshake has gone beyond the elbow. I want to imagine that. I invite the Frontbench - our brother, Gen. Katumba, over there just survived an assassination attempt that took the life of his beloved daughter. I am sure investigations are still going on up to now. As a House, this is a matter that, ideally, I think, we would commit some time to discuss. Tomorrow, it will be the Chief Whip and the other day, the Shadow Attorney-General. If you have now targeted the Speaker, you are next, going to target my Jjaja , the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, because she is next in the queue. You then will go to my brother, Hon. Obua, the Government Chief Whip and then my classmate, the Deputy Attorney-General, Jackson Kafuuzi.So, the issue of assassinations, as a modus operandi in this country, is a matter that we must address and a matter that the Prime Minister should comment on, over and above the premise of investigating, yet she is still very busy with Nyege Nyege . (Laughter)5668THE COMPUTER MISUSE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022THE SPEAKER: Thank you. MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, the issue of security, especially when it comes to assassination – to me – cannot be discussed here. I request that you give me time. We shall inform the Commander-in-Chief and those that are concerned. I commit -(Interjection) – please, allow me to conclude. Madam Speaker, protect me from my brother. THE SPEAKER: Leave your mother-in-law to speak. MS NABBANJA: Please, let me conclude. Issues of security, colleagues, are not like a cat-rat chase. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I commit, as Government, that we are going to handle this issue with the utmost urgency it deserves. You will be protected and I know God is there to protect you and nothing will happen to you –(Interjections) - Yes, nothing will happen to her. We are going to beef up her security. We are in charge of this Government. THE SPEAKER: [Member: “Information.”] Honourable members, one would ask why I raised that issue. I raised it because it has been overdue and it was in relation to the issue of Ugandans that were being talked about. If that can happen to me, who has all the security, what about Hon. Ssolo, who does not have?So, I raised that issue in good faith. I want Ugandans to know that in case anything happens to me, I have got assassination threats. I am not going to be intimidated. We are going to handle it. It is not anything for debate. You have heard from the Prime Minister. I adjourn the House to Tuesday. (The House rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 September 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) PRIME MINISTER’S TIME