Thursday, 13 September 2012

Parliament met at 3.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, honourable members; you are welcome to this sitting. We apologise for starting late. I am sure the circumstances are well-known to the Members; consultations on the budget process have been going on.

I have a communication from the desk of the Rt Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, former Deputy Prime Minister, and now Senior Presidential Advisor on Veterans.

As part of the 50th Anniversary of Uganda’s Independence, I.K. Musaazi Foundation is organising two functions to commemorate the veteran architect of Uganda’s struggles for Independence. The first activity will be laying of wreaths on his grave along with Y.K. Lule, former President and national hero, at the Heroes’ Corner, Kololo Airstrip Grounds on the 2nd October 2012 at 10.00 a.m. Honourable members you are encouraged to come and attend this function. It is part of the events to mark the 50 Years celebration.

Secondly, a memorial lecture on Musaazi and his struggles for economic emancipation and Independence on the 7th October 2012, at 2.00 p.m. at Makerere University Main Hall by Prof. Campbell of the University of New York, a life-time associate of Musaazi.

The grandson of Prof. George Sheppard, Mr Fraser Sheppard Linear of the University of Columbia will be in attendance. He will receive the Independence medal on behalf of his grandfather, who came to Uganda to work with Musaazi in the federation of Uganda farmers against the exploitation of the middleman and the colonial government.

This is, therefore, to request you to attend as Parliamentarians and to ask the whole country - those who are listening - to show up at Kololo and also at Makerere on those days. His Excellency the President, who is also the patron and promoter of Musaazi Foundation, will preside over both occasions. You are invited.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

1. THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012

2. THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2012/2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion has been before this House and you remember the last time we adjourned to enable the Committee on the Budget to reconcile some of the figures and come back to the House. This would be a proper time for us to hear from the committee on this matter.

3.13
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take with concern the fact that Parliament cannot proceed on the item of supply yet it has been pending on the Order Paper since Tuesday. This is a fully constituted Parliament with a Leader of Government Business in session, and ministers. Can we be informed about what could have happened in between? Is the chairperson under some problems such as distress?

Otherwise, we are ready to proceed and it is not good for this Parliament to be convened when such important business that we are eagerly waiting to debate cannot proceed because of the absence of the chairperson. In view of that, I thought the Leader of Government Business could offer this House an explanation as we see how to proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, the matter was no longer with the Leader of Government Business. The matter was with our Committee on Budget. The Government moved its motion for Committee of Supply and we had some debates. At this stage, I referred the matter to the budget committee to reconcile those figures. So, the proper procedure would be for the chairman to report, and if the Leader of Government Business has some response to that, then that response can be made.

3.15
MR JACOB OBOTH (INDEPENDENT, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It would be unfair to me and probably for the House to try to assume that the chairman of the committee is not in the House. He actually came, I was the first person, here and he laid his file. Probably, he has just gone for a health break; but I know for sure that he is committed to his work.

3.16
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, this motion is moved by the Ministry of Finance. The minister is just arriving after all of us were wondering whether all of them had been sacked. It would be very difficult for the committee that is reporting on the figures supplied by the ministry which is absent, to come here and read. The guidance I am seeking is about us in Parliament. This is a matter on which we are going to take a vote and yet we are also missing too. Maybe there is a problem in Parliament that we do not know.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable Chairman was in the House a while ago and should be coming soon.

3.17
MS HANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): I want to confirm that the chairperson of the Budget Committee was in the House as I was coming in. I met him going out and as we have been informed, wouldn’t it have been good for this House to continue with the next item as he comes, because this is an important issue that we would like to deal with. [Hon. MEMBERS: “No!”] I am requesting  because we anticipate that he is coming since he has left all his files here in the House. Short of that, we could suspend the House for five minutes, with your permission, and when he returns, we continue because we are ready to debate.

3.18
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, the item in question is constitutionally one of the greatest items in Parliamentary practice. It would, therefore, be odd and extraordinary for us to create a stalemate over such an important item knowing very well that everything we do in Government greatly impacts on this item.

I propose very strongly that you adjourn the House for 15 minutes to give Government chance to make this happen. Otherwise, we cannot avoid this crucial issue.

3.19
MR SSEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe North Constituency, Kampala): I was equally of the view that we give this House 15 minutes, because it is the Government which is presenting. And, I am surprised that even the Chairperson of the Budget Committee - much as there has been a lot of fuss about the health sector - I do not know, Mr Speaker, whether you are aware that there has been a stand-off between the Chairperson of the Health Committee, hon. Dr Lyomoki, just coming in. Maybe it could also have a bearing on this. We should adjourn and sort ourselves out, especially the Government side, whose Members are not even here.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, but it is also true that we have the vice-chairperson. I am glad to announce that he has come.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you have the Floor to report on the findings and decisions of the Budget Committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you distribute copies of the report?

MR LWANGA: Mr Speaker, the Budget Committee was tasked by Parliament to harmonise the budget figures with those contained in the recommendations of sectoral committee reports of the financial year 2012/2013 ministerial policy statements.

Methodology

The committee held meetings to consider the budget estimates in accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and rule 161(3)(c) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

The honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development attended some of the meetings along with the support staff from his ministry.

a)	The committee of the health sector in its report to Parliament as adopted on the policy statement financial year 2012/2013, requested Government to provide an additional Shs 260 billion to cater for the following activities within the health sector:

i.   To retain health workers currently on the payroll, that is 58 percent of the staff establishment by enhancing their salary by 50 percent. This would require an additional Shs 121 billion. 

ii.    To recruit an additional eight percent that is 6,905 health workers countrywide, hence bringing staff establishment to 66 percent. This would require an additional Shs 61 billion.

iii.  To motivate health workers who are on duty with a duty allowance and this would require an additional Shs 78 billion.

b)	The committee received and considered a letter from the Uganda Law Society dated August 2012, addressed to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General raising issues affecting the operations of the Judiciary.

c)	The committee received concerns from the foreign affairs sector committee regarding costs resulting from poundage losses due to fluctuations in foreign currencies and the dilapidated state of Government properties at missions abroad.

Observations

The committee made the following observations:

Human resource for Health 

The performance of the health sector solely depends on the availability of critical health personnel and their remuneration that will ensure attraction and retention.

The committee was informed that Government was to provide additional funds to the health sector priority areas in line with national development plans as revenue collection improved. However, the increased allocation was to be on the basis of demonstrable performance by the health sector to improve allocative efficiency and institute internal controls to minimise avoidable wastage and loss.

The committee confirmed that during the finalisation of the budget, the health sector recorded a total budget increase of over Shs 45 billion over and above the budget for the financial year 2011/2012 on account of increases in wage, non-wage and donor budget ceilings.

Despite the low levels of staffing, there was no provision for staff recruitment in the financial 2012/2013. The staff recruitment requires an additional Shs 33 billion.

The Ministry of Health had a wage shortfall of staff in posts of Shs 23.8 billion and primary healthcare of Shs 9 billion. This amount was planned to be provided through additional allocation in the current financial year 2012/2013. The committee noted that the 21 percent increment in wage would cover shortfalls that existed in the financial year 2011/2012.

Consumptive items budget

The committee noted that the total amount budgeted for, for all votes on consumptive items excluding vote-on-account and vote for statutory bodies, protected votes and votes for missions abroad is Shs 130.8 billion. By effecting a 30 percent cut on this amount, a total of Shs 39.2 billion would be raised. See annex 1 attached.

Underfunding of the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS)

The committee received a copy of the letter from the Uganda Law Society raising pertinent issues - See annex 2 attached - affecting the operations of the Judiciary, namely:

i.	Remuneration of Judges; 
ii.	Construction of Judiciary headquarters housing for the appellant courts; 
iii.	Administration of Justice Bill; 
iv.	Delays in appointment of Judges; 
v.	Non-provision for court awards against the Government and allied institutions in the national budget; and, 
vi.	Inaction on the recommendations of the Judicial Service Commission.

The committee notes that the funding gaps existing in this sector are crippling the Judiciary in delivering justice in the country and require focused attention.

The committee observed that the need to construct Judiciary headquarters housing the appellant courts has been dragging on for a long time. It was further observed that the problem of the office accommodation is not only for JLSO, but also for other ministries, departments and agencies. This financial year 2012/2013, there is a total of Shs 57.169 billion earmarked for rent and rates of which Shs 12.48 billion is for JLSO

Foreign Missions Abroad

The committee noted that the foreign missions experienced a poundage loss in their budgets due to the fluctuating foreign exchange rate. This in turn affects implementation of planned programmes, activities, and the welfare of our diplomats employed in our missions abroad. 

The committee also noted that Government properties occupied by missions abroad are in a sorry state and that even where Government has been given the opportunity to acquire property, for example, in China and Rwanda, Government has continued to rent.

Recommendations

The committee recommends as follows:

Health Sector

The committee recommends that Shs 39.2 billion raised through adjusting consumptive items by a 30 percent cut be utilised by the health sector and allocated as follows:

a)	Shs 19.5 billion be used as wage for extra health workers, who should be recruited by 1 January 2013 in favour of all districts. This money should, therefore, be appropriated under the Ministry of Public Service since it has the sole responsibility to manage the wage bill for all public servants.

b)	Shs 19.5 billion be used to enhance the operations fund  - non-wage recurrent - for the health centres II, III and IV and general hospitals in all districts; that is, 2,696 health centres and 49 general hospitals. This money should, therefore, be appropriated equally among votes 501 to 850.

However, the committee notes discrepancies in salaries and allowances among the different Government commissions, statutory bodies and agencies, which is affecting the morale of persons working for Government with similar ranks and experience. 

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendations that Government undertakes a review and harmonises salaries and allowances of these bodies. Indeed, the setting up of an independent salary review/setting commission is long overdue. 

Justice, Law and Order Sector

The committee recommends that Government should handle the issue raised by the Uganda Law Society in regard to the Judiciary expeditiously. Urgent attention should be focused on remuneration of Judges and the construction of office accommodation. 

The committee reiterates its recommendations as contained in the National Budget Framework Paper 2012/2013 to 2016/2017, that Government urgently finds resources to construct homes for its ministries, departments and agencies.

The committee recommends that as an urgent matter, Government should allow the construction of an extension or a new building in the green space next to the High Court premises to provide the required accommodation for the Appellant Court. This can be done through borrowing, since servicing it would not be a problem given that currently, the budget raise for this sector for 2012/2013 is over Shs 12 billion.

Foreign Missions

The committee recommends that with effect from the financial year 2013/2014, Government should ensure that all budgets affecting foreign missions should take into account effects of the foreign exchange rate fluctuations to mitigate poundage losses. 

The committee reiterates its recommendations on the National Budget Formwork Paper 2012/2013 to 2016/2017 that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development bears the cost of loss on foreign exchange and that in the long-run, budgets for missions should be in foreign currency.

The committee recommends that Government should endeavour to utilise every opportunity to acquire property when host governments present an offer.

The committee recommends that Government properties occupied by missions abroad should be urgently repaired because this will save on costs.

Figures for committee of Supply

The committee recommends that the budget figures be adjusted to take into account changes resulting from the recommended adjustments in the health sector budget and the expected vote before supply.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg that the august House adopts this report. (Applause) Mr Speaker, I beg to report and lay the report on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you, Chairperson and your members of the Budget Committee for the time you have put in to come up with this report. Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

3.34
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Chairman of the Budget Committee for presenting that report. As you may recollect, the reason why this was not done yesterday was because we had not agreed on the figures –both sides had not agreed on the figures, therefore, it was difficult or impossible to supply.

Today, we made all efforts to reach agreement on this and I am afraid, Mr Speaker, to inform you that we have not generated consensus on this matter yet. And in saying so, let me explain why.

The main point of disagreement is not that we should not make an effort to find money to provide to the healthcare sector; no. Certainly, we are interested, as much as everyone is interested; the Government is –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of order. The issue being discussed on the Floor of Parliament has been stayed twice so that a harmonised position is realised to enable the House proceed. So, is the honourable Prime Minister, who is also my friend, in order to now allude that the position is not yet harmonised yet we have been waiting to proceed, after they had been given the opportunity to do that twice? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought that the Prime Minister was re-stating what he picked from the committee meetings where Finance and Budget committees were supposed to reconcile. And he has said they have not agreed. So, I do not see whether that raises a matter of – he is just reporting what happened; and he is saying they have not yet reached a settlement on the issue. I do not think there is any violation of any order of the House. 

MR TINKASIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I listened to the chairman’s submission and also to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who has said that there was a disagreement. However, he has not told us where this disagreement came from. Our rules provide that when a chairperson of a committee reads his report and you disagree to it as a committee, you produce a minority report -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you are a member of the committee.

MR TINKASIMIRE: Where did the disagreement come from?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is not a member of the committee and so he could not have produced a minority report.
  
MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Mr Speaker, there is always time to learn, and my very good friend, hon. Tinkasiimire, is learning that I am not a member of that committee. Therefore, the disagreements I present need not come by way of a minority report. 
 
I was saying that the disagreement is not on the reasons the chairman and the report have presented. The dire straits the healthcare is sounding; the administration of justice and indeed other sectors of Government; we all know that the resource envelope of Uganda, although it has been increasing tremendously, is still limited. Therefore, we have decided many times before in this House that we must prioritise. We have this time -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, the report of the committee has been presented to this House and after the presentation of this report, I don’t know whether the Prime Minister is making another report for us to take a decision or he is commenting on this report? So, the point of procedure I am raising is; how are we going to proceed now, because we have not taken a decision on the report and yet the Prime Minister is making another presentation? So, how are we proceeding? And how do we handle it? Is it a comment on the report; or is it a response on the report? How do we handle it?  What is it that the Prime Minister is talking about? Or he is issuing a Government statement? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion was before the House for supply. If there was reconciliation and agreement on the figures, we would not be talking about this matter today. We would have finished it last week. But there was disagreement on the figures and I made that reference to the Budget Committee under the rules here. The rules allow me where the figures don’t tally, to refer to the Budget Committee so that they can sit down and try to reconcile the figures. 

This reconciliation is done with the Executive Arm of Government, who have proposed the budget. The Ministry of Finance and Leader of Government Business are on the side of the Executive that are supposed to have this discussion so that we come to harmony. 

The committee has reported what was discussed between the Budget Committee and members of the Executive – the Prime Minister is making a statement on behalf of the Executive, and after which, we shall have a debate. That is what I have said because there is no violation of any rule. There is no wrong procedure here; the procedure is correct; that the Prime Minister makes his statement to guide the House on his side of the coin since the chairman has guided us, and then we have a debate, and take a decision on the report. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee in his report doesn’t talk about the disagreements, and yet he is supposed to prepare a report. If Parliament must make a decision, we should actually be debating the report of the committee.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is what the Prime Minister is doing. He is saying that they have disagreements with the report of the committee and he is pointing out the areas. Why don’t we move forward? Why can’t the Prime Minister finish and we have the debate and then move forward? 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Under the normal arrangement, it would have been ideal for the Prime Minister to allow that debate ensue and then he comes in last when we have considered and responded or debated the report of the committee. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not a normal situation. This is a situation of a matter that has been presented to the House and there has been disagreement on the figures arising from the two sides; the committee has a position and the Executive has a position. The Executive cannot come up with a minority report because that is the state at which it would have been discussed.  

Now, what we are saying is this; the main report of the committee has been presented, which we are going to debate. The Prime Minister is raising the area we should consider in our debate, where the other side has an opinion that some of these things might not work the way they are proposed. So, when we have the debate, we should have the full balancing. The final response will be given by the chairperson who is in charge of the report, and also, the Minister of Finance will speak as we are concluding the debate and then we take a decision on the report. 

Right now there are two situations; there is the position of the committee and there is another position, which this Parliament should hear so that when we are debating, we debate with these two views in mind. If it comes at the end, you will not have listened to the other objections to the report. Isn’t that correct? This is not a typically normal report of the committee. 

3.46
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi):  Thank you Mr Speaker. Article 155(4) of the Constitution puts very clearly the mandate of this Parliament, and Section 161 (1), (2), (3)(b) clearly indicate the mandate of the Budget Committee. It is under that wisdom that the Budget Committee has been considering the estimates presented by Government. It is under these considerations that the Budget Committee after reaching a position within its mandate presented its position to Cabinet. It is after the work of the Budget Committee that my chairperson has presented the report today. 

Mr Speaker, we would seek your guidance. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the House proceeds to debate the Budget Committee report because the Leader of Government Business is part of this House. It is after that, that the House will decide appropriately. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me try again. (Laughter) I made this reference to the Budget Committee myself under the rules of this House. If there was no conflict between the figures, I wouldn’t have referred this matter to the Budget Committee. So, it is not doing this particular job in the course of its ordinary work; no, the decision has to be made.  

I even don’t know why we are spending a lot of time on this, because the Prime Minister would have finished by now and we would have opened the debate and moved forward. Let me cite for you the rules under which I referred this matter. 

Honourable members, Rule 138(2) states, “The House shall consider the sectoral committee reports within a period of 14 days and if there are any inconsistencies in the recommendations by the sectoral committees, the Speaker shall refer the inconsistencies to the Budget Committee for reconciliation and harmonisation.” This is the rule under which I proceeded to refer this matter to the Budget Committee.

The inconsistencies are that there are figures being proposed by the people who proposed the budget and there are also the figures being proposed by our own committee. That is why I made that reference. If they had agreed, I would not have referred this matter to the Budget Committee. It is because they did not agree that this matter went to the Budget Committee.

Now, because it has gone to the Budget Committee on the basis of that disagreement, which has not been reconciled, the committee has presented what it, acting on behalf of the House, has found.

The person with whom they have disagreed is the Executive, which is entitled to also address this House just like the minority report would be done, so that we hear both sides and then I open the debate and we take a decision. It is as simple as that.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Arising from your guidance, I think we do not see any contradiction in you referring this matter to the committee. Where we are finding a contradiction is the submission of the Prime Minister, which is just verbal and not written. If the Executive has a position, it should be circulated to the honourable members, to allow that abnormality to occur in this House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS ANIFA KAWOOYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. Where we have a problem as Members in this august House is that the chairperson of the committee presented a report, which is now a report of this august House. When the Prime Minister came, he said he has no problem with the committee report. That means the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is in agreement with the committee report and with the recommendations in the report.

He was going ahead to say - if I heard him right - that the problem with Government or with him, is the small resource envelope. If the problem is only about the small resource envelope, and for the time I have been here I have never seen Government come here and say they have a big resource envelope, I would anticipate that we proceed, with due respect, with this small envelope as it has been proposed since Government has no problem. At the right time, the Prime Minister will come and tell us, the small envelope is so much, and we can come back as we normally do with supplementary expenditure so that we move on. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the Rt Hon. Prime Minister had agreed with the entire report, were we going to have a debate? Were we still going to debate even when the government had said it is okay?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, the item we have is a motion that Parliament resolves itself into a Committee of Supply; and we are now in that process. Essentially, such a motion is a motion of the House. I had seen that creeping up and when the chairperson was missing in the House, I thought that maybe the Prime Minister could say something since he is the Leader of Government Business.

With your helping hand, you said, no; this is a matter of Parliament. He did his part and he is discharged. Now, I am surprised that the same Prime Minister is again attempting to find an opportunity to come on the Floor and make his presentations when he had already been functus officio - he had no locus at all on this matter. It is a matter for Parliament. Let him sit and listen in, and participate as we do our part. 

Members, this is the last opportunity we have; this is the function of Parliament. The interaction with the Executive ended, and Parliament should be in position now to proceed and do its work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation composed of the district speaker and deputy speaker, and 25 sub-county speakers from Kabale District. They are represented by hon. David Bahati and hon. Ninsiima. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them to the House. (Applause)

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery again we have a delegation of leaders and farmers from Nyabushozi and Kazo counties in Kiruhura District. They are represented by hon. Fred Mwesigye, hon. John Nasasira and hon. Beatrice Barumba Rusaniya.

They presented a petition this morning and this afternoon. They are expected to attend proceedings of Parliament. They have come to witness what we do in this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, it looks like you do not want to listen to the Prime Minister before; you want to listen to him at the end. So, -(Hon. Amama Mbabazi rose_)- Are you speaking as the honourable member for Kinkizi West? Well, then they are saying we wait and you present your issue at the end as responses to the report and the debate.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I think you were absolutely right.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I know I am. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: As always; and hon. Ssekikubo is wrong. Because, for him to suggest that I am not here in this Parliament as a Member; that the interaction between Parliament and the Executive is over, and I am in some other capacity here, cannot be correct, obviously; which is not unusual for the honourable member of Lwemiyaga.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I made a lengthy presentation in which I was specific, that in as far as the Committee of Supply is concerned, I hailed the Leader of Government Business, that he has done his part, and now was the time for Parliament to proceed with the motion. I took cognisance of his contribution and harmonising of both positions of Parliament and the Executive up to this stage. 

I have also listened carefully to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister stating that I am always - “as usual” - not right, yet he knows that we have always been complimenting one another. (Laughter) Is he, therefore, in order to impute that I am always at variance with him even on matters of national importance?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I heard the Prime Minister say was that on that particular issue, you were not correct; and that he was not surprised that you would come to that conclusion because he had anticipated that naturally, you would come to that conclusion. (Laughter) So, it is a matter of opinion. Has he imputed improper motive on you? No, I do not think so. He has not. So, if for other reasons the Rt Hon. Prime Minister cannot speak now, can I open the debate? [MEMBERS: “Yes.”] How long do we want to do this debate? One hour or 30 minutes? [MEMBERS: “One hour.”] Okay, let us have one hour then. 

Considering the number of people who have stood up to speak, if you divided it by one hour, it comes to two minutes each. If I am to accommodate all of you, you will speak for two minutes each. Where there is plenty of time, we shall speak longer, but for now, it is two minutes each.

4.02
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report, and from your guidance, I would have expected the views of the government to have been reflected in this report. Since they were supposed to harmonise their position, they should have told us where they disagreed on figures, because we are not talking just politics here, but about figures. We did not get that. 

We know very well that at least in my constituency, most of the health centres have no staff; we have about 30 percent of the staff needed in those health centres. So, the recommendation of the committee that we should have more staff is very important, and whether we have a small envelope or not, that is a priority. 

Before the Rt Hon. Prime Minister sat down, he was talking about priorities and it seems he was dismissing that as not being a priority. But we believe that having more staff in health centres is a priority right now.  

I have some queries to the committee regarding the report; there are figures with which I want the chairman to help me with. In “methodology” – Item 2 - you mention Shs 61 billion on staff. Then under 3(i) - “Human resource for health services”, you have Shs 33 billion; again for staff. Now under 3.2 - “Wage shortfall”, you have Shs 23.8 billion on staff. Please explain to us what exactly you mean; what figures do you need? Does the shortfall include when you have computed the new recruitment of the new staff (88 percent) or the current staff that we have?

4.05
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will straight away go to page 5 of this report: “The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Government undertakes to review and harmonise salaries and allowances of these bodies. Indeed, the setting up of an independent salary review/setting commission is long overdue.” 

I would want to be helped by the committee chairperson, because many reports of this nature have this kind of lamentation. What is it that has stopped the setting up of this commission? Is it because Government does not want it? Is it because you do not have personnel in the country to carryout this kind of activity? What is it that has stopped us from setting up this commission to harmonise salaries? 

The other day, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs was comparing the salary of the Chief Justice and that of the Executive Director of KCCA, which is still shocking. So, what is it that has stopped? Is it because some people want to extract some political mileage by giving and not giving some individuals depending on how it serves them? 

On the issue of the health sector; of course, you cannot overemphasise the importance of recruitment, but do you know our requirement? Even where they are, sometimes their service delivery is not commensurate to their numbers. It is very convenient and politically popular that you can come here and recommend for recruitment. But are we satisfied with the delivery of those that are in various health centres before we recommend for more recruitment? Is it the salary increment or the numbers that are causing us problems in the health centres? 

4.07
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for its good report and analysis of the health sector, which is in dire need. I actually thought that all the Shs 260 billion would be there for the health sector, which is doing badly. Back in Kabale, our referral hospital is in dire need of money; the doctors are always leaving because they do not have enough funds and nurses are not there; because they cannot survive with meagre funding and yet Kabale is a hard-to-reach area. So, I actually thought we would get all this money. But when I saw the Shs 39.2 billion – yes, thank you – but I understand that we can get money somewhere else very fast. 

For example, much as the Government coffers have not yet reported to us, I think I would be right to think that the other Basajjabalaba issue brings us monies, which are already there and maybe we could give it to the Ministry of Health. It was Shs 169 billion; if you add on this Shs 39.2 billion – really, I thought we would have this money for the health sector. 

Otherwise, our doctors will leave. They are always running to Rwanda and across the border to Congo. And we have a big crisis; like in my area - I am talking about Kabale - we have refugees coming from Congo, who do not also have enough; we do not have enough medical equipment; we do not have workers. So, how will we handle in such areas? 

In the last financial year, we had the least money as a referral hospital - less than a billion. It was Soroti and Kabale referral hospitals that had the least money given, and yet the other financial year, we had over Shs 1.8 billion –(Member timed out.) 

4.10
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I speak for the Prime Minister on matters of Kanungu and I wish he was here -(Laughter)- to listen to what I am saying; that we thank the committee for the work. The committee needed Shs 260 billion for health, but apparently this has not been realised. But I want to thank the committee that you were able to reorganise the budget and find some money, which I want the Members of Parliament to support. 

So, we do not expect our Prime Minister to disagree with the committee because right now, the staffing level for health workers in Kanungu is at 32 percent and it is even worse in his constituency. If I had time to give you -(Laughter)- the morbidity and mortality statistics for Kinkiizi East and West really, I am sure he would change his position because we need more money. So we would request Members to support the committee when it comes to supply with the figures they have found. 

But also, we want to ask Government to make a firm commitment that through a supplementary budget, money should be found to facilitate the health sector because right now, the health sector is dead, in my view. If you collapsed in any corner of Uganda, you would hardly survive. 

It is a very big problem and, therefore, the Prime Minister should withdraw his sentiments of disagreeing with what the committee is presenting, but rather, Government should give us a commitment that money will be found to enhance the budget of –(Member timed out.)

4.12
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am Okeyoh Peter representing Bukooli Islands, hard=to-reach and hard-to-work in. I stand to support the position of the Budget Committee. Actually, their position is timely, and I want to tell you that it is worse in my constituency. I have eight health centres II and one health centre III, which is manned by a midwife assisted by two Senior Four boys; and one Senior Two girl. The eight health centres II are manned by nursing aides who have even been demobilised and, therefore, the entire eight health centres II do not have anybody to run them. Somebody will ask me, “Is this in Uganda and part of this country celebrating 50 years of Independence?” 

Therefore, committee’s intervention is timely, and I feel for the first time, as a member of NRM, we should pat this committee on the back and even as a party, it does us well to support the position of the Budget Committee if we are to save the image of the party in this country. 

Mr Speaker, therefore, the situation is so bad that it does not only need the intervention of this Parliament, but the intervention of God as well. Thank you very much.

4.14
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am speaking about a recent health situation. Last week, 20 people died instantly in an accident at Kakira because there was no ambulance between Jinja and Iganga hospitals to rescue those whose lives would have been saved. So, basing on that recent incident, I would like to support the committee recommendations. 

There are many health workers who are not on the payroll, but they are working in disgrace. So, if there is money and they can be retained, I support the Budget Committee recommendations.

Besides that, doctors need motivation. The reason why people are rushing to Rwanda and South Africa to be treated by fellow Ugandans who are working for a better pay, is because we are underpaying health workers. Honourable members, I beg that we support the committee’s recommendations so that people will remember us and we create more voters. At least if a person does not think about health, let us create more voters.

On page 5, the recommendation of spending Shs 19.5 billion to enhance operational funds would imply that if Iganga District lacks a generator, it would get a generator. Jinja District does not have fuel for generators - I move along that road. Today, I came from Iganga and I am speaking from a practical point of view. 

Lastly, annexure 1 indicates things we are reducing. We are in a technologically informed world. (Member timed out.)

4.16
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion and the committee’s recommendations. In my district, the health situation is so deplorable. We have a big hospital that is supposed to have about seven doctors, but we have none. In the whole district with a population of about 100,000 people, we do not have a doctor. So, I really feel the committee has made the right recommendations, and when you see the areas where the committee has proposed a cut, they are areas that do not concern development budgets. They are mainly consumables that can fit within the mandate of the committee to cut.

The committee also went ahead to recommend that the salary review commission is put in place so that we harmonise salaries of civil servants. The abnormal salaries that some civil servants are getting when others are getting peanuts and yet they fall within the same category, is really demoralising our staff. So, I recommend that at least Government should give us a timeframe when we are going to have this commission in place so that they can review the salaries.

When you turn to page 5, the committee also noted with concern that Government is continuing to rent offices and yet we own this land. We have the land, and yet most of these departments and ministries are running away from Government offices to rent. What is the logic behind it? And yet such monies can be used to build offices. I refer you to annex 3, where it is stated that Ministry of Agriculture is spending over Shs 3 billion a year on rent; and Ministry of Lands and Housing is doing the same. All these monies could have been used to construct at least a house or offices for each ministry every year. (Member timed out.)

4.18
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to join my colleagues to appreciate the report presented to us by the Budget Committee, and I stand to support it.

As we talk of passing the Shs 39.2 billion in support of the health sector, I would like to appeal to Government that the Shs 260 billion should be found even if we passed the budget today; and how are they going to do it? Government always brings us supplementary budgets. So, the balance of this money should be brought in form of a supplementary budget; and if Government does not do so, I will mobilise my colleagues not to pass any supplementary unless this one is included. (Applause)

Time and again, we have sat here in Parliament lamenting about the poor health delivery given by the health workers, and I have the answer now. There is a consortium called Future Health Systems. They carried out a pilot study in the districts of Pallisa, Kibuku, Iganga, Buyende, Mayuge, Kamuli, Kaliro and Luuka. They were giving what they call a transport voucher to pregnant mothers to attend antenatal sessions four times during that period.

They were also giving a voucher which they called facilitation voucher to the health workers; and the results were that mothers turned up in big numbers and health workers were also effective; which means that we have -(Member timed out.)

4.21
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and report of the committee. It would be catastrophic for this Parliament to apportion Shs 4.8 billion on welfare when the mothers of this country are dying in hospitals because they lack facilities.
 
It will also be catastrophic for this Parliament to appropriate funds to printing. We talk of printing of Shs 5 billion that the committee has saved for this purpose of health and yet we have gone to IT; we are now in e-business. Why are we still printing? Why are we still putting a lot of funds on printing when hospitals are in a dire situation? Our health workers in hospitals are de-motivated. Why can’t we give this money to the health workers? 

I want to thank my senior nurse who has just talked and who is a Member of Parliament. She has said Shs 260 billion should be demanded for, but there is a saying that “a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush”. Therefore, I really want to thank the wisdom of this committee in appropriating Shs 39.2 billion -(Interruption)

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you so much. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that the decision of the committee was not only for future recruitments, but some districts recruited health workers, but they are going without pay. A case in point - and I want it to be captured in the Hansard - is Kyankwanzi District, where we have got health staff - 51 of them – who have gone without salaries for the past four months. In this budget, there is no budget line for them; they are maintaining the previous budget.

4.23
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to congratulate the Budget Committee for identifying the Shs 39.2 billion that will enhance the health sector. Much as I was stuck on the Shs 260 billion, at least this is a step that can kick-start the long awaited recruitment of health workers. 

However, I am disappointed by the Ministry of Health. Where is the Minister of Health here? This is a ministry that we are all here lamenting for; crying and shouting to support, but I do not see them here as interested in whatever we are discussing.

I was equally disappointed by my government to come and say that they did not agree on the Shs 39.2 billion. I thought this would be the opportunity to congratulate the Budget Committee for having identified the little cuts here and there to ensure that we are showing commitment to the people of Uganda that we care for their health. 

Today, I was in a conference and they said that in the whole country, we have one dentist to 168 people. In other words, 168 people have one dentist in the whole country. What does this mean? That our people cannot even easily access a dentist and that is why we want the recruitment of health personnel in our health centres. 

While I was advocating for recruitment of health workers, I was so shocked that Kitagata Referral Hospital in my constituency had only one doctor and they even said that the doctor had run away because we cannot remunerate them properly. (Member timed out.)

4.25
MS RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank my Chairman of the Health Committee, hon. Sam Lyomoki, who brought all this pressure that is now seeing us fight for the plight of the health workers. Much as the Budget Committee is being applauded for trying to at least ensure that Government squeezes and provides the Shs 39.2 billion, I am still reluctant to thank them because looking at the issues that as a Health Committee we brought out that were pertinent and very important for this Shs 260 billion to be realised, I look at Shs 39.2 billion that is going to cater for recruitment and operational funds as a drop in the ocean.

Mr Speaker, I want to assure you that in this country, we are sitting on a time bomb, not only of doctors, but the nurses who feel that Members of Parliament and other leaders are only looking at doctors and not looking at their plight, yet they spend the greatest time with patients in hospitals. I thought that this Shs 260 billion would be able to cure that challenge we have with the nurses, so that they also know that this country thinks about them and appreciate what they do much as we need the recruitment and operational funds. No matter how much we shall put in the health sector, as long as we do not look at money to motivate these health workers, especially the nurses who spend most of the time with our patients, I feel we are not going to achieve much.

4.27
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity, Mr Speaker. I feel ashamed to see anybody in this House trying to object to the movement of this Shs 39.2 billion to the health sector. Every day, 16 women in Uganda die. We are not talking about the children; we are not talking about the Bazee; or the young men; but 16 women die all because we are unable to provide sufficient health care within our health system.

I have risen on this Floor several times. Tororo Municipality has quite a number of health centres, but within those health centres, they have no refrigeration services for vaccines. We just carried out an immunisation programme and the kerosene fridges that were given at inception didn’t work. Now we have no power connected to these health centres. 

Mr Speaker, I think this is a drop in the ocean. I want to support the committee, but also support what my honourable colleague has said. As Parliament, we need to put our foot down. If within 90 days, the Executive does not come up with the extra money required within the health sector, we seize all other business –(Interjections)– yes! If we can accept a private individual to take Shs 169 billion and we are all comfortable here; if we can afford to pay Shs 169 billion in rent, which money can build sufficient structures within the same period – in my opinion, if this money was given to the Justice sector, it would build a tower where all of them can be accommodated –(Member timed out.)

4.30
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative): Mr Speaker, mine is about the statistics that we know. Recently, it was reported by the Ministry of Health that on average – and I found it very difficult to believe, but it was from the Ministry of Health – we lose close to 320 Ugandans per day due to Malaria.

Now, I asked myself; a dose of Malaria is basically Shs 500 – (Interjections)– honourable minister, you can always cross-check. It is so painful that we spend a lot of money on so many unnecessary activities. And when it comes to this very essential sector, we spend hours debating. This should be obvious to all of us. Who doesn’t know that our mothers and sisters give birth in the corridors of Mulago? 

We were in Buhweju recently -  the Anti-corruption Forum - they have only 15 beds. The mattresses were rotting and stinking; and that is the biggest health centre in the district. It was only 100 metres from the district headquarters. The chairman was there and he was speechless; the CAO was there; and somehow they seemed not to be bothered. 

Mr Speaker, there is even a more serious problem. Recently, there was a report that $150 million is –(Member time out.)

4.32
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson for the report, and to invite him to look at his preamble; that, “The committee was tasked by Parliament to go and harmonise the budget figures with Government...” And as far as I remember, on the health sector, Parliament was looking for Shs 260 billion, but we can only find Shs 39.2 billion. 

Chairperson, where is the timetable for finding the balance? Did you harmonise with Government? I would have expected a very clear timetable; unless you are saying that there was no wisdom you found in the parliamentary combination of Shs 260 billion. Otherwise, we would have expected a timetable on how these monies will be found such that it can take care of the lamentations from Members; I have heard of stoves, electricity, generators and so on. So, where is the arrangement? 

Secondly, you  mention in the committee report that this money is going to the Public Service Ministry. But somebody could  correct me; I thought this money is supposed to go to the districts. They are the ones who actually recruit the health workers, and it is the reason why some districts can hardly attract any health workers. Somebody  should correct me on this matter. But as far as I am concerned, the absence of a clear programme of getting this money as advised by Parliament is the problem –(Interruption)

MR ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I seek your guidance. We are debating a very pertinent issue, which is about life. Life does not segregate; when we talk about our life, we are also talking about the life of the people we represent. Mr Speaker, I am pleading for your guidance that the two minutes we are given cannot help us exhaust –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we agreed that we discuss this for one hour, and 45 honourable members stood up. How do we share the time? Please let us not go back there; how do we share the time? 

DR LULUME BAYIGA: Mr Speaker, the point of sharing time is important, but the question of enriching the debate is also very important, especially when people have got submissions, in order to make tangible decisions that matter. But two minutes is too short; they can be revised –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please let us proceed; you have already taken up eight minutes of that time. 

4.36
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The district hospitals I represent have got 20 percent staffing level. Buhweju District has Buhweju Health Centre IV as its highest health institution, but it has no doctor. In Buhweju, we have got a theatre which has been there for about eight years, but it is not operational, and it is not yet fully equipped. 

In Buhweju, when the medical staff go for outreaches, the health centres are totally closed. I think it would be good for us to spare this Shs 39.2 billion. I should thank the committee for doing something very small, but very important. That committee has done very good to show us how we can start and I think the best advice I can give to my government and party is to give out this money for a start and to add more to it. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.37
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this wonderful report and the decision they made; and personally, as Lyndah Timbigamba, I respect the recommendations of the committee. The reasons are, especially on recruitment, it is very true that in the whole country, the staff in the hospitals are very few. For example, I visited my health centre IV in the evening. I found one elderly midwife attending to six expectant mothers. When I tried to ask, “How do you attend to these?” I was told that those giving birth for the first time are helped; but those others who have practiced and have gone through it before help themselves because they already know how to do it. 

It is unfair, Mr Speaker. For this, the committee worked and discussed from their hearts on what was hurting the country at large. Most of the district hospitals, at least the ones I have visited are on the highway. Being on the highway means they receive many different cases, as the honourable member from Iganga just mentioned. 

In that same hospital that I visited, I found one nurse in the evening, who was sleeping with the TB patientsalmost in the same room. That was very dangerous. That is why I recommend to the committee that it should also talk about the structures in the hospitals. As we talk, the buildings are also ramshackled and are about to fall on the patients and employees. 

If I were sitting on that committee and had to speak as a Member of Parliament who has her district and country at heart, I would recommend that even the money we have requested for is little. Thank you so much.

4.40
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have heard the name Katerera. For some of you who do not know the name Katerera, it means where you pour a jerrycan of water on the ground and even a car will not pass. There is a health centre II which was constructed in Munyonyi and it is open. Government spent money on it, but there is no single nurse or doctor. 

When you go to Katerera Health Centre II, which serves as our Mulago, the situation is appalling. Last week, they rang me and told me that there were 40 patients waiting when the nurse – I think she is a senior three or four leaver. She had been around, but she decided to go and dig instead of attending to  the sick people and pregnant mothers. I was about to cry when I was told. So, I thank the budget committee for its recommendations.

Some time back, a loan of about $130 million was passed. It was supposed to pay the nurses and doctors. But when you visit the Public Service, they tell you that each district employs up to 60 percent of the required personnel. But when you go on the ground – in Katerera we have about 0.2 percent as far as employment of doctors is concerned. The situation is not good. You may be wondering why we are losing elections; it is because the services are not there –(Interjections)– that is what the people say. 

So, I think we should go back on the drawing board and provide people with the series as much as possible. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.43
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for this realistic report. And allow me to remind this House that what we are trying to do today by cutting the budget by 30 percent is not new to the Government of Uganda. I remember the same thing was done when we were trying to mobilise money for the war in Northern Uganda. When we got the money from all sectors across the board, the departments never collapsed. 

So, I appeal to my government to pass this recommendation because the situation down there is very bad. Today, we have improved on drug supplies, but there are no people to dispense the drugs. That is why many drugs are being stolen. 

Secondly, when I take the case of Mubende District, where we have a newly constructed referral hospital with very magnificent buildings, but the staff is not there. Even the few staff we have in Mubende Hospital, majority are in acting capacity, including the director, the head of the referral hospital. If you have worked in Public Service, you would know what it means to remain in acting capacity; it demoralises and frustrates those people and service delivery is not there. 

I want to add that when you look at the areas recommended for cutting, I would consider them wasteful expenditure. Look at the fuel budget recommended to be cut – we are providing a lot of money for fuel; that is why people steal money for fuel because they cannot utilise all that money for buying only fuel. When you look at entertainment and welfare –(Member timed out.)
 
MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, this is a very pertinent sector and we are raising issues which the implementing ministry should be taking note of. But we have not heard any explanation or apology on where the ministers are. So, Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that they give us an explanation why the ministers who are supposed to implement our concerns are not in the House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are debating the budget and some re-allocation to go to the health sector. This is expression of the views of the Members about why they want some monies re-allocated. 

4.46
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give a testimony about my experience with the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health and Kayunga Hospital. Last year, I had a very interesting encounter about whether Kayunga Hospital should restore its sewage system and sanitary system. In this hospital, the toilets had been removed and there were no toilets at all. Water was not flowing anywhere; be it in the toilets or even in the operating theatres. 

Having appreciated the condition of this hospital, the permanent secretary eventually said he would avail Shs 100 million to provide the necessary repairs on the sewage systems. He asked us to prepare the bill of quantities through the District Engineer, which amounted to Shs 200 million. 

Those bills of quantities presented pictures of toilets with heaps of faeces in those rooms that used to be toilets and the situation was so appalling. So, this is the condition of the health sector in this country, and I think what we are supplying now is just a drop in the ocean to address the plight of this sector. 

I believe, this financial year, with this provision of Shs 39.2 billion the ministry will be able to provide some minor rehabilitation – at least to provide the sanitary and sewage system –(Member timed out.)

4.49
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): I thank you. I want to draw the attention of the House to the various international protocols that we associate ourselves with and most especially the most recent, Abuja Declaration. Uganda is actually one of the countries that ratified – when budgeting for anything, priority should be given to health, and 15 percent should be the mark for every country in regard to health delivery. 

In Uganda, what is the case? Today, we are still not even half way and when it comes to issues of health service delivery – this is about health and there is no debate about it.

We want to associate ourselves with the population of Uganda yesterday; what was the population of Uganda in the previous financial years? What is the population of Uganda today vis-à-vis the health service delivery? 

This country would rather harmonise issues; and even as I speak now, when the district service commission recruits must submit the list to Public Service Commission for approval, which will take a decade and yet there are no people down there to deliver the services. At the same time, it is the Ministry of Health to supervise these health workers. 

When I am in Ngora, my car is an ambulance; and I can assure you that when you start from Serere, go to Ngora and then to Kumi, you may never get a doctor to attend to a patient, especially a mother with complications - and I speak as a mother of two sons –(Interjections)– I know what the mothers go through –(Member timed out.)

4.50
MS BETTY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubirizi): I thank you. I also stand here to support the Committee on Budget. In fact, I hope that my people in Rubirizi and Katerera in general are very happy because of the Shs 39.2 billion. 

Two weeks ago, I had the chance of going with the Minister for Health to supervise health centres. We started with Rubare and the question was lack of staff. We went to Kitagata and there was one doctor and now they are saying that the doctor has disappeared. By the time we reached Rubirizi in Lugazi Health Centre, there was only one midwife who had been working from morning doing immunisation, attending to mothers and by the time it was 5.00 p.m., the lady was sincerely very tired. She had not taken even water and she was overworked. 

When I hear that more money will be provided to recruit more health workers, it is my joy. I would urge the health committee that this time, it should prioritise according to districts, because there are those districts that have more needs than others. In Rubirizi, for example, our health staffing is almost –(Interjections)- somebody has said 0.2 percent. Out of 146 health workers, we only have 54 and the rest of the work is left in the hands of VHTs. You can imagine a VHT prescribing medicine which he or she does not understand.

With that, I hope that next time, it will be for structures; where sub-counties do not have health centres, they will be equipped. I thank you.   

4.54
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. This time round, I would to thank the Budget Committee for at least realising the plight of health workers unlike last year when they failed to realise the plight of education members. I understand that there is a ceiling on recruitment at 65 percent at district level, and this means that the Ministry of Public Service can comfortably cater for that ceiling. I thought that the Shs 19.5 billion that has been brought up is to step-up that ceiling for those who have not yet reached that ceiling.

What I would like to ask the Minister for Public Service now that he is here; Can he tell us what has been happening to the money that was allocated to make the ceiling of 65 percent? Because most of the districts are complaining that they have less than 65 percent and yet we have a ceiling? I would like the Minister for Public Service to clarify on that so that it can be very clear whether the Shs 19.5 billion is a top-up from the 65 percent or it is still catering for that ceiling. I thank you.
 
4.55
MS PAULA TURYAHIKAYO (NRM, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would want to express my appreciation to the Budget Committee for the recommendations made, and more specifically, for recommending that we get the Shs 39.2 billion to the health sector. 

I am very happy about this because personally, on a weekly basis, I receive like four to five calls from people inviting me to go and attend burial. This means that  one of the reasons as to why people in Rukungiri district are dying so frequently is because they have not been accessing quality health care; and that is why we thank the Budget Committee for being very patriotic with this matter.

I want to ask my government that the Shs 260 billion that we had requested for, please, let it be provided and if we see that they cannot provide the balance of Shs 260 billion, possibly we recommend that the cost-sharing arrangement be re-introduced instead of having our people dying. I thank you.
   
4.56
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Having listened to all the various submissions, this is turning into a matter of national importance. The situation is not different in Buvuma, and it is on that note, that I request and move that we close debate and the matter be decided by a numerical conclusion. I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is still within the discretion of the Speaker whether a question should be put to that motion, and in the discretion of the Speaker, so many Members have been listed to contribute and we have to also listen to the response from the Government and the chairperson before we take a decision on this matter. So, please, let us accommodate some more Members because we had agreed on one hour, but I have only had about 23 Members contributing. We have about seven more; and I will now take the Member from Rukungiri.

4.58
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Runkungiri Municipality): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My problem with the committee report is one; this Parliament tasked the Budget Committee to harmonise the budget figures with those contained in the recommendations of sectoral committee reports, and that is where we have the issue of Shs 260 billion to cater for the activities within the health sector. Now, I want to ask the chairman of the committee, where did you get that letter from Uganda Law Society? Was it from the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee? Where did you get that letter from? 

I think you want to use this letter to divert us from the original plan of Shs 260 billion – I don’t know whether you are getting this point clearly. Where did you get this letter? I am saying this because as Parliament, we tasked you to go and harmonise the budget report and not these letters. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.59
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County East): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the report of the Budget Committee mainly because health matters or services are among the national objectives and one of the key Millennium Development Goals. In Kyankwanzi, we got permission from the Ministry of Public Service to recruit and we recruited. As I talk, we now have 61 health workers. They were deployed in February; they are not yet on the payroll, but they are working. So, I hope that this Shs 39.2 billion will help us to pay off these workers’ deficit of Shs 13 million. And it is not only a concern of Kyankwanzi, it is a concern nationwide. That is why I support the proposal made by the Budget Committee.

On foreign missions, I also support the committee’s recommendation, to enable these missions to acquire their own homes. However, what I am told from different sources is that Ministry of Finance is not interested in building permanent homes for these missions. For instance, in Rwanda, we have land, and we also have land elsewhere. We should, therefore, support this issue of foreign missions having their own homes in foreign countries, and even the ministries here at home. So, nobody should sabotage that mission. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is here and has heard, as Leader of Government Businsess, and all ministries should take note. We are here as change agents –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have the last four contributors, who will include, the Members from Kashari, Moyo, Gulu and one Member from the Karamoja region.

5.02
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for identifying close to Shs 40 billion for our health sector. Given the fact that for this short time, the committee has been able to re-organise for us Shs 40 billion, my request to Government is that they should sit down and look for more money. 

Yes, we are here talking about building more health centres and recruiting more health workers, but there is a problem of retaining those workers in our health units. Many of our good doctors have gone abroad – South Africa, Botswana, England and so on. This is because they are paid better in these countries. Why should we continue training manpower for other countries, yet when some of us fall sick, we look for money in hundreds of millions to go to India for treatment, yet we could have easily retained our professionals. 

Therefore, my warning to Government is that, if they don’t get serious with some of these crucial issues, they are likely to lose out.

And we need to be serious;  Shs 244 million under special meals and drinks, is just 30 percent! One hundred  percent of this would be about Shs 600 million? Shs 244 millions can buy drugs for Mbarara District. What are these special meals? Are they sausages or chapatis?
 
Lastly, I would like to inform you that in my health centre Bwizibwera –(Member timed out.)

5.04
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the recommendations they have given on the health sector, which I support. However, I would like to inform you that this Shs 39.2 billion is only 10 percent of Shs 260 billion, which they had asked for. Therefore, the Executive should not really oppose what the committee has recommended and I am sure they have also been trying their best to look around for cash. If they have realised some cash somewhere, I beg that that it be added onto this Shs 39.2 billion so that a higher percentage is realised.

We have very large numbers of nurses and midwives concentrated in referral hospitals and the centre, leaving the districts with none. That is why we are experiencing very high mortality rates. Therefore, their second recommendation that this money be used to recruit health workers at the district - the nurses and midwives - should be highly supported. 

Recently in August, with the arrangement of UWOPA and Ministry of Health officials, I went on a monitoring exercise. What we found on the ground is that reproductive health services and family planning service are really lacking. And this is one of the reasons why I support this recommendation. I would, therefore, like to appeal to the Executive to go ahead and identify more areas –(Member timed out.)

5.06
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the first place, in the Eighth Parliament, women in this Parliament had to threaten to block all the loan requests coming to this House if reproductive health issues were not going to be prioritised. Again this time round, the women had to come out to complain about the same issues. So, why should we always have to threaten when it comes to issues of health when this should be priority number one? Without health, you know that even education can be no more. The economy we talk about will be no more. Health should be number one.

The Ministry of Finance should spare us – we have this Abuja Declaration which should always be our driving force. However, it looks like we are not moving forward. We should be moving towards 15 percent of the national budget going to the health sector. When we do that, then definitely, reproductive health will also be improved. 

Now, we are all accepting that Shs 39.2 billion be re-allocated to the health sector, but we have a shortfall of Shs 228.8 billion. So, it is all up to us and the Ministry of Health to see how we can play around with the resources of this country. Sometimes we even give to those who don’t deserve to be given and we don’t prioritise health. This is very unfortunate. The Ministry of Finance should ensure that -(Member timed out.)

5.08
MS JULIANA AUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I am going to speak on behalf of the region. I would like to thank the Budget Committee, especially, for finding the Shs 39.2 billion to support the health sector. The health status of this country is more or less dead. We are either burying it or asking for a chance so that we can put it in ICU (Intensive Care Unit). By re-allocating this money to the health sector, I believe that we are trying our best to do something for the nation. I am just giving brief information.  

Last week, we were in Karamoja  - a delegation of Members of Parliament supported by UWOPA and the Ministry of Health, but the condition there is very pathetic. We all know how health services are being delivered in our respective districts. Let me give an example of Abim District, where the ratio of doctors to patients is 1:98,000. Just tell me how an emergency case can be rescued.  

Moroto, which is a Regional Referral Hospital, has only two doctors and the two are serving both the district hospital and the regional hospital. I am appealing to you, honourable members, to support the recommendations of the committee and where possible, if there is another budget, let there be another supplementary for the health sector besides -(Member timed out.) 

5.11
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, People with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I wish to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for this report. The population of a country is the strongest human resource. You don’t expect that a country can prosper if its population is not healthy. Therefore, we applaud the committee for identifying the Shs 39.2 billion, which much as we know is not enough, is a good beginning. 

I also wish to thank Government for laying the infrastructure, particularly in the initiation of construction of the different health centres that are all over the country. But it is not viable to have health centres II, III and IV when they are understaffed, not facilitated and lack equipment, and of course, the staff that we have are not motivated to work. It is, therefore, imperative on the part of the Executive to ensure that this infrastructure is well equipped and the staff is provided to ensure that our people can access health services. 
Honourable members, we need to also look at the status of the referral hospitals which we have in the country. We ought to ensure that there are minimal requirements that must be in these referral hospitals because time and again, you find that a referral hospital lacks even a scan -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are really getting time barred, but let me have  a few more Members. 

5.14
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Uganda, unfortunately, is very accommodative. We are about to call it a free zone for strangers. As they come in, they come with strange diseases like the one I saw in the newspapers today. These people are given chance to come in without any serious medical check-ups. So, we need to do a lot of research, but what can we do when we don’t have doctors? We are being unfair to our people if we deny them health services. 

Pity MPs from areas like mine. We have now resorted to buying ambulances; facilities are not there; hospitals are nowhere within our areas. So, we need to allocate some good amount of money to the health sector. 

In Kassanda, you can hardly see a health centre. Imagine a whole sub-county has no health centre and if it has at all, there are no facilities. So, I am of the opinion that the government should either buy more ambulances for the rural people who die without help; or come in and build as many hospitals, especially referral hospitals, which are a necessity.  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.16
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is one point that everyone has supported and I believe that even the Leader of Government Business will concede and support this cause. The issue of health – you cannot talk about wealth without health. 

The people of West Budama South and indeed the people of Tororo as a whole, seek to be healthy. I would like to thank the Committee on Budget for identifying the Shs 39.2 billion. I would request that we all support, including the government – the Executive - this cause. 

Some honourable Members here went to Mulanda Hospital. You saw what I have been talking about. You find a health centre which is sick; what do you do? (Laughter) You see, we cannot pretend about this. If you are in a home and you don’t have money for medical treatment, just sign for a death warrant. If this Government can come and say, “We cannot give this money,” or “This money is not there,” then we close up the shops. (Hon. Baryayanga rose_) You want to give me information in these two minutes? Okay.  (Laughter)

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give is what I have just received on my phone from Kabale is that the staff of Kabale Referral Hospital have just adjourned their meeting in which they have decided to lay down their tools because they have not received their salaries for August 2012. So, they are also in the Intensive Care Unit. They have said that they won’t work on Wednesday. 

5.18
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. Yesterday we lost a seat to the Opposition in Butambala District. This was because of poor service delivery in hospitals and health units. Even in Gombe Hospital, there is a polling station within the staff quarters and they have about 200 staff, but we got 10 per cent of the votes and the 90 per cent were given to our opponents.

The staffing question is a question of life. Districts may wish to recruit but there is always the ban, which limits them from recruiting. The Ministry of Public Service sets staff structures for such institutions but when they wish to recruit, they are not allowed. Doctors are not in the districts, in our communities, at health centre IVs and hospitals. Adverts are always put in the newspapers but nobody applies and if they do, they withdraw their applications. 

So, I think that doctors should be recruited at the centre and then they are posted to the relevant districts and health units such that even our districts, which are rural, can have access to doctors and- (Member timed out_)

5.21
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to support my good friend, hon. Tim Lwanga, and his committee for the good report this time round while withstanding the pressure from the incessant and powerful Mukiga, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister – (Laughter) - who even insisted that he wanted to change the figures on the Floor of the House. I have been passing by and he is reconsidering his position. 

Women of this country and our health centres need to be supported. My people in Kagadi were affected by Ebola. They found it much better to go to the isolation tent than to the hospital which had been constructed by the late Milton Obote. I am happy that we are now putting aside some money to at least do something for this hospital.

I also want to ask the Minister of Finance to urgently address the issue of judges. Everyday of their lives, judges are in their chambers reading cases, internalising judgements and they never have time to kuba kyeyo. Because of the poor pay they get, this consequently sometimes puts them in a compromising situation and – (Member timed out)

5.23
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to begin on a sad note. In the recently concluded massive immunisation campaign, we lost a two-year old child at the national referral hospital, Mulago. As the chairperson of the Immunisation Forum, when I went to find out what had happened, we discovered that in the process of treatment, that child was handled by an untrained nurse and she did not manage the immunisation well and that is why we lost that child. Therefore, I am of the strong view that we support the committee so that we recruit well trained nurses, midwives and doctors to help the citizens of this country.

On that note, I want to warn the Public Service Commission, which is so adamant; even when there are some districts which are willing to recruit they say “no, we cannot”. We have lost health workers but they do not even want to fill the vacant positions because of the ban on recruitment. Now that we have the Shs 39 billion plus - they have been saying they will not allow the recruitment because they do not have the money - I think that will do something better. We can begin by refilling the places where we have lost health workers and then we shall add on that when we have more money.

Lastly, I want to recommend that recruitment should be centralised so that when these people are recruited, the Ministry of Health is able to deploy them to work anywhere. (Member timed out)

5.26
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, allow me to take the pleasure to invite you to think about a district without any medical doctor in any of the health facilities, where the nearest doctor can be found 130 kilometres away, a district that has failed to attract a medical officer in spite of the modalities put in place to retain them, you will agree with me that, that district is Amolatar District. Because of these factors, the provision of quality health care services in Amolatar District has been greatly affected. 

The committee has recommended an allocation of Shs 19.5 billion to recruit extra healthcare workers. This represents a third of what the health sector needed because initially, they needed Shs 61 billion to recruit staff. The extra healthcare workers will be recruited by 1 January 2013 in all districts, but in what proportion? We have heard here that in some of the areas where we have inaccessibility, there is quite a big challenge. There are areas that are difficult to stay in, and one of those areas is Amolatar. So, when we are thinking about recruiting and deploying, I think such areas should be given priority.

As we embark on recruitment of health workers, I think other fundamental concerns that should be addressed are issues of absenteeism and quality handling of patients. These have been common factors that are affecting the provision of health services. (Member timed out)

5.28
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to thank the committee for the good report and to thank them for the re-allocation of Shs 39.2 billion. However, I urge Government to see to it that the budget of health is increased on an annual basis so as to be in line with the Abuja Declaration, to which we are party. We would also be in line with Government’s priorities as we know them and as read to us in the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech.

Mitooma Health Centre IV has no doctor, no mattresses and no ambulance. There is a health centre II in Kanyabwanga Sub County, which has been closed for the last four years since it was constructed because of lack of personnel. A lot has been said on these issues and so I just wanted to record the Mitooma experience.

I would like to support the position of the Committee on the Budget on raising the remuneration of judges and having the salary review commission in place to harmonise the salary structure in public services. I also support the position of Government building its own homes rather than wasting money on rent. Thank you. 

5.29
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I salute the committee for the good report and thank the members for wholeheartedly supporting this motion. The key commitment that Government made to the people of Uganda was to improve service delivery. It is in this spirit that I want to appeal to Government to heed to the concerns of the members. This is what will enhance the popularity of our Government.

Mr Speaker, less than three months ago, we approved the supplementary budget in this House – I think it was worth Shs 130.8 billion. The source was compression of votes of other sectors. What we are doing here today is not new; that is why I am appealing to Government that the same way we compressed other votes, we should do it now and help the health sector. 

I have no regrets in appealing to my bosses on the front bench that we are not fighting Government so for heaven’s sake, I do not wish to see anybody humbly opposing the Shs 39.2 billion. We should have asked for more money but for now, thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should draw this to a close but there are members who have been persistently standing up. I will start with the member for Samia-Bugwe South and then the member for Busongora South.

5.31
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also want to add my voice to those of other members to thank the committee for this wonderful report. I would like to bring it to the attention of the House that the Shs 39 billion that the committee has identified is a good gesture and we should all support them. 

Whatever the committee has come up with as recommendations is in one way trying to relieve pressure from MPs. Whenever we visit a hospital or health centre, the people within that area will only ask you about the services being offered. That makes an MP appear as though they are not working. At the end of the day, we are even getting into pledging and providing for some of the facilities that Government should have done. Members are now buying beds, mattresses, nets and other items that are supposed to be the government’s responsibility. I know this money is there; we only need Government’s gesture to come and appreciate it.

In the April report from the Ministry of Health, Shs 380 billion was reported as money being spent on treatment of Government officials abroad. Assuming we just cut that figure by half, the Shs 150 billion would automatically be available for the sector and we would not be here haggling over it. Recently, there was a judge – a friend of mine– who went for treatment to Nairobi. The machine they were using to aid his treatment can be purchased at only Shs 80 million! (Member timed out)

5.33
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me join my colleagues in thanking the committee for reviewing the budget projection and coming up with Shs 39 billion, which will be appropriated to the health sector. 

In my district, I have been fighting with the district health officer. Sixty per cent of the health centres II in my constituency are not operating. Most of them are actually closed, for example Katunguru Health Centre II, Kasenyi Health Centre II, and Kahendero Health Centre II. When I asked him the reason for that, he said the district had an insufficient number of personnel. I have also discovered that this is a very big problem affecting the whole country, according to the members’ submissions.

Mr Speaker, according to the statement from the Committee on the Budget, we need Shs 33 billion for staff recruitment. The committee has done its work – (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finally, I think we will allow a mother to conclude this debate. Let us have the Member for Kabarole. 

5.36
MRS VICTORIA BUSINGE-RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, my other big name is Maama wa Baana, meaning “mother of all the children”. I thank the committee for focusing on the most important area in this country, that is, health, and more so for focusing on human resource and enhancing health centres II, III and IV. 

I will refer my concern and appreciation to what we are experiencing in our referral hospital in Kabarole. The hospital would be doing much better if the lower health centres were equipped and staffed. All the same, despite the Shs 39 billion, there is a lot lacking and it is my prayer today that a lot must be done to go back, mobilise other votes, and especially get deductions from the perishables. 

In this country, the calamity and condemnation we face is all about life. So if we do not come out strongly to increase the health budget, we will continue being victimised, especially we, Members of Parliament, where the failure of service delivery bounces back to us. I am sure some of my colleagues are victims of these poor health services. Therefore, in conclusion, we have to do a lot to revive seriously but very considerately – (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Honourable members, we had agreed that at the end of our discussion, we would allow the Executive to make some responses. However, may I say that the House has spoken and the Executive should be able to respond in accordance with the spirit of the debate. (Applause)

5.39
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I stand to make a very clear statement on behalf of the Executive that we support this report. (Laughter)

As I was beginning to say earlier on, we support the report and we agree with the reasons that each of you who have spoken gave about the state of the health centres in our constituencies and in the country as a whole. Indeed, because Government is conscious of that problem, we announced long time ago that we had stopped construction of health centres infrastructure units, like health centres II, until we have managed to raise enough staff and enough drugs for these health centres to perform the functions for which we are setting them up. So, what you are saying, honourable colleagues, is entirely in line with Government thinking with the pronouncement of policy by this Government. We are not in disagreement at all.

Mr Speaker, we only had one point, which concerns detail. What the committee is proposing in its report, which is reflected in this appendix -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the report of the committee, the matrix attachment.

MR MBABAZI: Yes. If you look at this attachment, the first item on that list is vote 004. I want to remind colleagues that this is Ministry of Defence. When you look at the last column, totals, it is Shs 15,157,377,739. So, of the Shs 39 billion, Shs 15,157, 377,739 is from Ministry of Defence. It is mainly from travel, staff training, printing stationery, welfare, fuel, and oil lubricants and maintenance of vehicles. 

Colleagues, I want you to give a moment to what this means for the security of this country - (Interjections) - I speak with authority, hon. Oguttu. I have absolute authority on this because I have been in it, as you know. Is this a reasonable proposition? - (Interjections) - Please, hon. Tinkasiimire, I think you really ought to listen to me on the account of my credentials on defence. We think this would undermine and prejudice the defence of this country.

The next one is vote 102, and may I inform you that this is the Electoral Commission of Dr Kiggundu. Mr Speaker, I know you will make a ruling on this, but let me make a comment before you make that ruling. The Electoral Commission is a statutory body and it will not be within the law for us to cut their budget. You know how we handle them. If we did that, it would be an act of illegality. 

The next vote I want to refer to is vote 143, which is Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS). Uganda Bureau of Statistics is also required to make statutory reports, and they gather information countrywide by moving to different parts of the country. By cutting their budget by Shs 3 billion, we are curtailing that body in doing its statutory duty.

When hon. Yaguma spoke, he spoke very well, like the others, and he made the point that when you look at the proposed areas to cut - he mentioned one like special meals and drinks - instead of cutting by 30 per cent, we should cut by 100 per cent. On the surface, it sounds a logical and rational argument, but let us ask ourselves, “what are these special meals?” These are actually meals provided in hospitals and places like that- (Interjections) - I do not know what they are. 

The next biggest cut, which is vote 103, if you go back to the appendix, is actually Ministry of Education and Sports where the committee is proposing to cut Shs 1 billion. The simple point I rise to make is that these areas, which add up to Shs 24 billion of the Shs 39 billion, are critical areas of state functioning. 

Now, I said we support the report and we agree with what everyone else is saying. What the Executive pledges to do is let us go back and instead of making cuts where our national security may be prejudiced, let us look elsewhere. Let us look even at these special meals. If the special meals are not hospital meals for patients, then let us cut 100 per cent instead of 30 per cent as hon. Yaguma is saying. So, all I am saying-(Mr Yaguma rose_) - Hon. Yaguma, I am saying that we are open to all that information. Let us go and look at all the sectors and see whether, actually, we cannot raise money without crippling the state, without prejudicing the security of the country. That is my first point. (Ms Aol rose_) Mr Speaker, when you are faced with a mugole, what do you do? (Laughter)

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, the honourable Prime Minister raised issues on areas which are very important to the country, but he originally wanted to give us a report, something which he did not also circulate to us. I would think that the report would contain his alternative thinking, that if you are so hard on defence then you have a proposal on where to cut. You cannot just come and again tell us that we go back. Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister give us clarification on where to get the Shs 39.2 billion if he is hard on defence, education, the Electoral Commission and he is also hard on Uganda Bureau of Statistics? Can he really clarify on that and give us alternatives where to cut? 

I am very sure that the committee searched and found areas which were possible to cut from. We are not underrating or undermining defence - we know the importance of defence - but not everything in defence is more important than health. We know that in order for defence to operate, health must be taken seriously. So, can the Prime Minister really give us that area of clarification? It looks like the alternative report, which he was trying to give us, is completely shallow because it does not give us alternative areas to cut from? Which areas can we cut from so that we can compare notes? We need to compare notes. Thank you.

MR YAGUMA: Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give our Rt Hon. Prime Minister as far as this document is concerned is that the special meals and drinks are not for hospitals. Look at the fourth last column - There are several votes but I would imagine we have one vote for Ministry of Health; even if there were to be regional referral hospitals, this is not the case. These are votes for special meals in ministries, including the Prime Minister’s Office.

Secondly, vote 004 is Ministry of Defence. From the explanation, and since the names of the votes are not in this document, I would request the Prime Minister as the Leader of Government Business to provide the alternative equivalent to Shs 15 billion. When you look at the budget right from the President’s Office downwards, from workshops and trainings you cannot fail to get Shs 15.1 billion. For your information, you represent the people of Kanungu, the health situation is not any better. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I would like to seek further clarification. Of course, the point has been made that if you are uncomfortable with cutting Shs 15 billion from Defence, maybe you would have made a proposal of where this money can be cut from. If you look at inland travel, for example, State House is allocated Shs 11 billion and you know of course the President presides over very serious functions, but sometimes you have also to attend weddings and parties. Maybe you can request that this year, because we want to deal with serious matters, the President cuts down on the weddings and parties that he attends. 

Also, if you look at the policy statement from State House and the Office of the President, we now have more than 115 presidential assistants. We also have presidential advisors more or less of the same number, including those who will never see the President. If Members of Parliament are lamenting that there are no doctors in hospital, maybe the President can drop some of the advisers, like those who advise him on veterans, and then we deal with health which is a matter of life and death. If the envelope, as you keep promising, becomes bigger, then we can bring in more presidential assistants on this and that. 

Finally, when you now say maybe we go back, I do not know if I understood you correctly that you are now actually suggesting that you want to go back and look at those proposals.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for giving way. He seems to be suggesting that he needs more time to go back. I thought when you directed the Committee on the Budget to go and harmonise with the Executive, this is the work that has been going on. My understanding is that the Prime Minister and his team have done their best. 

I just wanted to seek clarification from him; don’t you think now is the time for you to leave Parliament to help you come with the final figures through the process of supply instead of consuming more time? Today is 13th September, we should have passed this budget long time ago but you seem to want to take more time by saying that we go back. Don’t you think you should leave Parliament to help you come up with the last figures to supply? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, first of all, I thank all those who stood either on a point of clarification or information because they have made my point much better than I would ever have made it. Precisely that is the point I am making. These are the issues. 

Let me tell you that these matters came up in Cabinet. I want to answer hon. Baryomunsi who is my neighbour and my young brother and who is paralegal. We received these figures yesterday in Cabinet and then we came here and informed the House. We were given time to go and discuss. When I tried to speak earlier on, I wanted to report that yes, we had met but we had not concluded on these issues which I am raising now. 

Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda thinks everything must be politicised. Hon. Nganda, do not politicise the lives of our people. At least on this, we must be united. We are talking about the lives of Ugandans irrespective of their political affiliation by all means. So, we must all be united when we are talking about raising funds for a common purpose. We have said, and I want to repeat this because I said it earlier not once, not twice but many times, that we are very conscious of the state of our healthcare. We support what is in this report and we are determined to find a solution. We are simply asking you, colleagues, let us work together to achieve this because we are not in disagreement. 

What the mugole - honourable America Online - had proposed, what hon. Aol had proposed, is precisely what I am asking you for, in light of the issues and the points I have made about the dangers of taking up these proposals. We are not opposing the proposal that we find money but we are saying these proposals are dangerous for the reasons I have given. We are asking for time to go back, look through these and liaise with the committee again. I do not know how much time we will have, Mr Speaker, to come back. If you want us to come back tomorrow, no problem but we will come back and have a harmonised position. 

My last point – (Mr Ssekikubo rose_) - if honourable Lwemiyaga does not stop me from speaking, which he is attempting to do - is that on this point – (Mr Tinkasiimire rose_) - we are on the same page with hon. Aja, we are on the same page with hon. Tinkasiimire; I do not need any information on that because I know we are together. Hon. Ssekikubo, on this one we are on the same page. 

What we must do is not to take a decision whose consequences are obvious, which I am pointing out to this House. They prejudice the security of this country and one of them is clearly illegal - it would be an illegal act. Obviously, when you look at the Office of the Prime Minister - hon. Yaguma was talking about the Office of the Prime Minister - I do not see it. If it is listed as one of the areas where there are special foods, I am not aware of them. So, I thank you very much. I would like to ask for more time so that we go for those reasons to consider this.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, with a deep heart I raise a procedural question. This is an honourable House and the honourable House has to proceed with decorum and within the legal framework, that is, avoid doing illegal things. Mr Speaker, you are chairing and none other than the Leader of Government Business is insinuating that this legally constituted House is proceeding on illegalities. 

Before I raise the procedural question, we are here putting our heads together, the time to pass the budget is overdue and I had reserved my comments. However, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister was lamenting about cutting the defence budget. As we all know, the country is now peaceful and most of this is geared towards pacification of other countries, yet you know that charity must begin at home. Are we demanding too much if we say, “let us take a small portion to save our own people, our own mothers, our own children, our own fellow Ugandans who may not be fortunate enough to be flown to South Africa or taken to these modern health centres”? 

From a procedural point of view, is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister right to pour scorn on this House and even insinuate that we are proceeding with illegalities when he is seated in the House, Government is well-represented, the chair is occupied by none other than the Rt Hon. Speaker and indeed, we have come to the end of this debate in a clear and a procedural way? Is the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister procedurally right to insinuate that we are proceeding with illegalities by not considering the plight of the very people of the government he is serving as the Leader of Government Business? Is he procedurally right? 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of order. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister continued several times saying that we are proceeding on illegality because we are touching the budget of the Electoral Commission. That matter came up to the committee and we looked at all laws and there was no legal provision whatsoever, which prevented Parliament at this stage from handling budgets of even commissions. 

We looked at it because before the President – I think he is referring to a provision which provides that the President can comment - when it comes to this stage of supply, we have the right. There is no legal provision. We tasked the lawyer because he came to the committee and actually, there was no law to this matter.

The second point was on defence. When you look at Ministry of Defence, the total recurrent budget for defence is Shs 555 billion and non-wage is Shs 230 billion. The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister made a statement that by removing Shs 15 billion we are compromising the defence of this nation. However, if we came here we can show evidence that out of that Shs 230 billion there are a lot of activities which are actually not necessary for the security of this country.

So, is the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister in order to make those statements without substantiating when clearly all the statements he is making are not supported by any law? They are not even supported by any fact in terms of the defence budget. Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the issue is related. Let me deal with the point of order and then I will deal with the procedural point. The question we need to confirm first is: is the Electoral Communication budget a statutory budget or is the budget for UBOS a statutory budget? If so, possibly people did not find the law but the procedure of Parliaments, including this Parliament, is that recommendations that come from statutory bodies are sent to the President and the President can only comment but he cannot reduce. 

In the practice of this House, we have never voted on statutory votes, in my recollection. The figures presented come and go the way they were presented. When it comes to voting on supply, they are supplied the way they are proposed. I have a form which we always use for supply and those statutory matters are always automatically appropriated by law. 

So, to suggest that this House can change statutory proposals here – maybe I would need the advice of the Attorney-General - it would not be correct in terms of Parliamentary procedure for statutory expenditures to be changed in this manner. I do not know which laws the honourable members looked at, but in terms of Parliamentary procedure and practice in public finance, that is the protection given to statutory organs. 

Honourable members, there is agreement that this money has got to be found, and there is agreement that the figure is Shs 39.2 billion. What we should be asking from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is, if this money cannot be found in the statutory expenditure, cannot  be found in defence and cannot be found in the Electoral Commission, where is it going to be found and how is it going to be found. 

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to you carefully and I have listened to the Prime Minister. What we are interested in is the money. If they can go and find the money, we can give them the three days. I hope everybody agrees with that. 

However, when we start disagreeing on what is statutory and what is not, the laws are very clear on that. So, since the Prime Minister has given his word here that he agrees with everything that we are asking for, I do not see any reason why we should not allow him to go and confirm, first of all, that we are not charging statutory bodies. Secondly, he finds the money elsewhere within his budget and then he gives us the money for the health sector. That is all we are interested in.

So, I would like to suggest that we allow the Prime Minister - he said that he wanted one day, but I think we should give him up to Monday. I know what it involves getting these figures sorted out; it took us three days but he has got a bigger force and it might take him two days, but tomorrow is Friday. At your discretion, we may meet again on Tuesday and he may come back with the figures so that we can supply after knowing that we have the Shs 39.2 billion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we agree on what the committee has proposed - and these matters have been pointed out to us –(Interjections)- The Speaker is speaking, honourable members. We do not need to pass something that can be challenged. When we go into supply, all the figures must be harmonised so that we just pronounce ourselves on the figures. 

Now that there are issues that have been raised – I am not so sure of the security thing but the issue of the statutory expenditure that has been raised is a legal matter - should I, as Speaker presiding over this, allow a vote on a matter that I personally do not believe is entirely legal? Would it be fair to me? I am not a very bad lawyer at that.

So, honourable members, I think it is only fair that we allow this process to continue so that there is no backing down on the issue of the Shs 39.2 billion that has been agreed upon, to which even the Prime Minister has agreed. The question is how and where it is going to be found. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, this matter coming up needed clarification, and particularly from you. I am proceeding from Article 156 of the Constitution regarding the Appropriation Bill: 
“(1) The heads of expenditure contained in the estimates, other than expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund by this Constitution or any Act of Parliament, shall be included in a Bill to be known as an Appropriation Bill which shall be introduced into Parliament to provide for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums for the purposes specified in the Bill.

(2) If in respect of any financial year it is found –  

(a) that the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; or

(b) that any monies have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount...” 

My understanding of this is that it is from the Executive that such votes are not touched. However, as it comes to Parliament, Parliament has the right to vary and appropriate for purposes of supply. This is what I wanted you to put on the record of this House. It is only under the Executive that hands are tied but when it comes to Parliament, Parliament has all the rights to vary figures during appropriation. For us to just fall back without getting clarification on that  is setting a precedent that we may soon fall on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, this House does not take a decision on statutory expenditure, it does not matter what law you read. It does not take a decision on statutory expenditure; by law, it does not.  Parliament does not vote on statutory expenditure. 

Please, let us listen. On the issue of appropriation, appropriation is a process that happens after supply but we are not appropriating anything now. That is why by the time we get to appropriation, this matter has got to be resolved. By the time we go to supply, these matters have got to be resolved. 

When we supply here, it is only up to after we supply that an Appropriation Bill is published. As we talk now, there is no Appropriation Bill and the reason is simple. You are already going to the Appropriation Bill, which is not yet there because the Appropriation Bill is published on the basis of figures we have supplied in the House. So we are not yet in appropriation. Honourable members, are we together? 

On the issue of whether you can deal with and vote or take a decision on what has been classified as “statutory expenditure”, I am definite that that is not possible. I once chaired a committee and I presented budgets here and I know on what you can make recommendations about changing and what you cannot. So, let us go as honourable members knowing that there are such things as “statutory expenditure” and such things as “others”, which we can deal with and make changes to. Does the learned Attorney-General want to assist us on this? 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I agree with you and I am sure that every lawyer here will agree. It is actually straightforward knowledge. If you want, you can look at the relevant provisions of the Constitution, although to me that is not even as pertinent or fundamental because that provision is straight and we shall quote it. 

I was happy when the honourable member from Kyankwanzi was citing Article 155 (4) on the powers of Parliament. However, no one even wants to look at Article 93 and I do not know why, maybe it is deliberate. Let me tell you, the substance of Article 93 is clear in the sense that when a Bill or motion which provides for the imposition of taxation or alteration of taxation is introduced on behalf of Government, Parliament may reduce or increase the taxation in the Bill or motion. But if the Bill or motion is not introduced on behalf of Government, Parliament can only reduce the taxation in the Bill or motion. 

Similarly, under the same article, paragraph (a) (ii), when a Bill or motion which provides for a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge is introduced on behalf of Government, Parliament may reduce or increase the charge on such fund. But if the Bill or motion is not introduced on behalf of Government, Parliament can only reduce the charge on such fund. 

Mr Speaker, I thought that the way you were guiding this debate and allowing the Leader of Government Business to come in was to ensure that there is harmony between the Executive and Parliament. Without that harmony, we cannot proceed and we shall have legal technicalities and yet we would not want an impasse in this House. There is no way Parliament can, on its own, vary and alter taxes, impose charges – (Interjections) - on the Consolidated Fund without agreement of Government. That is the law.  

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the Leader of Government Business has requested for two days to go and identify areas where we can get the Shs 39.2 billion. The point of procedure that I am raising is that, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we dispose of that matter - whether we allow him or not - and then we continue to determine whether we have powers to vary or not to vary? As you had guided earlier, the time of varying had not started. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If such a vote should say that we proceed and make a decision and we do not give the Prime Minister time to debate, then what will be the purpose of our debate on whether we have authority to proceed to the next phase when issues have been raised about legal matters? Issues have been raised on legal matters; I can put the question and we say that we are not going to defer and I put the question and we take a decision. 

If we take the decision that the report of the committee be adopted - Personally as Speaker, I have already raised my own concerns about issues of statutory expenditure, which have been pointed out in the presence of the chair. I really do not know the details of what is in the figures but the issue is that they have raised the issue of a statutory matter - a statutory budget proposed to be reduced by this House. I find a legal difficulty to proceed to conclude it.
   
DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you very much. The Attorney-General has made reference to Article 93 of the Constitution. I just wanted your guidance in terms of understanding what the provision is, because it says, “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the Government- 
(a) proceed upon a bill, including an amendment bill, that makes provision for any of the following –

(ii) the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction.” 

My understanding is that if you are reducing the money on a statutory charge, then it is okay for Parliament to proceed. If I understood what the budget committee is proposing, it is saying that the votes that the Prime Minister is referring to, like UBOS and others, were reducing their amount and therefore it is allowable within the limits of Article 93 of the Constitution. I think that helps to understand the legal hurdles that are being raised. Since the proposal is to reduce the allocations of those statutory charges, then it complies with Article 93. We are not increasing or imposing a new tax. 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not a lawyer but in my wisdom as a Member of Parliament, I take oath under this Constitution and it means that I must read and understand it. I am not a lawyer but I do read between lines. My understanding is that any law must be consistent with the Constitution. As a Member of Parliament, when I hold this Constitution, it is clean in my understanding. 

I want to refer you to Article 155 (4) and then request for clarification. With due respect to my Attorney-General, it reads as follows: “At any time before Parliament considers the estimates  of revenues and expenditure laid before it by or on the authority of the President, an appropriate committee of Parliament may discuss and review the estimates and make appropriate recommendations to Parliament.” 

Mr Speaker, the Committee on the Budget looked at this provision because its hands had been tied at one time,  and we were talking about statutory budgets. Take vote 102, the Electoral Commission, where we have travel abroad costing more than Shs 100 billion, our wisdom was – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me; did you say travel abroad for the Electoral Commission is more than Shs 100 billion?

MS ANNE NANKABIRWA: Is it in millions? Even if it is –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, for the record, that is important.

MS ANNE NANKABIRWA: I can provide the record. Okay, under vote 102 it is Shs 106 million and not billions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not billions, certainly. Okay, thank you.

MS ANNE NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, as I was saying, in the wisdom of this Article of the Constitution, our understanding is that we cannot increase or reduce on the budget of a statutory body after Parliament has appropriated that money. So, if at this time while we are still considering the estimates we cannot look at statutory bodies, it means even the Budget Act’s mandate given to it by this Parliament will be null and void

However, remember that this Parliament is empowered. I want to call upon honourable colleagues - We raised this in the budget committee meetings and we challenged all the concerned to produce the law that protects these ring-fenced votes. In any case, why is it that these so-called ring-fenced votes get their fences broken when they are looking for supplementary budgets? When we want money for the health sector, you begin to say those fences cannot be opened. Many of these votes we are talking about, even in the last financial year, got less releases than we had appropriated; what happened? Were the fences broken?

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification. As a young Member of Parliament, I need to be guided and to be assured that I am not reading between lines but that I am reading the Constitution of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a procedural point; can I first respond to it? There is a big difference, and I tried to make that clear, but maybe let me explain it again. There is a big difference between a statutory body and a statutory budget. What I have been labouring to deal with here is a statutory budget. There is a big difference because – (Laughter) – No, honourable members, listen and I am very careful about the words I use and I choose them very deliberately. That is why I said I do not know the details. 

Do the details recommended in here deal with statutory budgets or not? There might be aspects that are statutory and those that do not qualify to be statutory budgets but from the same institution. You need to understand this. When I said it, some honourable members thought I am just creating something. No, that is not true. 

Even non statutory institutions can have statutory budgets – (Interjections) - Yes! Those are budgets that are protected by law and do not require appropriation. That is the definition of a statutory budget - it does not require appropriation by Parliament. But we have statutory institutions with budgets that can be varied. Even then, there are components of those budgets that are statutory and they are called statutory budgets. Those ones cannot be voted upon by Parliament. 

Let me give an example. Hon. Jacan Omach, do you want to give information on this? Okay. Let us look at Article 158; that is a statutory budget. Wherever it appears in any institution, it is a statutory budget – (Interjections) - Precisely! I am just giving you aspects of statutory budgets. 

Honourable members, let me finish what I am explaining. Look at rule 143 (2) of the Rules of Procedure: “When the House is in the Committee of Supply to consider annual or supplementary estimates- (a) any Member may move to reduce the amount of the vote of the estimates, and such motion shall take the form that ‘I beg to move that the sum of Shs 10,000 be reduced in respect to vote...” 

Budgets are taken care of through votes. In the Commonwealth, the practice of reduction – (Interjections) - honourable members, I wish you could listen – is to express displeasure with the Government and it is symbolic. In the House of Commons, for example, they can move a motion to reduce a particular vote by one pound. So, the concept of moving a motion for reduction is symbolic to just show displeasure about something. 

When we leave here, just go and look at how the House of Commons proceeds on this issue of reductions. It is just to show displeasure, and it means big business for them. That is why in the rules we have even talked about Shs 10,000. It is symbolic to say that members are very dissatisfied with the performance of some sector, so they express their displeasure by reducing some vote by one pound but not by one million pounds. That is because by reducing that vote by that figure, they will have exceeded the extent of the displeasure they want to express. They will now be performing a budgetary function.

In public finance, if my recollection is right, the President proposes – there is something called the principle of financial initiative – (Interjection) - Please, let me say this. There is the doctrine or principle of financial initiative where all budgets are a responsibility of the President, which is sometimes exercised through his ministers. So, it is the responsibility of the Executive to propose. As Parliament, you cannot initiate or you cannot inherit the principle of financial initiative by acting as if you are the ones initiating the proposal. What you can do is to dispose. In fact, the popular phrase is, “the Executive proposes, Parliament disposes.” That is how it is done. 

The guidance I am trying to give this House is that, even in Article 93 that some honourable member proposed, those variations should be in concurrence so that there is harmony. That is the only point I am making here. We have already agreed, for example, that the Shs 39.2 billion has got to be found. The question is: who is going to propose that the Shs 39 billion be moved from here to there? That proposal has got to be in concurrence. That is what we are asking the Prime Minister to do, so that they own this and it comes with the Shs 39 billion incorporated and then we can adjust the budget accordingly. 

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a point of procedure under rule 68 of our Rules of Procedure, which reads, “The Speaker shall not take part in any debate before the House, but may give guidance to the House on any matter before it.” (Laughter) Before I sit down, I would like to be guided on what was returned to the coffers in the budget of financial year 2011/2012. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you correctly pointed that out. The Speaker cannot participate in a debate, and I am sure we understand what a debate is, but the Speaker can guide. I am responding to the procedural issue he raised. 

DR BAYIGGA: Rt Hon. Speaker, the chairman of the Committee on the Budget had made a concrete proposal, which was in line with what the Prime Minister had suggested, that they just needed some time to scrutinise figures and see where they can get the Shs 39.2 billion. I think that was agreed upon. 

This Parliament has made a concrete proposal to have this money to support the health sector, which Government has taken up. So, I do not see another point of debate presently, other than giving the timeline to the Prime Minister and Government - a responsibility which they should have carried out with the budget committee way back - so that they come here maybe on Tuesday, as it was suggested, to give us the concrete suggestions of where this money is going to come from and we end this debate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Precisely that was the point I was making. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, the last time when we were here, we hit a snag and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister asked for more time. Today, the same thing has happened, and he is well aware that we represent the needs of our people. We are telling Government that the need of our people is their health but they are not listening. When they return and we hit a snag, how are we going to proceed? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please let us first deal with this matter. First of all, the request was not made by the Prime Minister. I was chairing on a Thursday when we were expecting the question - the motion for supply was on the Order Paper – and they were reconciling the figures. While I was seated here, I received a note from our own Clerk, who is in charge of reconciling our figures here. 

When we were still debating and anticipating that we would go to supply, a note came from one of the directors here, and it was presented to me that, “the figures are not reconciled. Under the rules, please refer this matter to the Committee on the Budget for reconciliation.” I am the one who announced that we would not be able to supply that day and I directed that the budget committee should meet the following day, which was a Friday, and try to harmonise the figures, which they have been trying to do. 

The next time that we met, it was not the Prime Minister but it was the chairman of the budget committee who said that they were not ready, and I allowed them more time. I have not had any opportunity to listen to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in this House asking for more time to deal with this issue except today. Let us be fair with this thing. So, to respond to the procedural point you raised, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has not asked for extra time on this matter at all. This is the first time he is asking.  

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable members. The budget for this financial year, that we are praying should be appropriated, stands at Shs 11,475,352,187,000. This is both the revenue side and also the proposed expenditure side. So, the two sides are balancing. 

The members, both the Members of Parliament and the Executive, have agreed that we go and look for Shs 39.2 billion within this by varying from votes within the budget that is to be appropriated. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has agreed that we will go ahead and look for this money, given two or three days, and come back with that position. 

In one of the prayers, the Rt hon. Prime Minister did mention something on statutory votes and this is contained under Article 155 (2) and (3), which I would like to read so as to give more support to what you have already guided, Mr Speaker: “Article 155 financial year estimates.
(2) The head of any self-accounting department, commission or organisation set up under this Constitution shall cause to be submitted to the President at least two months before the end of each financial year estimates of administrative and development expenditure and estimates of revenues of the respective department, commission or organisation for the following year. 
(3) 	The estimates prepared under clause (2) of this article shall be laid before Parliament by the President under clause (1) of this article without revision but with any recommendations that the Government may have on them.” 

This is why, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, Government and you have guided that in whatever adjustment we are going to make, statutory bodies should not be part of what we are going to consider out of the Shs 39.2 billion that we are going to raise and bring back to this Parliament. This is the information I wanted to give to you. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order, although he is trying to run away but since he is still in the House, he will take it. It is also your prerogative as the Rt Hon. Speaker to rule on this matter. He has ably read some provisions from Article 155 of the Constitution, but he has deliberately avoided clause (4), for purposes of misguiding this House. It reads, “At any time before Parliament considers the estimates of revenues and expenditure laid before it by or on the authority of the President, an appropriate committee of Parliament may discuss and review the estimates and make appropriate recommendations to Parliament.”

In my own understanding, when you have been given the role of reviewing, you can do what we are doing and what the committee is doing. Is he, therefore, in order to misguide this House by reading provisions that suit the Executive and not the people of Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think all of us have been selectively reading provisions of the Constitution. 

I would like to refer to the provision of the law that governs the budget process, particularly in the revised laws, section 4(1) of the Budget Act, entitled “Submission of Estimates of Departments etc.” Section 4 in the initial print from the government printer would be section 5. It states: “(1) The head of any government department, self accounting department, institution, organisation or commission shall submit to the President preliminary estimates of revenue and expenditure of that department, institution, organisation or commission for the following financial year by the 15th day of February in each year. 

(2) The Estimates prepared and submitted under sub section (1) shall be laid before Parliament by the President under section 2 and 3 but estimates submitted by bodies established under the Constitution shall be laid before Parliament without revision but with any recommendations that the government may have on them.”

This is an extract from the same Article of the Constitution as implemented in its operations by the Budget Act. You were asking for the authority, where we say the budget of these particular institutions should be statutorily protected; that is it.

Honourable members, let us move forward in harmony. The arguments we have had for the last one hour plus are not whether the Shs 39.2 billion is agreed upon or not; no. The arguments we have had for the last one and a half hours is how to proceed with this. The Prime Minister has agreed that Shs 39.2 billion has got to be found. The Minister of Finance has agreed that Shs 39.2 billion be found. The question is: where do they get it from for purposes of supply? 

You see, when you are supplying, you supply vote by vote. So the specific vote that is going to be changed has got to be found before we go to supply, so that by the time we are supplying, the Shs 39.2 billion is already captured in the supply and already removed from the respective votes where they are going to look for it, so that it can now come to the health sector. That is the request that is being made.

So, should we go and vote on this matter; to achieve what? It is agreed that Shs 39.2 billion be found and the minister is saying, “Give us two or three days, we will go back and look at the budget, see which areas we can cut without legal complications and other difficulties, then we come back with those figures already provided for as recommended by Parliament”. Is there a problem with that? Isn’t that the way forward? What are we voting on?

MR JACOB OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas I agree with your guidance and the discussion that is going on, the provisions of the law have been read and this is the only privileged place in the whole country where they make the laws but the interpretation is not within our preserve. We have constituted ourselves into a constitutional court to interpret certain sections of the law and articles of the Constitution. Whereas there is a difference between a statutory budget and statutory bodies, and whereas what you read in the Budget Act, section 4, which is a replica of Article 155 (2),(3) and (4), as you guide us into the conclusion, it is my humble prayer that, probably, it would be only fair that where the law is clear, you do not seek for interpretation.

I have listened attentively to some arguments from lawyers, and of course semi lawyers, and my humble prayer is that the matter you raised about statutory budgets not being subject to revision should be a matter that should not only interest this Parliament but the Leader of Government Business and the Attorney-General too. The Attorney-General should be able to come out with a clear provision that states so, because what the law does not prohibit, it allows. In such a very important matter of appropriation and supply, if this same Parliament in its wisdom suggested that statutory budgets should not be subject to appropriation by Parliament, they should have stated so.

In my limited knowledge of the law, from both the Budget Act and the Constitution I am finding it difficult to draw any meaningful deduction to the effect that there is any provision that would directly deter Parliament from reviewing or considering. Otherwise, the rationale of appropriation would not be. Why would you bring a budget to Parliament? 

Whereas I am aware of the Article in this Constitution, which states that statutory budgets – salaries and allowances of officers – cannot be reduced, if the budget committee is actually in effect trying to take money that has been allocated to salaries and those other statutory bodies, it would be illegal. However, if the money is from other sources, I am at pains to say that this would be for further research and the comprehensive – (Interjections) - that the Attorney-General would be helpful in consultation with the Prime Minister, who is a learned counsel, to give this Parliament the clarity in this matter. 

As Parliament, if we go out today and say that there are certain provisions that limit this Parliament in appropriating funds, it would be defeating the purpose of the appropriation process. So, it is my humble prayer that whereas it is very clear about what the Executive cannot do in Article 155(3), Article 155(4) actually states the contrary. However, I might be wrong since I am not the Constitutional Court and I have very limited knowledge of the law. Probably, if we shared – that is my fear. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need to move forward on this. Even when we come to supply and appropriation, statutory expenditures will not require our vote and we will not vote on them, whether you like it or not. That is it. For statutory expenditure, it does not matter what you wish, we will not vote on it when the time comes, and it is listed accordingly. You will see the way they are presented, and that has been the practice from time immemorial.

Can I make a proposal and see how we can conclude this? The issues that have been raised about this particular schedule, which is already specifying where money should be removed, and there is a possibility that this could face legal difficulties. Could we then approve the report, with the exception of this schedule, – (Interjections) - so that we approve the figure and allow the ministers to consult and come back to supply, without necessarily binding ourselves to the issue of where this money should be got from? Is that okay? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we then say that this particular matrix should not be part of the report we are going to approve – (Interjections) - I am proposing as a way forward that we pronounce ourselves on the figure and then allow the technical people to go into details to extract the Shs 39.2 billion from whichever vote they want to get it from, so that we do not bind them by this. We will vote on the Shs 39.2 billion and approve it, but then I am proposing that we do not tie anybody to this matrix about where it should come from. That is my proposal, so that we move forward.

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, the point raised by hon. Oboth Oboth was to the effect that this dilutes the power of Parliament to appropriate in respect of budgets of statutory bodies – not statutory expenditures – such as the Electoral Commission, UBOS and so forth. His submission has been very useful. He has just been humble to speak authoritatively, that he did not need the Constitutional Court to interpret this because it was clear law. It is in that vein, Mr Speaker, that it would be wrong for this Parliament to adopt this report without this matrix as it is. Thank you. (Applause)

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I stand here to make a prayer to my colleagues. The issue that was raised was to find money. I think the spirit is that Government should find the Shs 39.2 billion. 

If the Leader of Government Business has committed himself here and has requested for two days, please accept and give the Executive the two days to find money and then we come here to vote on adoption of the report after a member of the Executive moves an amendment. We would not follow the details of the request but we would move an amendment to adopt what the member of the Executive would have brought, so that it remains the same amount for the same purpose it is intended for. 

I pray, honourable members, that we accept this because we have spoken all the English and the legal language that we can but we have not achieved anything. Since we are saying that the money will be found, to save on time I request the members to accept my prayer. When the money is brought and they have showed us where it will be got from, then that is moved as an amendment and attached to the report and then the report is adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me first state the issue that we are dealing with now. Can I state the issue we are dealing with so that we are together on what we want to do? (Mr Tinkasiimire rose_) Do you want to state it for me, hon. Tinkasiimire? That is why I am saying that let me state it because I am definitely sure you are not in my mind. (Laughter) 

What I was saying is that I want to re-state that the issue of Shs 39.2 billion is agreed and whether we pass this motion for adoption of the report or not, we will not be able to supply today. The reason is simple - to supply, the technical people from Parliament have got to go and prepare, vote by vote, the things that the Speaker will read for purposes of supply. So, we will not be able to even supply today. 

You see, supply takes the form of, “I propose that the sum of Shs… be provided under vote so-and-so for the recurrent expenditure for the financial year... I now put the question.” So, these texts are not ready. This is because whatever we decide has to be entered into these papers, so that I will have a big pile to go through with you, members, to take decisions on them. That cannot happen today. The earliest it can happen will be next week because tonight they will have to prepare these texts.  So I was proposing - 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing to guide us. You are requesting that we adopt the proposal of the Government Chief Whip-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I was proposing. I was not requesting. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: All I know is that this is a committee report and these figures, which we want to say that we do not pass, were carefully looked at by the committee and they saw wastage. This is the reason why they say  that instead of it going to these non-priority areas, like providing sausages in offices, this money should go to the welfare of our people. It had been proposed by the same people we are giving the same assignment. How sure are we –(Mr Tim Lwanga rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is on a point of procedure. 
 
MR TINKASIIMIRE: This is Parliament’s report; it is no longer his report. Mr Speaker, I was an ex officio of the committee that looked at these issues. We had an intensive debate - give and take - and there was total conviction that from the areas we looked at, there was wastage. It had been proposed by these same people who we want to again give the same assignment to go and look for the money. Where are they going to get it? 

Since they want to keep the sausages on their plates, they will still hide these sausages and the chairperson- (Interjections) - and the committee will not return on the Floor of the House to challenge them. This is because you would have adopted their report and they will have no interest in looking into it; it will be the interest of the Executive. (Applause )So I am praying for your guidance, Mr Speaker. In the circumstances - we laboured to come up with this scrutiny - is it procedurally right for us to adopt the report and pass over to these hungry people who want the sausages again? 

MR OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From what we have seen this afternoon in this House, it would appear that the Executive is trying to undermine the power of Parliament to vary the budget. The committee has looked at various votes and the committee saw it fit to propose 30 per cent of those votes as non-priority areas. 

What the Executive is labouring to do, through the Attorney-General who is trying to mislead us in matters of law, and we thank hon. Oboth Oboth for coming in handy to help us - From what the Prime Minister had said, the Executive does not want us to cut or to vary, or to reduce – (Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to say that my Attorney-General is misleading this House without substantiating? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to substantiate, hon. Oguttu, the specific areas where the Attorney-General misled this House?

MR OGUTTU: Yes, Mr Speaker. The Attorney-General said clearly that we do not have any powers to vary the budgets of statutory organisations or institutions. Article 155(4) definitely does give us that power. The Attorney-General knows it exists and he conveniently refused to read it. That is trying to mislead this House.

The procedural point I am driving at, Mr Speaker, is that is it in order for- (Interjections) - It is a procedural point –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had not ruled on the point of order. As to whether the Attorney-General was misleading, it is certainly a matter of opinion. But my recollection is that the learned Attorney-General was reading from the text of the Constitution as it is written. Whether it came out as a misleading statement to honourable members, that would be a matter of perception and understanding of what he read. But certainly, it cannot be said that the Attorney-General tried to mislead this House. 

MR OGUTTU: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. The Executive-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of procedure, just to remind you.

MR OGUTTU: The Executive have asked to go and find money wherever they are going to find it. However, the committee of Parliament has found the money where we feel there is wastage. So, if we go by the proposal, which, Mr Speaker, you also seem to agree with, it would seem that the Executive does not want Parliament to be scrutinising budgets vote by vote and varying those budgets. So, is it procedurally right that we proceed that way, to actually undermine the authority and power of this House?   

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, having listened in to the debate, I was being persuaded by the proposal that we adopt the report minus the schedule. However, when you consider the fact of adopting it without this schedule, where shall we be supplying from? It remains stale. 

The alternative to that is: is it possible to pass this so that after two days they bring the alternative and then we can amend this? We adopt it the way it is, we  allow the two days in which they want to come back to us, and when they find the money we shall then amend accordingly. I think that should be the position. If they are serious and committed, we shall be ready. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been listening attentively and I have heard the arguments of members, which are very valid. However, this is a lesson to us as Members of Parliament, that when we are passing the estimates of the budget of each financial year in April for forwarding to the President, we must scrutinise the activities. (Interjections) Protect me, Mr Speaker. 

You remember that the estimates were sent and the Ministry of Finance read them and you allowed Government to spend one third of the total budget, which was vote-on-account. That means the activities in the investment plan of each sector have started being implemented. There are three ways of budgeting: incremental budgeting -(Interjections)- Yes, we are running an incremental budget. If we go by the genesis and the-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had allowed the hon. Kakooza to make his comment and I cannot hear anything if everybody is talking at the same time, really.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you. You know what they teach us in school is not what we practice; otherwise, we should listen to each other and we get the way forward. 

To me, the problem is not what is brought today; the problem is the way we budget and our participation in the process. The figures you are trying to reallocate from one vote to another were passed here in April and Parliament pronounced itself on these activities and according - (Interjections) - In financing, if we allowed Government to spend on vote-on-account, that means in the budget all the activities which are budgeted for, Ministry of Finance has started implementing them. This is what it means. What I am trying to say is that the activities where we are going to deduct and suppress-(Interruption)

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I want to raise a point of order because when the budget committee was making this proposal, it did not go to the development budget; we handled the recurrent expenditure. Therefore, Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to mislead this House that we already passed a vote-on-account and now we are reducing on the votes for the development yet this is only the recurrent budget and non-wage and not even wage? Is he in order to misguide this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, maybe I can take the guidance from you; what constitutes the figures in the vote-on-account?

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, it is true the vote-on-account also constitutes the development budget, but the proposal of the Committee on the Budget to make this cut-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, does it only constitute the development budget or it is the entire spectrum?

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: The vote-on-account, Mr Speaker, also constitutes the development budget but we were very conscious while proposing these cuts not to touch on the development budgets. So, the development budgets will not in any way be affected as their vote on account has already been used.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the vote-on-account that was passed constitutes a third of the entire budget. The point the hon. Kakooza is making is that some of those activities have already received a third of the funding. That is the point he is making. If, for example, the budget for buying stationery in the Deputy Speaker’s Office was Shs 10 million, Shs 3 million of it has already been released in the vote-on-account and possibly spent. This is the point he is making. 

If we come at this stage and say we reduce from the Shs 10 million that was allocated to the office of the Deputy Speaker to buy stationery, it means we are affecting that budget, part of which is already spent as three per cent. I think that is the point he is making and I do not think he is misleading the House at all. Let him make the point and please wind up quickly.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you. We passed a law here, that is, the Public Finance Accountability Act. What does it say in section 14? It says that Government should streamline the process so that it is effective, and anything being appropriated by Parliament must be accurate. When you allow Government to spend one third of the vote, each ministry gives an investment plan of each year and if today you are saying you are removing money negatively from defence and talking it to health - you are suppressing - what will happen to that activity within defence? 

The only way out, since we are running an incremental budget which allows the Ministry of Finance to come with shortfalls, is this money can be brought by Ministry of Finance and we pass that supplementary as by law.

MR TINKASIMIIRE: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. All of us, because of the time we have spent here, are knowledgeable about matters of the budget. I even went ahead, when I was submitting earlier on to seek for your guidance, to simplify the matter we were handling-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For whose guidance?

MR TINKASIMIIRE: From you. I simplified and said we cannot again give these people who gave themselves 100 sausages - (Interjections)-Yes, that is being simple because we are looking at teas in the offices-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are on a point of order.

MR TINKASIMIIRE: I am coming to it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please, just raise the point of order.

MR TINKASIMIIRE: We very well know that the matter we are handling is of recurrent expenditure. We are considering three quarters of the budget and we are saying that the first quarter has gone on vote-on-account-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, what is the point of order you are raising?

MR TINKASIMIIRE: I have a point of order and I want to raise it, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please do.

MR TINKASIMIIRE: Is he in order at this point, when we are concluding, to start mixing us up well aware that we have taken care of the vote-on-account-(Interjections)- well aware that we are only reducing the remaining three quarters. Is he in order, when he has just even run from the canteen where he has been taking sausages against the paramount needs of our citizens? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, no amount of debate or disagreement will alter that simple fact raised by hon. Kakooza from Kabula. We should take it in that spirit so that we see how to remedy the situation. I do not think it is in bad faith at all. I do not think he is misleading anybody. 

The point he has raised is that one third of a particular vote has already been spent under vote-on-account. If it is Shs 10 million, that means about Shs 3 million has been spent. If you reduce it to Shs 7 million, it means on the vote-on-account you have already overspent that vote. This is because if the vote-on-account was Shs 3 million based on Shs 10 million, and you reduce it to Shs 5 million or reduce it to Shs 3 million, - I am just giving you the situations - that means you have already spent that vote. That is the point hon. Kakooza is making. He is just pointing it out to the member so that we take cognisance of it as we make this decision.

Honourable members, it seems we are not going to have any headway in this discussion for now. I think it is the proper time for us – 

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance. A report was presented on the Floor of the House, it was debated and the government side said they were going to bring the source of the Shs 39 billion. We reached a level where you wanted to remove one page, one annexure actually, the matrix, which –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not say I wanted to. Please, honourable member, use the words well.

MR KWIZERA: You indicated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I proposed it could be a way forward.

MR KWIZERA: Most obliged. It would actually be irregular. If the Prime Minister as the Leader of Government Business wants to come with an amendment to the source of funds, why can’t we put the question and then at an appropriate time, maybe in two days, they are met, instead of going back to debate on those? We have debated enough. You had given one hour, now they are two hours and even now there is no quorum. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then what happens to the decision already made by the House? Do we go under the provision for rescinding that decision to allow for debate on it? You see, honourable members, we do not want to run into technicalities. If we take a decision on this matter, we cannot discuss that same matter again within this session of Parliament. We cannot do that, unless under the rules as amended, we bring it by substantive motion and vote by half of Members of Parliament not just present and voting but half of Members of Parliament. That is what I am trying to avoid here. 

If the decision can be harmonised so that we do not have to go for rescinding - changing our decision to accommodate a new situation - would it not be proper for us to process it that way? I am just raising procedural issues so that we proceed properly because the issues are agreed, honourable members. The issues are really agreed.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, if we are following good governance and rule of law, you realise that there are a lot of issues on the Floor and you know that some of us believe in justice; it takes us no minute to go to the Constitutional Court for interpretation – (Laughter) - of these provisions. So, if you wish, we would actually adjourn until the government side brings its side, we incorporate and adopt it as one report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, this House then is adjourned to Tuesday, 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 7.34 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, September 18 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
