Thursday, 17 September 2015

Parliament met at 1.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: The Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, honourable Leader of the Opposition, members of the Cabinet, Members of Parliament, guests in the distinguished visitors’ gallery, Mrs Linda Nyakairima, Sam and Samantha Nyakairima, relatives and friends of our departed colleague. I welcome you to this special sitting, which has been convened to pay tribute to our colleague, the late honourable Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, former UPDF representative in Parliament and Minister of Internal Affairs. I apologise for interfering with your recess but I think you will understand the circumstances.

Gen. Aronda has been a distinguished servant in this country, rising through the ranks until he reached the level of Chief of Defence Forces. He was a long-term representative of the UPDF in Parliament. We knew him as a balanced legislator who contributed to the law making process. He was a member of the Constituent Assembly, which gave us our Constitution, and since 2004 he has been in this House as a UPDF representative.  

As a backbencher, he served on the following committees of Parliament: Defence and Internal Affairs; Natural Resources; Gender, Labour and Social Development; Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; and National Economy
 
Distinguished colleagues, in just two years since July 2015 when he became a Minister of Internal Affairs, he spearheaded the enactment of a number of legislations:
    a) The Registration of Persons Act, 2015, which had a significant bearing on the democratic process of the country.
    b) We acknowledge his role and contribution to the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2015.
    c) He has also been very instrumental in the processing of the Non-Governmental Organisations Bill, which we have not yet concluded.

He presented several ministerial statements here and answered several questions. He will be remembered for fast-tracking the National ID Registration Project and personally supervising it, region by region. We especially remember his presence at the commencement of the issuance of the long awaited national IDs. On regional defence collaboration, he was instrumental in the drafting of a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on the Mutual Peace and Security Pact signed between Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda, which was laid on the Table, debated and a resolution of the House passed.

I convey my condolences and those of this House to Mrs Nyakairima and the children and to the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces. As Parliament, certainly we shall miss his firm and spirited contributions on the Floor of this House. I also know that he had a larger family of Ugandans, many of whose lives he touched and they will miss him.

Personally, I first met hon. Nyakairima in 1986 here in the corridors of Parliament. He had been meeting the Rt Hon. Al Haji Kigongo, who was then the Chairman of the NRC. What struck me at that time was his height. The second thing was that he had a big mop of Afro hair; of course by the time he became minister, he had shaved it but that is what struck me.

We shall remember his demeanour on the backbench, doing a lot of listening; and on the front bench, listening and taking notes. He was a very disciplined officer and I think he was one of the finest we had in the UPDF. He had the courtesy to always seek the leave of the Speaker when he could not attend Parliament but also went out of his way to write and explain his policy positions on matters that were coming before this House so that they could be well understood. I also recall that at the time when many Ugandans were being killed, he took off time to meet political, cultural and religious leaders to brief them on the situations as well as to seek their views.

May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace. As I said, he touched many lives so I would like to recognise, in the distinguished visitors’ gallery, the Right Honourable Al Haji Kigongo, First National Vice Chairman of the NRM party; the honourable Justice Mulyagonja, the Inspector General of Government; the honourable Justice Faith Mwondha; hon. Irene Wekiya, our ambassador in the UAE who had the difficult task of dealing with that situation, which was unprecedented.

I also recognise the Rt Hon. Speaker emeritus, Margaret Zziwa. There is a huge delegation from South Sudan and as soon I get all the names, I will continue to advise you about the presence of our friends in the distinguished visitors’ gallery. I welcome Gen. Sejusa. I ask the Clerk to give me the list of all the names so that I can recognise everybody who has taken time off to come here. I think I see Mr Robert Ssebunya but I need a list. We have Princess Bagaya, thank you for coming. I will announce everybody once I get the full list.   

Honourable members, now that you know why you have been called, I request the Clerk to facilitate the arrival of the casket into the Chamber so that the proceedings can commence.

(Entrance of the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima)

The National Anthem

The East African Community Anthem

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a slight problem with my foot. I am wearing an orthopaedic shoe, which might cause some lugubriousness if I walk back and forth. I nominate the Chairperson of the Committee of Finance, hon. Sebunya, to lay the wreath on my behalf.

Laying of wreaths

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I indicated earlier that we have a lot of guests and the gallery is quite full. I would like to thank all those who have come, including citizens of the business community. I would like to recognise: 
    1. H.E. Frank Mugambage, High Commissioner of Rwanda to Uganda;
    2. Gen. Augustino Jadalla, Special Presidential Envoy of South Sudan;
    3. Gen. Mangar Buong, Inspector General of the SPLA;
    4. Brig. Gen. Hillary George, the Deputy Commander of Air Defence of South Sudan;
    5. Mr Therich Diing Therich Bol, Office Manager in South Sudan;
    6. Maj. Majur Morwal Mager of the South Sudan’s Embassy in Uganda;
    7. Ms Adwey Angui Mading, Second Secretary in the same mission here in Uganda;
    8. Hon. Ruth Kavuma, former Member of Parliament;
    9. Hon. Lydia Balemeezi, former Member of Parliament;
    10. Mr Peter Kasenene, Chairperson of the National Identification Registration Agency who had the difficult duty of travelling to Korea with the minister;
    11. Ms Judith Obitre Gama, the Deputy Chairperson of the National Registration Identification Agency. They were together;
    12. Hon. Constantine Karusoke, former Member of Parliament of Uganda. 
    13. Hon. Nusura Tiperu;
    14. Hon. Mawiya;
    15. Gen. David Sejusa. 
    16. Hon. Nyakaisiki Byenkya, former Member of Parliament of Uganda. 

If there are other former Members of Parliament, I will inform you. We thank everybody for coming. 

I now would like to invite the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to move the motion. It will be seconded by the Leader of the Opposition. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HONOURABLE GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA, MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS

2.33
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINEES (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima for his dedicated service to this nation. I do so under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

“WHEREAS the country learnt with profound shock and disbelief of the untimely death of the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, which occurred on Saturday, 12 September 2015 aboard a flight from South Korea to Dubai in the United Arab Emirates on his way to Uganda;

AND WHEREAS the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima was born on 7 July 1959 in the present day Rukungiri District and attained his education at Katojo Primary School in Rukungiri, Lubiri Secondary School, Kitgum High School, Makerere University and directly from Makerere University he joined the National Resistance Army in 1982. Later, he took a junior officer’s course after liberation. He further trained in a number of areas and I will quote some: 
    a) Trained as an intelligence and security officer and attended that course in 1987 in the United Kingdom;
    b) Attended the Officer’s Basic Course in Uganda in 1989;
    c) Attended the Command and General Staff Course at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, USA  in 1982-1983;
    d) Attended the Strategic Leadership Course at Nasser High Military Academy, Egypt in 1999;

AND WHEREAS the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima was an illustrious member of the Seventh, Eighth and Ninth Parliaments where he was a prolific and articulate representative of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces;

NOTING with appreciation his important role in the liberation of this country that brought the National Resistance Army/National Resistance Movement government into power in January 1986, as well as the responsible positions that he held in the UPDF as an Intelligence Officer, Commanding Officer of the Armoured Brigade, which duties he carried out to the best of his ability hence rising to the highest military rank in the UPDF as a four-star General and appointed the first Chief of Defence Forces;

APPRECIATING his intellectualism, discipline, innovativeness and leadership skills that saw him play a significant role in fast tracking the Northern Corridor Integration Projects under the East African Community in which free movement of persons and services are being actualised;

AWARE that the late hon. Gen. Aronda Nyakairima at the time of his death was the Minister of Internal Affairs who in his two years of service has seen the country make great strides in maintenance of law and order and security; 

FURTHER, he championed the following initiatives:
    a) The National Identification Project
    b) The fast issuance of passports - Ugandans get passports more easily and faster.
    c) He had started revamping the Immigration Department.
    d) He spearheaded, in this very House, the legal framework against financing of terrorism.
    e) He led efforts to restructure the management and operations of Non-Governmental Organisations in the country;

SATISFIED that the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima indeed dedicated the prime of his life to liberation, stability, unity and development of Uganda;

FURTHER SATISFIED by his contribution to regional integration and Pan African ideals and aspirations, Gen. Aronda deserves the recognition of this Parliament and the nation;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
1. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives and friends, His Excellency the President, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, staff of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the people of Uganda at large for the loss of a distinguished son of Uganda, Gen. Aronda Nyakairima.

2. 	That this Parliament takes cognisance of the exemplary services and contributions that Gen. Aronda Nyakairima has, in the course of his illustrious life, rendered to the people of Uganda and Africa as a freedom fighter, a Member of Parliament representing the UPDF, the Chief of Defence Forces and Minister of Internal Affairs.

3. 	That the Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants our departed colleague and comrade, Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, eternal rest.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by several Members from all sides of the House. What is the justification? 

DR RUGUNDA: In justification of this motion, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we are gathered here today to honour, celebrate and pay tribute to a fallen gallant son of Uganda, Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, who has been our Minister of Internal Affairs. 

On Saturday morning, 12 September 2015, Government received the sad news of the tragic demise of our colleague. He died aboard an Emirates flight from Seoul, South Korea, to Dubai. He was returning home from official duties in South Korea and was due to arrive in Uganda on Saturday afternoon. 

Madam Speaker, remembering and paying tribute to our colleague is imperative because it enables us to pause, reflect and acknowledge the outstanding and exceptional contributions made by this son of Uganda in the short span of his life. It also enables us to take cognisance of his example for the present and future generations. The service and achievements of Gen. Aronda should not only be publicly known but also collectively celebrated and emulated in Uganda. 

Background

Madam Speaker and colleagues, Gen. Aronda Nyakairima was born on 7 July 1959 to Mr Yeremiya Nyakairima and Mrs Gladys Nyakairima in Nyakiju village, Buyanja Sub-County in the present day Rukungiri District. He attended Katojo Primary School in Rukungiri, Lubiri Secondary School for O Level and then Kitgum High School, where he sat his A Level exams in 1976. He graduated from Makerere University with a Bachelor of Arts (Honours) degree in Political Science in 1981.

In later years, he undertook other studies. He did the Command and General Staff Course at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, USA and the Senior Strategic Leadership Course at Nasser Military Academy in Cairo, Egypt.

Career 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, in February 1982, a younger Aronda responded to a call of duty to join the National Resistance Army where he fought in the struggle that liberated Uganda in 1986. Within the provisional National Resistance Army ranks, he was appointed junior officer class 2 until the capture of power in 1986. By the fall of Kampala, he was an intelligence officer for the third battalion, which was one of the battalions that fought the last battle for Kampala. In the same year, he was appointed an intelligence officer for the general army headquarters.

When formal NRA ranks were introduced in 1988, Aronda was commissioned to the rank of captain and appointed Assistant Director of Military Intelligence. In 1989, he was appointed an intelligence officer of the Presidential Protection Unit. Between 1994 and 1995, Gen. Aronda served as one of the NRA representatives in the Constituent Assembly, thus contributing to the making of the 1995 Constitution, which is the supreme law of this country.

In 1995, Aronda was promoted to the rank of major and later on elevated to the rank of lieutenant colonel in 1996 and to the rank of colonel in 1998. In 2001, he was promoted to the rank of brigadier and appointed overall operations commander of Operation Iron Fist. Under Operation Iron Fist, hon. Aronda commanded our gallant UPDF soldiers and routed the Lord’s Resistance Army from Uganda and Southern Sudan.  (Applause)  

The Lord’s Resistance Army fled to Garamba in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Members may recall that Gen. Aronda once remarked, “Kony did not re-locate into Garamba for tourism but was forced to Garamba on the onslaught of the UPDF.” Thus the contribution of this gallant son of Uganda to the peace that is now prevailing in the greater northern Uganda and indeed in the whole country is by no means a small contribution. 

In 2003, Aronda was promoted to the rank of major general and appointed the Army Commander of the UPDF. In 2004, due to his hard work and good leadership, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant general and in the same year, he became a Member of Parliament representing the UPDF. 

Professionalisation of the Army

In November 2005, with the re-structuring and professionalisation of the UPDF, hon. Aronda was promoted to the rank of a four-star general and appointed the first Chief of Defence Forces. He immediately embarked on the task of restructuring the UPDF to match the dynamics of a modern army. 

Gen. Aronda’s distinguished service to the army and to the country saw him decorated with many honours, some of which include: 
    a) Luweero Triangle Liberation Medal; 
    b) Nalubaale Liberation Medal; 
    c) Order of the Spear awarded by Lubiri Secondary School for being the light of the school; 
    d) African Union Medal towards contributing to the regional peace and security that you made reference to, Madam Speaker;
    e) The United States Medal for induction to the International Hall of Fame, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, United States;
    f) He also received an award of recognition for contribution to environmental protection of the Uganda National Environment Authority, NEMA. 

        a. As you can see, they were not only military honours but he was able to also get significant honours that affected all of us in one way or another. 
    g) He also got the European Union Medal on Common Security and Defence Policy. 
    h) He also got the Order of Distinguished Exemplary Service of the Uganda Police Force.

His last assignment: Madam Speaker, in May 2013 Gen. Aronda was appointed Minister of Internal Affairs, a position he held till his demise. His two years in the Ministry of Internal Affairs have seen our country make gigantic strides in a number of critical programmes of national importance. Of particular note is the successful take-off and implementation of the National Identification Project. (Applause)

Honourable members are very familiar with this project because in many ways, hon. Aronda involved the wide spectrum of political leadership in this important project. Ugandans can now proudly acquire and use their national identity cards as an acceptable form of identification in Uganda and in the East African Community. This is a significant development in our national transformation.

The other successful programme accomplished includes the faster issuance of passports. He had started revamping the Immigration Department as I had said in the motion, and he spearheaded the legal framework against financing of terrorism. He also spearheaded the restructuring and management of NGOs, a matter that Parliament is in the final stages of legislating.

Madam Speaker, I join you and the people of Uganda to mourn the loss of a patriot who dedicated his life for the liberation, stability, unity and development of Uganda. I worked with Gen. Aronda through the years, since the 1986 liberation. I saw him rise through the ranks of the UPDF, subsequently becoming our first Chief of Defence Forces, a position he held for 10 years, and later on as Minister of Internal Affairs since 2013.

In all my interactions, I found Gen. Aronda to be an honest, hardworking, results-oriented and dependable colleague whom one could count on at all times. His outstanding courage, discipline, loyalty and dependability ought to be emulated by all Ugandans. In Gen. Aronda, the country has lost a freedom fighter, a nation builder, a patriot and a courageous solider.

What was the cause of death, Madam Speaker? On 7 September 2015, Gen. Aronda and members of staff of the Ministry of Internal Affairs travelled to Seoul in South Korea on official duty. On their way back, Gen. Aronda met his death aboard an Emirates flight from Seoul to Dubai on Saturday, 12 September 2015. On learning of the death of Gen. Aronda, Government immediately dispatched a team of doctors, headed by Dr James Makumbi a senior consultant and presently serving as the Chief of Medical Services in the UPDF. The others doctors included Dr Moses Byaruhanga, a pathologist and head of the Police Health Services; Dr Robert Lukande, a pathologist and senior lecturer at Makerere University College of Health Sciences. This team was accompanied by a CID Officer and two relatives of Gen. Aronda - Jolly Ngabirano, a sister to Gen. Aronda, and also Henry Ngabirano, a brother-in-law.

Post-mortem Report

Madam Speaker, the post-mortem was carried out and the report was issued early today. According to the post-mortem findings, our colleague and comrade died because of a heart attack. I will quote from the exact post-mortem report and I also intend to lay a copy of it on the Table for information to the honourable members.

The main content of the post-mortem report is that Gen. Aronda’s heart was enlarged, with the presence of massive bleeding within the muscle of the left ventricle, which is one of the heart chambers, involving the whole thickness of the muscle. There were also many old small areas of damaged heart muscle or scars due to interruption of blood supply to the heart. This means that there were small blockages from time to time, which happened before.

Madam Speaker, with your permission, let me just add that the report was completed this morning and simultaneously some of the pathologists went to the family to explain what had happened. Another team of the pathologists came to Government and Ministry of Defence.  The honourable Dr Kiyonga, the chairman of the committee that is supervising the befitting send-off of our comrade, and I received the report on behalf of Government.

The team of pathologists came with Dr Lukwago, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health. They explained what happened and their findings at the post-mortem. Honourable Dr Kiyonga, Dr Lukwago and I were satisfied with the report that was given by the team of the pathologists. We have had some interactions with the family and the interpretation and understanding of the report of the pathologists by the Government is similar to the understanding of the family.  At the post-mortem, which was done yesterday at Mulago Hospital, there was a member of the family, Mr Henry Ngabirano; he attended the post-mortem from the beginning to the end.

Finally, Madam Speaker, in terms of condolences to the family, I take this opportunity to convey my sincere and heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family for the loss of this gallant son of Uganda. Mrs Linda Aronda, thank you for the tremendous support you have given to our colleague, our comrade and our brother. (Applause) Your support enabled him to make these outstanding achievements and contributions to our country. May you and the children – Samuel Agaba Aronda and Samantha Aronda - find peace and comfort in the knowledge that your husband and father served this country with distinction for which Uganda will always be proud of. We will always treasure him and remember him for this great contribution to our country. May his soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. As I invite the Leader of the Opposition, I just would like to acknowledge that His Excellency the High Commissioner of Kenya to Uganda, Maj. Gen. Geoffrey Okanga, is in the gallery. He has come to pay tribute. (Applause)  I also recognise the presence of Lt Col Grace Kyomugisha who used to be a Member of Parliament here for UPDF. Thank you for coming. 

We have also received messages from the following people, which I will hand over to the family: 
    1. Hon. Irene Muloni, Minister of Energy; 
    2. Hon. Kataike Ndoboli, Minister of Luwero Triangle; 
    3. Hon. Amongin Christine Aporu, Minister of Teso Affairs; 
    4. Dr Richard Nduhura, our Permanent Representative to the UN in New York; 
    5. Prime Minister Emeritus, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi; 
    6. Prof. Pius Okong, Chairperson Health Service Commission;
    7. Dr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor Bank of Uganda; 
    8. Mr Joseph Biribonwa, Acting Chairperson, Electoral Commission. 
    9. Buganda Parliamentary Caucus; 
    10. Rt Hon. Margaret Zziwa, former Speaker of EALA; 
    11. Hon. Amelia Kyambadde, Minister of Trade and Industry; 
    12. Hon. Agnes Akiror Egunyu, Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. 

We thank you all for your condolence messages. Let me now invite hon. Wafula-Oguttu.

3.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Madam Speaker and members of this august House, it is my honour to join you in paying tribute to a gallant son and soldier of our country. 

It was with profound shock and sadness that we learnt of the untimely passing of Gen. Aronda Nyakairima a few days ago. Gen. Aronda was a nationalist, a dedicated servant of the people, a humble man, a man of integrity and honesty. We wish to express our most sincere condolences to the family of Gen. Aronda. We should not be mourning the demise of Gen. Aronda; we should be celebrating his life and his contribution to our country. 

I first met Gen. Aronda in 1986. I was a journalist then and I think I had written something that the new government did not like. Gen. Aronda was heading the army then at CPS. I was summoned there and I went to talk to him, and I found a very humble young soldier. Compared to what we had just been experiencing with soldiers, it was remarkable that I was talking to a soldier. From then, we became friends. He was humble.

One of the greatest contributions and achievements of Gen. Aronda was breaking the back of Joseph Kony and his LRA group, which brought peace to Northern Uganda. As the Chief of Defence Forces, he personally joined the frontline in Garamba, and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister gave us a quotation from him. That gave a lot of inspiration to our soldiers to uproot Joseph Kony even from Garamba. We thank him for that contribution.

Soon after he was appointed Chief of Defence Forces, Gen. Aronda embarked on an exercise, which we all know about, of virtually visiting every army unit in the country and talking and listening to soldiers’ problems. That is what a good leader is expected to do when they take over a new office. We learnt that he later drew up a plan to address the soldiers’ welfare and began to tackle issues like that of the small houses, the mama ingia pole. He also embarked on building barracks; Kakiri Barracks, Kalama Barracks and Kasenyi Barracks are to his credit. 

Gen. Aronda emphasised training as the best requirement for modernising and professionalising our army. Under his command, Kimaka Senior Command Staff College, Jinja, was improved and internationally recognised as a military academy.

The nation is sad and is mourning the demise of a fine soldier whose loss extends beyond his family, clan and home district. This has been exhibited through the many messages from all categories of people in Uganda and the region. This is because of his contribution to peace and development in the region.

Madam Speaker, Gen. Aronda was one of the senior army officers who had never been accused of committing offences against humanity and corruption. (Applause) He largely remained focused on professionalising the army. He spent most of his adult life either fighting or commanding our army on the various battlefronts at which various victories were achieved.

Madam Speaker, Uganda has been engaged in wars for the past 30 years and we have had enough war. We wish to take this opportunity to once again call upon Government and the President to withdraw our soldiers from Somalia and South Sudan - (Applause) - since as a country we have sacrificed a lot for regional peace.  

It was unfortunate that the powers that be tried to taint Gen. Aronda’s illustrious military career with a controversial appointment as Minister of Internal Affairs while he was still a serving army general. The passing of the Public Order Management Act under his watch also dented his name, although not irreparably. 

Madam Speaker, as the Chief of Defence Forces, Gen. Aronda demonstrated his love for technical knowledge and skills for his soldiers. He demonstrated his unyielding devotion to the army’s work, transformational leadership and unwavering determination to support the soldiers’ welfare. He was truly one of the most disciplined army commanders Uganda has ever had. (Applause) Gen. Aronda leaves behind a lot for us to learn from. His dedication and humility were particularly striking. His goodness far outweighed his shortcomings and misdeeds, if any.

Madam Speaker, Gen. Aronda is the second former army commander to die under mysterious circumstances. Generals do not just die like that because they are the most insulated people against being killed or death. They are guarded and they are generals. Generals would die differently. The truth needs be ascertained as to the actual cause of their deaths. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has just told us that Gen. Aronda died because of a heart attack. That could be true, but what is surprising is that soon after we had heard of his death, Mr Ofwono Opondo, the Government spokesperson, told us that Gen. Aronda had died because of a heart attack. How did Mr Ofwono know even before Gen. Aronda was taken to the hospital that he had died because of a heart attack?

Government decided to take a team of eight technical people to Dubai to do a post-mortem. Why wasn’t it appropriate for the post-mortem to be done by doctors in Dubai? We need to be given that explanation because we have had cases here, for example the death of the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda, which even took some MPs to jail. We are suspicious about this post-mortem; it could have been managed differently.

Madam Speaker, the struggle the young Arondas started in the 1980s has unfortunately been hijacked and derailed. Our youth should use occasions like Gen. Aronda’s demise, sudden and sad departure to commit themselves to the struggle for freedom and transformation of our country. That struggle is still unfinished business. 

Albert Pike, a Confederate military officer in America, once remarked that, “What we have done for ourselves alone dies with us; what we have done for others and the world remains and is immortal.” We thank God that we shared a life with Gen. Aronda and as is noted in Job 1:21, “God gives and God takes away.” May his soul rest in eternal peace. For God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Leader of the Opposition. I would like to thank the Pakistani community; they have come in big numbers to pay tribute. I also recognise a message from the Government Chief Whip, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, which will be handed over to the family.

As a custodian of records of Parliament, I want to correct an inaccuracy; Gen. Aronda did not spearhead the Public Order Management Bill. He became minister in 2013. I want that clarified for the record. 

Let me now invite hon. Chrispus Kiyonga to second the motion.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, Members of Parliament. I take the Floor to second the motion as moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to our departed comrade.

Madam Speaker, on my behalf, that of my family, the people of Kasese and the Ministry of Defence I wish to convey our deep-felt sadness and condolences to the family of the late comrade Aronda, to His Excellency the President and the entire country, Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the motion and justification by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has been very comprehensive. I will only mention a few aspects for further illustration. As you have heard from what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister said, the late Gen. Aronda had achieved very high levels of education particularly in the military. He had also acquired a lot of knowledge in the course of his work but he was also a self-educated man. Some of you who got close to him or who travelled with him will know that he was always reading materials on strategy in politics, security etcetera. 

I think nobody will oppose this motion. I thank the Leader of the Opposition for supplementing the Rt Hon. Prime Minister’s contribution. We all testify to the visible contributions and achievements that the late Aronda made in our country, particularly in the area of stability and building the unity of our country. That notwithstanding, Gen. Aronda always acted with a sense of humility but when it was required, he acted firmly and asserted himself. 

In all fora wherever he was, he was always conscious of the need to sustain national unity and stability. Despite the knowledge he had, he paid attention to the principle of speaking at the right time and in the right forum. I think that is one great lesson we need to pick from our departed comrade.

In the security area, particularly on the regional front, because of his initiative I saw Gen. Aronda leading the path to unite and bring together the armies of the East African Community states.  As you all know, I served with him as his minister when he was the Chief of Defence Forces from 2006. I saw him guide this process to the extent that today, if we, the political leaders, decided that we go into the political federation, one of the institutions that will be most prepared for this is the armies of the East African Community states. We owe this to the leadership of Gen. Aronda, working together with his colleagues in the partner states. 

He did not only work to see the armies of the East African Community come together, he went further to implement,  alongside  his colleagues in the region, the vision of the African Union - that we should build our own architecture for peace and security for the continent. Under that vision, the African Union is building five regional armies and we fall in the region of Eastern Africa; so we have been building the Eastern Africa Standby Force.

Madam Speaker, I have already submitted to you a motion that Parliament ratifies the establishment of the Eastern Africa Standby Force. Of the five forces to constitute the African Standby Force, the most advanced and ready is the Eastern Africa Standby Force. Again, I can say without any fear of contradiction that Gen. Aronda provided significant leadership amongst his colleagues as we grew and developed this standby force. 

Honourable members, subject to your approval, if the African Union wanted to deploy the Eastern Africa Standby Force now, Uganda would be ready to deploy where the African Union would be in need of that deployment. Therefore, when we say that Gen. Aronda has served not only Uganda but also Africa, these are the pieces of evidence that we base on to make those statements.

At home, the picture would be incomplete if we did not clearly articulate about the peace we enjoy in Karamoja. Gen. Aronda was at the forefront of bringing peace and security in the region of Karamoja. (Applause) The case of northern Uganda has been made. 

I would also like to add the issue of fighting terrorism; Gen. Aronda has been at the forefront of this effort. During his tenure as Chief of Defence Forces, he sustained the effectiveness of the UPDF and was particularly concerned and interested in ensuring that the relationship between the army and the population at all times was at its best. Any soldiers who breached this faced tough disciplinary procedures from Gen. Aronda and also from the system as built.

At the National Security Committee, which is a committee of Cabinet headed by the Minister of Internal Affairs, before Gen. Aronda left for South Korea he had led the meeting to discuss security for the elections. We had reached a decision that we go out into the region as political leaders to ensure that our forces, the police mainly but supported by the army and other agencies, are guided and are prepared for us to have free, peaceful and fair elections. He did not only act on the regional front indeed but he also distinguished himself back home here too.

Before I conclude, let me make some comments on what my brother, the Leader of the Opposition, has said. Gen. Aronda, as you have all heard, was travelling back home from South Korea. He was discovered by the crew as they woke people up for breakfast. That needs to be clearly recorded. As the Prime Minister said, immediately we heard this we were not only shocked but we took immediate steps to ensure that everything possible was done to arrive at what caused the premature death of Gen. Aronda.

We sent to Dubai not eight experts but three doctors - two pathologists, headed by Dr Makumbi. That is where the inaccuracy of my brother, the Leader of Opposition, begins. We did not send eight experts. The objective of sending them was to ensure that we work alongside our colleagues in Dubai. Our expectation was that since Gen. Aronda passed on on an Emirates flight, which belongs to United Arab Emirates and it was in Dubai, that country would take the primary responsibility to lead the investigation. We sought their authorisation to send our experts and we also got in touch with Interpol so that a CID officer would work with them. 

As it turned out, our colleagues in Dubai were reluctant to do the post-mortem and we were really enraged by this attitude on behalf –(Interjection)– Can you listen? How else will you get the information? If you have your own information, lay it on the Table. To say the least, it angered us, particularly we the professionals, that our colleagues with whom we have friendly diplomatic relations would take that attitude. We had to appeal to His Excellency the President himself to communicate and appeal to the authorities in the United Arab Emirates that a post-mortem be done in that country. This was our insistence and there are communications to this effect. However, our colleagues - maybe we will eventually know the reason; maybe they are religious - could not bulge. 

We therefore had no alternative but to return our own and do the post-mortem here. In doing so, however, we also want to get to the root, if there is anything that is not covered. However, from the post-mortem, as professionals we have no doubt about a typical heart attack. Nevertheless, we have taken the precaution to ensure that we take other specimen - fluids and body parts - which are going to be further examined in our laboratory here and abroad so that at the end of the day, we have a clear conclusion.

If we are to pay tribute fairly to the late Gen. Aronda, in our reactions, yes it is sorrowful but we should be scientific. We should not just develop suspicions without a basis or a movement that leads to where one may have to be suspicious. In this regard, I would like to thank my brothers who were with me at the airport as we waited to receive the body of Gen. Aronda; I would like to thank them for a reason, which I will give: hon. Elijah Okupa, the honourable Dr Eriaku, hon. Reagan Okumu, hon. William Nzoghu and my brother, hon. James Baba, among others. While we were waiting in the VIP room, we were led mainly by hon. Okupa, seconded by hon. Reagan Okumu, in condemning the callous, irresponsible exploitation of social media. You all read and saw what people were saying without any basis, as if to take unfair advantage of the passing on of a hero like Gen. Aronda, without any facts. 

We must commend the people of Uganda from all overall the whole country. When we had a discussion in Cabinet in a special Cabinet meeting called by the Prime Minister, nearly 30 of us spoke in praise of Gen. Aronda and each of us brought a message from every corner of Uganda. Literally, people were asking if the body of Gen. Aronda could be moved countrywide so that the people of Uganda all over the whole country can give him a send-off. However, there are callous people who do not wish this country well and who think they can take advantage of this tragedy and incite and divide the population.

In that Cabinet meeting, I told my colleagues that if Gen. Aronda was to come back today and read what we were saying then in Cabinet, he would pick - I know my sister will speak but let me bring out - what Gen. Rebecca Otengo said.  (Interjections) – Okay, aspiring general. (Laughter) I was really impressed not only because of her age but because of the appreciation. She said Uganda has never been as united as today. Her evidence was that whether you go to TDA, FDC and NRM, you find all Ugandans in those formations without the tag of tribe, religion or part of the country. This is what Gen. Aronda contributed to; this is what the late Gen. Aronda would like us to keep and not to incite people with unfounded rumours.

When Gen. Aronda left the Ministry of Defence to head the Ministry of Internal Affairs, I said three things about him at the party we held. First, I said that he was my son because Linda, his wife, is a daughter of a close comrade of mine; two, that I liked this young man, Gen. Aronda, because he was so hardworking. The third thing I said was that Cabinet had received value addition by getting Gen. Aronda into Cabinet and my colleagues are here to bear me out.

Gen. Aronda was really an intersect of our society in different formations. He related very well related with religious leaders and that evidence is clear. He related with our cultural leaders all over the country. He was also working with security, and we who are here as MPs know how we related with him very well. So he was a meeting point for security, politics, culture and religion. His main concern was sustaining the stability of Uganda, unity, transformation and regional integration. 

We have lost a comrade in Ndugu Aronda prematurely, at the age of 56. We say in our culture, in the Rwenzoris, that death makes a mistake when it takes a young one when the old ones are there. I think this has been such a mistake on the part of death. Our duty, therefore, comrades, is to carry on the struggle to sustain what Gen. Aronda fought for and not to incite the people through reckless, malicious, unfounded allegations intended to take unfair advantage of the tragedy we have suffered. 

I pray to the Almighty God that the soul of comrade Aronda rests in eternal peace. I beg to support the motion. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga. As I invite the Chief of Defence Forces, I want to acknowledge a message from Rt Hon. Kidega, Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly. As I indicated, all the messages will be handed over to the family at the end of all the tributes. 

The Chief of Defence Forces is a seconder. Honourable members, let us have Members from the institutions where the late worked speak first and then we shall get to other Members and at that time I will use my guillotine of three minutes. (Laughter)

3.36
GEN. EDWARD KATUMBA-WAMALA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion as moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We, as the family of the UPDF, stand here in very deep grief but at the same time celebrating the life of our celebrated general, Gen. Aronda Nyakairima.

Gen. Aronda was one of those few rare characters who made the UPDF be what it is today, that institution which everybody today admires. (Applause) On behalf of the UPDF, I would like to extend our heartfelt condolences to the family, the Members of Parliament, the nation and all Ugandans upon the loss of our comrade. His sudden departure has left a very deep wound in our hearts and has left a very big gap in our institution.

Gen. Aronda was a person of impeccable character and personality and an accomplished soldier. He was a national leader. He was a very steadfast officer, very calm, firm and accommodative of different people’s ideas. (Applause) Gen. Aronda would pursue his idea with a lot of zeal and at the same time would have an ear for the different ideas of somebody. He was a very good listener. 

Gen. Aronda was a nationalist. He hated tribalism with a passion and I think Members who sit on the defence committee can attest to this. He was always irritated whenever Members on that committee brought out the tribal card during debates. He hated tribalism with a passion; he was a nationalist. This was even seen as early as when he left all the schools in western and central Uganda and went and did his HSC at Kitgum High School. He could have done it in any other place. That is why when the information came that Gen. Aronda had passed on, a dark cloud fell over the nation everywhere – from Masaka to Kitgum, Karamoja to Kigezi – and everybody was mourning because of what Gen. Aronda was - a nationalist.

Gen. Aronda was a very good combatant. We performed a number of combat missions together, starting in West Nile. That is when I first met him. I closely worked with him in combat missions against the West Nile Bank Front, when he was commanding the tank unit and I was commanding the infantry. He was a very resilient officer. We were able to pull that off with a lot of vigour and a lot of energy from him. 

At the same time, he was a very good combatant. His combat experience has already been alluded to by the Prime Minister and the Minister of Defence as well as the Leader of the Opposition. The fight against the LRA and its total defeat did not come by chance; it came because of the energies and strength of Gen. Aronda and the likes of him. I know that the north today enjoys the peace it is enjoying because of Gen. Aronda’s commitment. (Applause) 

While he was a very good combatant, he was also a very good peacemaker. At the time we had the issue of Migingo with our brothers in Kenya, when people where thumping their chests for war, Gen. Aronda said, “No”. Between him and Gen. Kianga, they sat down and resolved the issue without us going to war. I do not know how many times Gen. Aronda shuttled between Entebbe and Nairobi to go meet his counterpart to ensure Migingo does not blow out of proportion and that soberness should prevail over the situation. He was able to do that; he was a real peacemaker.

Gen. Aronda was a workaholic. Those who have worked with him can profess to that. He would work and work and work. I also want to join the Minister of Defence to thank Linda and the family for enabling Gen. Aronda to work this much for his nation because if they had not given him the comfort, definitely he would not have been able to do what he was able to do. (Applause)

In his vocabulary, Gen. Aronda never had words like “it cannot be done”. Whatever situation it was, Gen. Aronda would find a solution. I cannot forget when he was handing over to me as he was going to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, he said, “I have not left you anything; I have left you a mountain”. Later, I told him, “Sir, at least you have left me a mountain with studded boots and equipment and I know I will scale the mountain. But where you have gone, you are jumping from the frying pan to the fire because now internal security is more demanding in this terrorism age than my area”.

When the National ID Card Project came up, Gen. Aronda found himself in a situation where he wanted results delivered yesterday. He wanted to make sure that the national identity cards were delivered on time. Thinking out of the box, he came back to us in the military. He told me, “CDF, we cannot deliver the national identity cards at the pace at which our civil servants work.” He said that we needed people who were ready to work extra time without asking for extra money or allowances. We committed to him dedicated officers and they worked, day and night, and now the story is telling of how far he had brought the National Identity Card Project. (Applause)

Somebody else would have sat back and said that they were being frustrated but he said, “We must find a solution”. He was a results oriented manager.   

Gen. Aronda transformed our military. By the time he came on as the CDF, you all remember the stories of the unfitting uniforms and all other things. All that became history under Gen. Aronda. He cared so much about the welfare of his soldiers. We discovered that our soldiers were being cheated through exorbitant bank interest rates for loans. Gen. Aronda started and spearheaded the formation of the Wazalendo SACCO and today, we are talking of the most vibrant and efficient SACCO in the country.

Although Gen. Aronda has died at an early age, what he contributed to this nation will remain an indelible mark to this nation and in the UPDF. Gen. Aronda, we shall always miss you as an institution and friends. As somebody said, we know that you would have been here with us today if only Heaven was not very far.

To the family, we cannot give you anything but we leave you with Psalms 23 to comfort you. I would like to say that although Gen. Aronda has not left you material wealth, he has left you one big treasure – the good name and legacy he has left. (Applause) That name will open doors for you because, as you have heard, everybody has been touched.

I would like to end by saying that this shining star has set too early but we shall struggle on. We are not going to relent. We shall make sure that we achieve what Gen. Aronda believed in and more so the stability and transformation of this nation. May God rest your soul in eternal peace.  

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. Honourable members, I recognise the presence of hon. Elly Karuhanga, former Member of Parliament. I thank you for coming. 

Let us now hear from the last institution where he worked and where he left his colleague, hon. James Baba, in charge on his final journey, before I come to the others. 

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, we in the Ministry of Internal Affairs with our many departments and directorates join the rest of Ugandans in mourning the death of our fallen hero, Gen. Aronda Nyakairima. Also, our deep condolences go to the family, friends and the people of this country.

The Prime Minister mentioned the period he joined Cabinet as a minister on 23 May 2013 and he served in that capacity in our ministry for two years. When he came, he hit the ground running. His brief from His Excellency the President on assuming that office was to deliver the national ID card. 

We all know the challenges and mess we had with the stalled National ID Project where equipment was ordered and procured without storage for it and without a mechanism to implement it. However, as soon as this general came, with military precision he set us working. We now know the results of that and the majority of Ugandans have received this national ID. 

Without Gen. Aronda, this task would have been impossible. Why was this so?  Gen. Aronda had a different work ethic. I think his raison d’etre was to work and work and work, as previous speakers have said. I had never seen a man who put in so much to do his work. Some of us in the ministry did not appreciate his style and ethic of work – working through lunches, late at night, weekends and holidays in order to achieve this project. In the end, however, we saw the results it achieved. (Applause)

I would like to pay tribute to this gallant son for being a nationalist. A young Aronda chose to go for his A’ Level to Kitgum in the 1970s. We all know how chaotic this period of Idi Amin was but how Aronda chose to go and study in Kitgum, to me, lay the credentials of his nationalism. (Applause) Thereafter, the late related with anybody. We all sit here in this House, and Dr Kiyonga has mentioned this, and he related with the Opposition, the Sheiks, pagans or whoever. He would be with you and listen to you and deal with your issues. This is the nationalism that showed in him early. He moved from Rukungiri to Kitgum and later on travelled throughout the entire country. So, to me he proved that in this country, one can live and work anywhere. 

There is no place in Uganda that Gen. Aronda had not reached where duty called him. It was mentioned how he managed the disarmament in Karamoja and when the Luo and Kikuyus were at each other’s necks, he was there. We saw what happened between Amuru and Adjumani over the border conflicts. Gen. Aronda would go to any function wherever he was invited, whether in Abim, Namayingo, Kitgum or Kisoro. All you needed to do was to inform him and he would create time and be there. This was the general that I knew.  

In our ministry, he knew every staff member. Whether they were in the Department of Government Analytical Laboratory, Amnesty Commission or the Department of Light Weapons and Small Arms, Gen. Aronda knew them. He knew the excellent ones and real workers. He knew the problematic ones and reached out to them to try to sort out their issues. He was no idler. He moved and interacted to make sure everybody was on board. In short, he took interest in every person he worked with so that they could get along.

One thing that impressed me is that as soon as he left university, unlike the young men of today Gen. Aronda did not wait to look for government work; he found his niche and ventured out and today, see what he became. Today, there are many opportunities, what are we waiting for? There are opportunities for wealth creation; with these great entrepreneurial skills, what are they waiting for? He set us the example -

THE SPEAKER: Order members, order please.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, I want to dwell on the contribution that Gen. Aronda made to systems of Government. He delivered the multi-sectoral approach of doing business in Government through the national ID programme. When Cabinet gave him instructions to go and implement this project, he went multi-sectoral because he knew he would not deliver it alone with his ministry. He co-opted the Electoral Commission, the URSB, UBOS, Local Government, NITA-U; he told them, “We are targeting the same population, why don’t we work together to deliver this project?” So they collaborated, shared human resources - Electoral Commission had staff all over the country and offices and that is what we used - UBOS had vehicles and computers and these were brought in; Immigration brought in their personnel. So, the multi-sectoral approach delivered this project.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think this is a lesson for Government to learn, that it is possible to achieve some very good results if we work together to achieve one particular thing within a short time at minimum cost. I think Gen. Aronda showed us the way.

Gen. Aronda left us some task to do; he promised us a stable and peaceful election. You heard him; he said that Ugandans shall have a peaceful election. I want to appeal to Members of this House; let us work together and organise a peaceful election. This is our country and there is no other country we are going to. Let us work to ensure a peaceful election. For those of you who would want to interpret the laws differently, we shall make sure the trouble causers will face the law firmly.

Let me finally comment on the issue Dr Kiyonga raised about the social media and networks. It has been bothering us a lot in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Let me say that the malicious reporting about the death of Gen. Aronda has hurt many feelings including those of members of the family, members of Government, many people in society and the entire population. What are we doing about this? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I want to say on the Floor of this House that the Ministry of Internal Affairs is going to take an initiative -

THE SPEAKER: I think you should be addressing the Speaker.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, I apologise but I was drawing the attention of the Leader of Government Business through you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of ICT, UCC, together with the Police are going to make an initiative to come up with a legal framework to deal with these issues of social networks, which are so malicious and damaging to society.

As we bid farewell to Gen. Aronda, we take solace in the fact that he gave his best service to this country with remarkable achievement. We also take solace in the fact that he was a committed believer, so with this he has a guaranteed place in heaven with his chosen Lord. I want to pray to the Almighty God to grant solace to the widow, the children and their family to overcome this difficult period. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the laying of the wreaths, moving of the motion and seconding has taken two hours. Unfortunately, for the rest, I must use my guillotine; you must choose the most important things you want to say. You only have three minutes. I want to invite the Minister of Education to speak for three minutes. 

4.01
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of my family and on my own behalf and also on behalf of the people of Katakwi District, allow me to convey my sincere condolences to the family of the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima and indeed to the whole country.

Allow me first to thank his Excellency the President for appointing Gen. Aronda in different capacities, which enabled him to explore his potential, exploit his potential and also expose his potential and now allowing us to debate a number of achievements that Government registered through his tireless efforts. However, Madam Speaker, let me start by saying that one of the very strong characteristics that I admired in the person of the late Gen. Aronda was that he was corruption free. He was never named in any scandal involving corruption throughout his service in the army and also when he joined the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

Madam Speaker, you know, Teso, Lango, Acholi, Bugisu and Sebei border Karamoja. So I would like to add that because of the disarmament process, Karamoja is now peaceful and all those neighbouring areas are peaceful, courtesy of the dedicated service of Gen. Aronda Nyakairima. He logically devised a mechanism of phasing disarmament in Karamoja into three categories namely: sensitisation, voluntary disarmament and consequently, forceful disarmament. Now all the people in those areas are engaged in productivity.

Madam Speaker, when we were invaded by the LRA in Teso and Lango, Government worked very fast to develop working groups like the Arrow Boys and the Amuka to work hand in hand with the Army to see how to expeditiously defeat the LRA in those areas. However, after the mission was accomplished, Gen. Aronda spearheaded a campaign to disband the Arrow Boys and the militia with a view of having no guns in the hands of people who are not authorised to have guns. That reduced crime from the population. I think this death has left us with a test, a test for all of us to pursue what he stood for, a great deal of which was highlighted by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister: Pan Africanism, peace and security, unity, patriotism, name it.

I would like to say that we shall not relent but continue pursuing what Gen. Aronda stood for; it is for the good of our country. I would like to say that may the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace and may the Lord sustain the bereaved.

4.11
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the late Gen. Aronda I did realise that once you are a good person, you can be good irrespective of where you are. That is why you find that even in the ministry they were working as a team. We know very well that there are some ministries where the senior ministers do not work with the junior ministers, but that was not in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

We have heard a number of cases reported that generals have been grabbing land from the peasants. That was not the late Gen. Aronda –(Applause)– We never heard anything about him. I wish the rest would emulate him.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, about four of our colleagues here would not have even get nominated in the next elections, but I will mention one whom I helped because we went together to meet Gen. Aronda because he had missed. Hon. Odonga Otto had missed and had been deceived that because he had the first identity card he did not need to register. When the list came, he was not there. We approached Gen. Aronda who made it possible to have hon. Otto register. That was the gentleman he was. Otherwise, if it was any of us here, they would play the politics. Gen. Aronda did not do that; he cut across.

Madam Speaker, I want to confirm what hon. Kiyonga stated here on the issue of the media. It is so painful that some Ugandans can afford to forge stories and pictures. You saw the pictures which were in the Red Pepper yesterday of the late Gen. Aronda in the theatre. If you looked at that picture, that was just an imagination of an individual. I am surprised that the Minister of Internal Affairs here is just lamenting. You are always fast to take action, why don’t we take action on the Red Pepper, the Sun and Hello? 

Tomorrow we are going to wake up, these papers are going to incite people and this country shall be put on fire. You do not know what you are playing with. I do not mind what they say about Elijah, - they can write what they write like they have written before - but someone has died and it is painful to the family and Ugandans. How can someone go ahead to play with the computer and do those graphics and we do not take action? Government, can you take action? We are fast at teargassing people, why don’t you take action here? I think with this, you should be able to take action.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have all applauded the late who is lying here. Can you, in honour of the general, postpone the launch of your primary campaigns tomorrow because it will be painful for you to be launching while we are in Kololo mourning our colleague. You are launching your primaries tomorrow and then on Sunday we will be burying him and some people will be campaigning. Can you please postpone it to Monday or Tuesday so that we are all able to go and say farewell to our colleague in Rukungiri? I appeal to the Government side, the ruling party; please, let us give a befitting send-off to our colleague.

Finally, on a personal note, when I lost my dad last year and my daughter, I was touched when Gen. Aronda called me and he gave me a message and made a contribution towards the burial expenses of my family members. Forever, I shall remain indebted to the late Gen. Aronda. May his soul rest in eternal peace.  

4.11
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Honourable colleagues, with a deep heart, I would like to second the motion in paying tribute to our fallen colleague and hero, a worker and a humble gallant son of Uganda. 

As Shadow Minister for Agriculture, at one time hon. Aronda, then Chief of Defence Forces, happened to be a member of our committee on agriculture. He was very diligent in attending both committee meetings and other programmes outside Parliament to the extent that at one time I asked him, in a joking way, whether we are safe given that the CDF was all the time attending committee meetings and other workshops. He had this to say: “My brother, it is not Aronda who is working alone; I have put in place an institutional framework and the institution is working, so we are safe.” That is the confidence of the leader in Gen. Aronda. 

Indeed, as another speaker said, he was a workaholic. I would like to confirm that Gen. Aronda would spare no time to rest. Unfortunately, whereas it is good to be a workaholic and to work hard, I would like to appeal to you; - this is now a caution to all of us – we are likely candidates. You know, a body is like a machine and at a certain time t, it will require rest. We need to find moments in our life to at least have a rest because when you work all time round - In fact, there are some persons who are called multi-taskers; they are doing this and the other at the same time without giving the body rest. In this way, it is possible to have a physiological breakdown.

I would like to commend Gen. Aronda for the effort he put in pacifying our country. Indeed, many of us are reaping the fruits. In my opinion, to the contrary, in the fire brigade when you are trying to put out a fire you go to the source. I would like us to pay tribute to our gallant sons and daughters who have put their lives at the frontlines to ensure our own safety. (Applause) The blood that is being lost in Somalia is in a bid to make us safer. (Applause)

4.14
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, the bereaved family, especially the widow and the children, relatives and friends. I stand here to pay tribute to a gallant soldier and true Ugandan who upheld the Ugandan motto faithfully until the end. 

Gen. Aronda and I come from the same district, Rukungiri, and the same sub-county of Buyanja. Gen. Aronda grew up in a religious family, which shaped his good character and made him a God-fearing person. That is why he was respected and loved by many regardless of age, position and belief. 

Colleagues, Gen. Aronda, was a servant and he put service to his country first. He served this country selflessly and faithfully until his time of death. As leaders, we all have a huge lesson to learn from him. This is a challenge to many of us as leaders in this country. You would not call Gen. Aronda at any time – even at night – and he did not pick your call. 

On this note, I would like also to thank hon. Gen. Katumba Wamala. Whenever you call Gen. Katummba Wamala, even at night, he picks your call. Thank you very much. He saved my life at 2.00 a.m. last year when I was travelling with a group of people and we were attacked by thugs between Mbarara and Lyantonde. I tried to call more than 12 officers but they refused to pick my call. When I called Gen. Katumba Wamala, he picked my call and saved our lives; we were actually many.

Madam Speaker, the country has lost an outstanding person. However, as people of Rukingiri, we have lost a peacemaker. Gen. Aronda loved peace and loved to see this country peaceful. He was determined to make a positive change, especially in the coming elections, as my colleague has said. He had high hopes that he would live to see a highly developed Rukungiri District and above all a better Uganda for all Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, Gen. Aronda loved children, especially the vulnerable. He was looking after over 200 children. This country has very many children on the streets. We hope the Government will do something about this alarming issue to carry on Gen. Aronda’s legacy.

Gen. Aronda has gone at a time when he had come out to tackle the issue of the illegal militia of Kakooza Mutale. This country expects the Government to solve this problem as soon as possible.

Madam Speaker, many people have talked about the death of Gen. Aronda, but I call upon the widow, Madam Linda, and the family members that let us put our eyes on the creator and know that Gen. Aronda has passed on to a better world. Farewell, Gen. Aronda. May God receive you and place you in the bosom of Abraham. Rest in peace, peace-loving nationalist.

4.19
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, the family of the bereaved, ladies and gentlemen, on my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Obongi, whom I represent here, I say condolences for this loss.

As the Shadow Minister of Defence and Security and as a member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, I had disagreed with Gen. Aronda Nyakairima before. From those disagreements, however, I learnt that useful and constructive disagreement is healthy and good for our country. I believe that if there is someone with whom you have disagreed and you believe you are right, let that person be alive until the idea on which you disagreed comes to pass and he comes to shake your hands and say, “Fungaroo, you were right.” This is what I have been waiting for. I thought my colleagues, including the late Gen. Aronda, would one day come and shake my hands, saying, “Fungaroo, you were right.” 

One idea that we disagreed on – exchanging words with the Ministry of Defence – and we now see it coming to pass is the idea of a Uganda national defence university or the University of Science and Technology, Lugazi. Our idea as the Opposition was that we want to have a national defence university like the one of the US, NDU, accessible to all people, including civilians - people who are charged with the responsibility of managing technical affairs of security and yet they are not in the military. They could be allowed to go and learn from there as opposed to a university strictly for military officers. 

We were moving progressively on that idea. We want to have a university in Uganda which will be useful not only to military officers, but also to people with a civilian background charged with the responsibility of managing security. We were improving on this issue but now we have lost Gen. Aronda.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, is the question of useful doubt. Useful doubt is good in science. I have useful doubt about the results of the post-mortem examination. I doubt the results of the post-mortem examinations –(Interjections)– I am not saying that you should not agree with it. However, as a person with a science background, I know that doubt is useful in science – (Interjections) - I studied science from St. Mary’s College Kisubi and Ombaci - (Laughter).

Honourable members, for those of you who know the story of a scientist called Galileo and the Catholic Church, go back and do some research on the basis of my doubt of the results of this post-mortem examination. My friend did not die of the results indicated in the post-mortem results. Thank you.

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Rebecca Otengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to second the motion and also send my condolences to the family and the people of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I will run through how I knew Gen. Aronda Nyakairima. The first time I met him in the line of duty was when we recruited the Amuka and they started to riot. Gen. Aronda made sure that he reached there in less than 24 hours. My elders, commanded by my mother, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, decided that I was the one to go and meet Gen. Aronda Nyakairima whom I had not met before. The history of Northern Uganda makes us fear army uniforms because the former commanders treated us as perpetrators instead of victims in the war. However, he received me and he spent about four hours speaking to the Amuka, who accepted to go back to the training. I would like to remember him for that.  

I would like to remember hon. Aronda Nyakairima for rescuing the children who were abducted, and sometimes at the risk of the army losing their lives. The children had that testimony to give.

Madam Speaker, I would like to remember hon. Aronda Nyakairima for camping in Northern Uganda. At that time, there were some people who were mandated to lead the defence in this country, but they said they would never step beyond Karuma. However, Gen. Aronda did not do that; when he was made the Chief of Defence Forces, we felt we were part of this country because some of the commanders that time had made sure we were not part of Uganda. I would like to testify that he made a difference.

Hon. Aronda Nyakairima’s approach was in a triangular way that started from big and would end with you as an individual. That is the kind of person I do know of hon. Aronda Nyakairima. Like the Minister of Defence said, we have moved a long way as Ugandans and of course, Northern Uganda. Today, I can have my mother, Cecilia Ogwal, from UPC in FDC, I am in NRM, Betty Amongi is in UPC, and others are in DP while others are in TDA. I can have my brother hon. Mao being supported by Kakande and disagreeing with Lukwago. I can also have my brother, Sseggona, as an Anglican in DP while I am in NRM. That is a very fundamental change in this country. 

Last, but not least, since I do not have time, I have this to say: as a representative from Northern Uganda, the minister in charge of rehabilitation and an Anglican by faith, I would like to disassociate ourselves as the people of Northern Uganda from the superstitious statement made by my Bishop Mark Baker Ochola. I would like to take this opportunity to appeal to my church leadership of the Anglican faith to make sure that this is mitigated. It is because Gen. Aronda left children and we also have children and they must live together as Ugandans.

May your soul rest in peace, my brother. I say all this for God and my country. I thank you.

4.27
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to mourn a fallen son of this country and more so, Rukingiri where some of us were born.

Madam Speaker, I wanted to go to science because I have to help Fungaroo as a medical doctor and a physician so that people can be very happy. Mr Fungaroo, when you have chronic hypertension, the heart is working against too much resistance and it becomes very big. That is what we call overuse hypertrophy. When you have atherosclerosis, the atheroma will just eat the wall of the vessels supplying the heart muscle. When it is eaten and the pressure goes very high, the vessels will rapture and that is what we call myocardial infarction in heart attack.

Now, let me leave science and go to Gen. Aronda as a wonderful person from Rukingiri. Madam Speaker, I had never seen a humble soldier like this man in this country. I had a meeting recently with him in Mbarara and today in my car, I got the last note he wrote to me in which he called me “comrade”. Can you imagine, a general calling a little man like me comrade! He asked me to give a speech and also call all Members of Parliament from Mbarara to speak. Some big people do not want to give some young people chances to speak. That is why he was a friend to everybody in this Parliament. 

Even if Gen. Aronda Nyakairima made a mistake, you would not notice. You would only see a loved man by everybody in this Parliament. Madam Speaker, there is a person in Mbarara who stole land that belonged to National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO). When we asked him, he said he thought I wanted this land. Gen. Aronda has not taken any wetland in this country and yet he was a very powerful person in the country. 

Madam Speaker, you would not see Gen. Aronda’s gun. Others when they get guns, they go around swaying their guns –Laughter)– but I had never seen his gun and yet this man was friendly to me.

When he was a brigadier in Masaka - I am in pain because this man gave me a cow to slaughter at my wedding. You see, I am in trouble –(Laughter)– One of the relatives of this wonderful man died, the late John Rubakuba, after he got injured in a car crash. The man told me that he was dying as I pumping oxygen for him when I was a doctor in Mbarara. He said that when he dies, I should tell Brig. Aronda and Brig. Henry Tumukunde to look after his children. I am in pain now for the children of my dead friend because he has also gone.

Madam Speaker, we have been saying Gen. Aronda has not been corrupt and he used to work from morning to evening to make sure we get identity cards. I now request the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to stop eating money of pensioners so that this man rests in peace. Pensioners have not received their money for three months and people are here sleeping. If you want Gen. Aronda to sleep very well, pay the old people who have served this country for so long.

I thank my brother and he should rest in peace and I will find him there when I die.

4.31
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende):  Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I take this opportunity to convey my condolences to the family, the UPDF fraternity, Parliament of Uganda and the country at large.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank God for the gift of life he gave the honourable Gen. Aronda. I again thank God for the opportunity he granted me for the two years I have had to work very closely with Gen. Aronda. Since I started working, I had never associated with a person like him. I do not think there is any amount of words that can describe the person of Gen. Aronda, but just in summary, I can say he was the most humble person I had ever met in my life.

In the time I associated with hon. Aronda, I knew him as a person who feared only one thing in this world and that was failure. Whatever task he had to do, he made sure he accomplished it. As the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, during the time we have associated with him he really helped us to accomplish a lot of things. Many times, you have been thanking me on behalf of the committee for the several challenging tasks we have accomplished. However, we were able to do all these just because of Gen. Aronda.

Honourable colleagues, I would like to inform you that when Gen. Aronda was made the Minister of Internal Affairs, we had the project of national IDs going on. When he came to the committee, the first thing he told me as the chairperson was to request the committee to halt the project and he redesigns it. Indeed, as a committee, we did it; we halted the project and Gen. Aronda redesigned it. This is a project which had a huge budget but by the time he came in, there was zero balance on that budget and yet there was no single ID which had been issued to any Ugandan. 

Gen. Aronda lived and breathed the ID Project. His greatest dream was to see all Ugandans holding national identity cards. His greatest dream was for Government of Uganda to be able to identify all its persons. We would work day and night. Gen. Aronda would push the committee. He would encourage us and give us the morale to work even up to midnight. We are happy about this. None of us complained because of the way he cooperated with us. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that Gen. Aronda is one person who lived a selfless life. He would give in his all and time to make sure that he made Uganda a better place for all of us to live in. It is so saddening that God has decided to take Gen. Aronda before he sees all Ugandans with identity cards. With that, I would like to request Ambassador Baba, the Minister of State, that the greatest thing you can in memory of Gen. Aronda is to make sure that the ID project is implemented to a logical end. 

Colleagues, as we talk now, Gen. Aronda died on the - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I will give half a minute to the chairperson to conclude. She has been working with him. 

MS NAMUGWANYA: He died when he was still trying to make sure that the ID project is implemented to a logical end. I also want to request that we make sure that Parliament handles the NGO Bill to a logical end as soon as possible. These are the dreams Gen. Aronda had. He was looking at a Uganda where every Ugandan can be identified, where every Ugandan has a passport - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to recognise the presence of hon. Ali Kirunda Kivenjinja, a former minister and Member of Parliament. You are welcome; thank you for coming.

We have received a message from hon. Hajji Moses Kigongo. We shall pass it on to the family. We have also received a message from the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme where the honourable member was a contributing member. We have also got condolences and contributions from the Catholic Chaplain at Parliament, Fr Balikudembe, who has presented Shs 200,000. The Buganda Caucus has contributed Shs 1,000,000. We have received it.

4.37
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to pay tribute to Gen. Aronda, an approachable soldier regardless of status. He was a calm general who would sit and listen to what we wanted to tell him and would always advise accordingly. Gen. Aronda was a person you would call at any time. Whenever you called him, he would pick his phone. If he missed the call, he would call back and ask you what you wanted to tell him.

Gen. Aronda was a down-to-earth soldier who was loyal to everybody. The first time I met him, I had an issue and I wanted him to help me and he advised me. He kept on calling me to see how far I had gone with it.

There is a time he came to Mpigi during the national ID registration exercise. There was a certain old man that he shook hands with and this man called me on Saturday and told me, “My general has died.” It was his first time to shake hands with a general. He wanted to come here today; I do not know why he is not here. However, he had rung me and told me that he was coming. 

It is very unfortunate that he passed on when the ID project was incomplete. He would have loved to see all Ugandans with national IDs. On behalf of the people of Mpigi District and myself, I wish to convey my sincere condolences to the family, all his colleagues and to all the Members of Parliament. May his soul rest in peace.

4.39
CAPT. MIKE MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I rise to support this motion. Gen. Aronda, the gallant son of the African Continent, was the epitome of humility, an officer and a gentleman. Gen. Aronda was a patriot, a nationalist, a Pan-Africanist and a revolutionary leader. This is a man who believed that the African Continent, Uganda and East Africa should have peace and stability in order to move forward. I wish to thank Ndugu Dr Kiyonga. This is because he has elucidated on most of the critical issues that surrounded the demise of our great patriot. 

I was involved in the struggle to bring peace and stability in the northern part of this country. Gen. Aronda was then the Chief of Defence Forces. The Arrow Boys and the Amuka Boys are also part of this son of Uganda’s contribution. Madam Speaker, fellow colleagues and comrades, I want to say that as the dark clouds enveloped this country on Saturday, the whole of Uganda and more so eastern Uganda - The Arrow Boys that were part of the supplementary team to liberate this country from the fascist forces, those who were perpetuating instability in this country in the name of Kony and his forces were all brought to their knees. No wonder, Kony is now deep in Garamba not for tourism but out of the pressure which was mounted by this gallant son. 

Comrades, I was able to witness all this. At one point when we had Gen. Oguti now in Teso, people did not believe that Kony forces would die. However, when a man called Opio was killed in Odudui, we brought his body for display. He was also called Lapwonyi. It was important that people got to see that Kony forces could actually die. A little after that, another fighter called Brig. Tabule, self-styled, was put of action - (Member timed out.)

4.43
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion with strong observations and a lot of lessons learnt. 

As the chairperson of the UPDF Caucus in which he has been a member since 1996 and on behalf of my family, I would like to extend my condolences to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, who has worked with him for a long time; the Speaker and the whole of Parliament; to Ms Linda Nyakairima and the children; to the entire Nyakairima family; the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Defence; Generals, officers and the UPDF combatants; and all those who in one way or another worked and loved him. I also send condolences to those who were impacted and influenced by the efficacious contact with this special person and hero, Gen. Aronda, whom we are saying farewell to today.

I have known Gen. Aronda for 33 years, through thick and thin, and I would request that we look not at what passes by but what he has left behind. The loss of Gen. Aronda is a great one in every way and at every level - from the family up to the continental level. He accomplished a lot and our challenge is whether we shall continue with his struggle.

Madam Speaker, I believe in certain ways of communication. I would like to remind you of one of our old songs, so that we can revive our spirit in the fight to continue with the struggle. This is how the song goes:

“Fellow countrymen and patriots in the struggle, 
Our country Uganda must be free.
We have lost our friends and comrades in the struggle
Our country Uganda must be free. 
Comrade Aronda and other comrades in the struggle, they have fought their fight and Uganda is free…” – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I give you one more minute for the UPDF Caucus.

GEN. TUMWIINE: Madam Speaker, that is how the world is unfair sometimes. There is no way I can talk about Gen. Aronda in one minute. If you cannot allow me three or four minutes, I will leave it here because he has spoken, he has left his mark, he has left his legacy which is speaking.

If you allowed me, I would just say the following: he was admirable, loyal, dependable and reliable for all of us who knew and worked with him. He had a lot of faith in the success of the struggle and a better Uganda thereafter, unlike the one we had grown up in. He sacrificed his all for others and for a better future for Uganda and Ugandans. He had total loyalty to the leadership, right from the resistance time up to the present, especially to the Commander-in-Chief. He consistently championed our focus on the four questions of where we have come from, where we are at each particular stage, where we would like to go and how we would like to go there - (Member timed out.)

4.48
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I also would like to fully associate myself with my colleagues that have spoken before about a life well lived by our very own. Today, I join others in celebrating that life.

When I received the news of the passing on of my brother, we were travelling to Kitgum to attend the burial of hon. Anywar’s father. We were all shattered. I had known Gen. Aronda at a close level for eight years. First, I had known him professionally as I executed my duties; I would approach him over complaints by UPDF officers who wanted their pay after being discharged. He was always right on the mark when approached.

My colleagues have described him and I can only say that he was a good man who lived for too short a time. One day, I stood here and I accused tall men and I gave an example of Gen. Aronda. I said, “Tall men like you kidnapped me and when I walk in the street and I see men of your height, I try to run away”. He did not take it at that level. Outside the Chamber, he invited me for lunch and took me out to the parliamentary canteen for lunch. He paid for my lunch and said, “I called you for a reconciliation lunch. I was the CDF when you suffered your fate. We make strategic mistakes for which I am sorry.” I then concluded then that he was a good man. 

Having said that, I would like to join my colleagues that have said that it is not good to use social media, especially in trying times like these; I agree. I fully associate myself with that because it causes trauma and greater pain to all of us concerned.

This gentleman has been public property; he was our property and we were his second family. We shall continue to pray for him. As an intelligence officer, he gathered intelligence and as a combatant, he confronted evil. We thank him and thank the President for choosing him and bringing him to that level. I can give assurance that every man and woman, given a chance, can give amazing results, even at a presidential level. (Laughter)

Ladies and gentlemen, I also would like to say that for those who are engaging a lot in speculation, it is not healthy for the country. Why are we as Government - I am now speaking as an officer of Government - perennial suspects in all suspicious deaths? I think we must also shave this away from our shoulders by cleaning ourselves and behaving transparently. This is not the first time or second time; why would it continue? 

Finally, I would like to agree with the Minister for Defence that it is time to act scientific. However, we can only act scientific if the records are on table for every man and woman to see. That is the only way we can guarantee our safety. As public property, we are entitled to access the documents relating to the death of our very own. 

I thank you and I pray for my brother. To the family, we stand with you in grief. We shall continue paying tribute with you and celebrating a well lived life. Gen. Aronda, my brother, rest in peace.

4.52
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Agago District, I would like to convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family of the fallen son of the country. 

As people of the district of Agago, we would like to remember Gen. Aronda Nyakairima for three very important and strategic reasons. One is his great contribution towards the end of cattle thieving from the Karamoja people in Agago District when he was CDF. 

I would like to confirm the statement from other Members who have said that Gen. Aronda was a very simple man whom you could call anytime of the day or night and he would pick your call. Whenever he found a missed call, he would call back. Madam Speaker, I remember when I was a Woman Member of Parliament of Pader District; it was a very difficult time for us because we were experiencing very tough times from the Karamoja raids. Whenever I rang Gen. Aronda, be it at 2.00 a.m., he would say, “My sister, be guaranteed; they will be arrested.” I would like to confirm to this House that his great contributions have enabled us to have some peace in Agago District.

The second reason I would like to remember Gen. Aronda for today is the reason I drove all the way from Agago. On 3 September 2015, I had lunch with the late Gen. Aronda in the canteen and he had promised to visit the district because of some security problems that we had and because of his great contribution in the security of the district. He had promised he was coming this week. It is very unfortunate today that he lies dead before this Parliament before visiting my district in order to handle issues of internal security.

On behalf of the people Agago, I would like to console the family because the late was a very great friend of the people of Agago. He was a very great friend especially to the people of Patongo Town Council and the people of Patongo Sub County as a whole. He would not spend a week without communicating to make sure that our district is a secure place. The last moment I spent with him on 3 September 2015 in the canteen of this Parliament was when he said to me, “Hon. Akello, I would like to speak to one of your voters.” (Member timed out_)

4.56
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and to bring condolences to the family and the country from the people of Masaka where Gen. Aronda worked for many years. 

There are two generals that Masaka people loved very much and one of them is with us here. Actually, the two of them are here – one lying here and one lives, and that is, Gen. Oketta. These two generals gave men in uniform a new face and look to the people of Masaka, aware of their history with armies and militias. Gen. Aronda served Masaka when I was a little young man going to school. I have recollections about his relationship with the people of Masaka with a lot of nostalgia and grief. 

I heard people wondering why Gen. Aronda had his high school education in Kitgum. At one stage, we had one country called Uganda and you could go anywhere and have a good education without fear that you would get a problem. I think in serving his memory well, he leaves behind a good lesson of recollecting what it took to build Uganda; that you could move from wherever you were and go to Kitgum or to Kamuli and have the same education with somebody in Masaka, in Kitovu, and everywhere. (Applause) We miss this as a people, and as leaders it is our duty to make sure that at some stage, Gen. Aronda’s children must find reason to go and have education in Amuru or anywhere in this country.

Madam Speaker, I believe that lessons of his service also go to inform us on how we must behave as leaders. While in Masaka, Gen. Aronda was very powerful but of course, very respectful; at no one time did he cross the Rubicon in interfering and trying to circumvent the choices of the people. He respected political leaders; he was a very powerful general but whenever the people decided, he obliged. 

You will recollect, Madam Speaker – (Member timed out.)

4.59
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima.

It was on Saturday, 12 September 2015, when I was burying my dad that I learnt that Gen. Aronda had passed on. Let me take this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to thank you and your office for your representation at the burial of my dad and I thank the honourable colleagues who travelled all the way to Kitgum. Thank you very much.

Gen. Aronda was my O.B. I studied in Kitgum High School even if much later. As my colleague has just stated, at that time the institutions were working. I am sure his mzee found comfort in the fact that Gen. Aronda could travel and study in Kitgum when he is secure and guaranteed quality education that was able to bring him to Makerere University, which at the moment needs to be revived. At that time, you did not need to lobby somebody to go to any school; it was purely on merit. What has gone wrong? I pray that we get a lesson from now.  

We are proud as people of Kitgum that we contributed to the general, the gentleman Aronda whom we are talking about today.  He studied in that environment and he got cultured in our environment. The education, the mentoring, is worth celebration today. As I came back last night, I got information from the headmaster, the staff and students of Kitgum High School to come and bring condolences to the family, Parliament and the country for the loss of their old student. That is why I laid the wreath as an O.G of the late.

Madam Speaker, I would like to also associate myself with what has been said. In Parliament, we used to call ourselves O.G and O.B. Gen. Aronda was so friendly and most of the time he acted by quoting the law. Above all, unlike other generals, here is a general who would stand before you - most of us are civilians - without an intimidating face. Again, this is a man who could concede to the suggestion of a civilian. (Laughter) 

He never mentioned those who fought in the bush and I was wondering, “Wasn’t he one of those who fought?” It is just because he was cultured, humble and above all he was a gentleman. However, others will intimidate us even on the Floor of Parliament. That was not Gen. Aronda. That is why I glorify his actions. (Member timed out.)

5.03
MR ODOO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last month, Gen. Aronda was in my constituency launching the issuance of national identity cards. He called me, we met at a hotel and made a programme, which is very unusual for most of our ministers; they come to our constituencies and launch programmes without informing us. That is something we should learn from.

Secondly, Gen. Aronda came to my village as the guest of honour at Katungu Church. He bought a heifer and donated it to the women, which is very unusual. Some people just come, buy and take. (Laughter) That, again, is something we should learn.

On the 3rd of this month, I met Gen. Aronda in the corridors as we were entering Parliament for the sitting. We talked about development and he said, “Bushenyi people, you work as a team.” I said that is what is meant by development irrespective of parties. He just smiled very simply, parted my shoulder and we entered Parliament. 


However, what challenges me is that, this has been an international man and you dispatched a team to United Arab Emirates to do a post-mortem. Why couldn’t you get another international team to carry out a post-mortem in United Arab Emirates than have it done in Uganda? You would have put away all these shameful rumours from the media by having an international team carry out a post-mortem. It challenges some of us. You cannot do a post-mortem of Gen. Aronda like you are doing a post-mortem of a hen. You are talking of Mr Ngabirano, who is a relative but this is a coffee man; what does he know about a post-mortem? 

We should learn from now that if a big person dies, to dispel all those fears and rumours get an international body to carry out a post-mortem so that we can believe it here. We pray that his soul rests in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I invite hon. Mwiru, I would like to say that when we are contributing here, we should also understand the feelings of the family. I do not know how much time Linda would have had to wait for international investigations. All these days, dealing with mourners, waiting, uncertain; please, he had a family.

5.06
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and pay tribute to our fallen colleague. 

The first time I met Gen. Aronda on an issue, I had to open an emotional bank account in my heart, and that was related to the National Identity Card Project. I put it to him that he was calling the exercise successful but there were no machines in my constituency. He said, “We shall end by the deadline”. I replied, “Something cannot end before it starts; I will close that process.” He then called me at night and said, “My brother, I have found out that you are right. Can you come to my office tomorrow and we find a solution?” We met and increased the number of machines in the constituency to carry out the exercise. That was a patriot.

Madam Speaker, in life some people die twice but I am happy that Gen. Aronda has died once. He cherished the values he fought for. At times, when we are paying tribute, there is a culture in this country that even if someone was bad, when that person dies we must say something good. Personally, I do not belong to that school of thought. 

When I had an issue in Jinja East Municipality about the demolition of a plot on Aldina Road, my good friend, hon. James Baba, gave wrong information to Parliament. When I contacted Gen. Aronda I said, “These people say they are connected but I am also connected to the people and we shall die at that place.” He then called me and asked if we can meet. He called again and said, “Hon. Mwiru, I have got the information. I am taking this matter to Cabinet and we shall come up with a report.” Madam Speaker, I would like to bear witness; Gen. Aronda presented a report in this House and the so-called big people who had connections did not challenge us over that matter.

I would like to say that I am greatly indebted to Gen. Aronda. When I went to his office, he taught me one thing, that in life before you want to be understood, seek first to understand. There is no way you will solve a problem without first understanding it.
Whenever he dealt with any issue, his was not a win-lose situation; he would say, “We can find a compromise. This matter can be solved.” 

I had reached the level of calling him, “We shall discuss”. We had a matter here on the NGO Bill, for example, and I asked him, “Mr Minister, do you believe in RDCs heading these committees of NGOs at the districts?” I told him I trusted him to look me in the face and say he was doing the correct thing. He told me, “Hon. Mwiru, we shall discuss.” He had made us reach the level of thinking that whatever he said was correct because of the culture he had built in himself; you would see an honest person.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, if these values would be passed on – I think they will be passed on to his children –(Member timed out.)

5.09
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, death has no ideological or tribal boundary. I am very happy that we are all speaking in one spirit. I am very happy that you have given us this opportunity. 

However, Madam Speaker, many times that we have had very important national issues to discuss, we turn up in big numbers. There is nothing in this country that would be so important to cause any Member of Parliament, who associated with Gen. Aronda, to be absent from the House on this day. It is the only day that you have given us to pay tribute as Members of Parliament. I am very disappointed that our colleagues enjoy being with us when we are not there; while the family members are looking, we are absent and the excuse is that we are too busy. Madam Speaker, this is un-cultural and should not be supported. 

Gen. Aronda died on duty and he achieved so much. I think that is to the pride of the ruling Government. The ruling party should be very proud of Gen. Aronda, that he has shown himself to be a true Ugandan. Many people wonder why I always referred to Gen. Aronda as my son. Indeed, he was my son. I always used to tell him that his dark skin makes me suspect that his father could have been an Acholi or a South Sudanese. (Laughter) He would say, “What is your problem, hon. Ogwal, on this matter?” He remained my son, I loved and respected him. Even when you bullied Gen. Aronda, he would remain humble and smile back. He was a unique personality.

Madam Speaker, Gen. Aronda was a man that I observed on the frontbench of Parliament defending Bills. We went confrontational with him on the ID project. I was very hard with him. However, you will be surprised that Gen. Aronda would cross to my side after debate and say, “Mum, you cannot treat me like that”. (Applause) He would disarm me completely and I would tell him, “Do not do it again”. (Laughter) Very few people would do that; they would return with an abuse or something like that.

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)


THE SPEAKER: Because of your age, I will give you half a minute only.

MS OGWAL: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I do not see the chairman of Lango Parliamentary Group here but I would like to say that the Langi are very proud that Gen. Aronda and Gen. Katumba Wamala escorted Kony across the border. (Applause) There is nothing more important to the people of Lango than peace, which has come as a result of the contribution of my son and also my sister, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, who always stood with us and several others.

Madam Speaker, allow me to say that if there is anything that we can do in honour of Gen. Aronda, let us do two things. One, for the family that he has left behind, because he died young, let the Government and people of Uganda take care of them. This is the only thing that we can do to thank him because he would have done better but he is no longer there. 

Secondly, he allowed me to address the DPCs and RDCs in Lira and he pleaded with me to lobby for the establishment of medical centres at the district police barracks because many policemen are deployed outside leaving their wives and children. He said that we had to do something about it. I would like you, Madam Speaker and this Parliament, to take this up as something, which we must implement in remembrance of Gen. Aronda.

Finally, to those of you who come from Acholi, Gen. Aronda was very proud, Madam Speaker, when you asked me to represent you in Kitgum High Girls’ School and he said -(Member timed out) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you were representing me; complete the statement. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to plead to the Acholi people; let us organise the Kitgum High School boys in memory of Gen. Aronda and his commitment. He had wanted to identify with the improvement of that school. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to put on record that there is a big difference between you and Gen. Aronda because your roots are in Northern Uganda. (Laughter) I thank you.

5.16
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My condolences go to the family. I know when death occurs like this, people will talk so well, comfort you, be around you but a moment will come when you remain lonely. So, the most difficult part will be felt by the family. Therefore, my condolences and best wishes go to you so that God gives you the guidance to live and survive. I also appeal to the army leadership to open the gates for the family whenever they would like to go to the army headquarters so that they can access the privileges of the late Gen. Aronda.

It is very painful when death occurs and many theories come up. It is always said that a human being will only cry twice in the whole of his or her life - at birth and in death. From the explanation we are getting, we have not heard that Gen. Aronda cried in death. It is a general rule of nature and one would question if even the people who were seated next to him could not realise that something was going on until a waitress came to wake him up for breakfast and that is when they discovered him dead. That raises a lot of issues. What could have gone wrong for somebody to die quietly? Really, that is not possible.

The general rule is that you cry –(Interjections)– yes, you cry twice – and you struggle; whether it is heart attack, you jerk. It happens! Therefore, this is a painful thing. I think when people mourn and raise some issues, these should be taken as serious issues. If you come and just explain by saying, “We discovered he had died when we attempted to wake him up for breakfast”, it raises a lot of issues.

Madam Speaker, I got to know Gen. Aronda when I was a student at Makerere and he was a captain in State House. I met him in civilian clothes and I told hon. Betty Bigombe, “This gentleman looks like an intelligence officer”. She asked me, “How did you know?” She told me he was a captain and an intelligence officer working there. 

The second time I saw him was during Operation Iron Fist. It was a very difficult time but he paved way for us, with Col Okello who is now a major general, to reach Kony’s fighters who had crossed back. That is when we delivered the letter from the President to the rebels and that began the process of the peace talks that eventually ended up – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I will give half a minute for the commissioner.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for honouring the Commission. I will make my last appeal. There are two things Gen. Aronda left at the Table here. There was the issue of land conflicts. I liked it so much that he had assessed the whole country and the last time we tasked him to go back and bring us the general land problems in the whole country. I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Internal Affairs; hon. Baba, please do that.

The last thing hon. Gen. Aronda left here was the question of the militias. Let us not just beat around the bush. He mentioned Kakooza Mutale and some militia groups in Kampala. If we do not disband these groups, this country will go up in smoke. Let us reach out to the population without relying on militias. This country has suffered a lot; we should not embark on fighting ourselves when we want to get votes.

Finally, while we applaud Gen. Aronda for the good contribution, I see the generals who are seated there, not all of them - When you say that he was the only general who has been like this, people might think that those seated here have not delivered. (Laughter) I would like to applaud Gen. Katumba Wamala, Gen. Angina, Gen. Oketta and Gen. Oula for providing a lot of contributions in Northern Uganda during the very difficult time of the conflict plus many others who are not here but serving elsewhere. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. May the Almighty God keep Gen. Aronda and give him eternal life.

5.21
MS PAULA TURYAHIKAYO (NRM, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all thank God for the gift of life that he blessed us with in Gen. Aronda. As people who hail from Rukungiri District, we would like to thank His Excellency the President for having given Gen. Aronda Nyakairima an opportunity to serve this country as Chief of Defence Forces and finally as the Minister for Internal Affairs.

Rukungiri has suffered a great loss and particularly, Rubabo County, which has suffered a very big gap. Gen. Aronda has left a very big and wide crack because he was a son of the soil who left a number of development projects that he supported particularly in educational institutions and I would like to mention a few: Nyakishenyi Primary School and Marashaniro Primary School in Nyakishenyi Sub County; Nyakaina Primary School and Katojo Primary School in Buyanja Sub County; and Kafunjo Primary School to mention only but a few.

Madam Speaker, Rukungiri District, particularly Rubabo County, would like to say that Gen. Aronda made us proud and he has died a hero. We shall miss him greatly. We shall miss his exemplary humility, discipline, kindness and commitment to serve this country unreservedly.

On a personal note, I remember when I got involved in an accident he facilitated my airlifting from Rukungiri. On arrival at Nakasero Hospital, Gen. Aronda was present there to receive me. I cannot fail to pay tribute to Gen. Aronda Nyakairima for that kindness that he displayed at the most difficult time. As a family, we are indeed very grateful for the contribution that he made.

Madam Speaker, I would like to extend my sincere condolences to the people of Uganda, to the family, particularly to my friend Linda and the children, relatives and friends and to His Excellency the President; I am sure he will miss him greatly. We have heard all the contributions he has made in this country and we are proud as people from Rukungiri that he really made those substantive contributions during the time he served this country. I pray that Gen. Aronda’s soul rests in peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.25
DR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had to travel from Bugangaizi in order to pay tribute to Gen. Aronda. 

In 2008, when he was still CDF, the army had its army week in Bunyoro region and we travelled to a place called Birembo. Jokingly, I told him that there was nothing on the ground in that area, which is being remembered by the army. He asked, “Well, what would you like us to do?” I told him that at Birembo Memorial Technical Institute, there is no hall and he casually said, “We shall build that one”. I then said, “There are civilians who helped the army in 1985 when they fought with UNLA and they are living in miserable houses”. He said, “We shall build those ones”. I then told him that where they had crossed at a certain swamp, people cannot cross and he said, “We shall put a bridge”. All these were actually done. 

I am therefore very grateful to Gen. Aronda and I pay tribute to him because what he would promise, he would deliver. For some of the things which you thought that he was joking about, he would do them.

Madam Speaker, during the ID registration, I called him and said, “Forms are being bought and they are on sale because they are few; I want forms so that I distribute them”. He just laughed and said, “But that is not your job”. I told him that I was a leader and he called me and gave me 7,000 forms, which I took. Recently, when they came to Hoima to launch the issuance of IDs, he called me and told me to go and pick my card. I went but my card was not there. He then called me aside and said, “I am embarrassed; I called you and your card is not here”. Whenever we met, he would ask, “Did you get your card?” and I would say, “No” and he would smile and say, “Well, you will get it”. He has died before I have got that card.

He was a member of the Committee on Agriculture when I was chairman of the committee and there were two issues he would discuss - fertilisers and seeds. He organised a trip for the committee to Ethiopia to look at the fertilisers and seeds they use. He was supposed to have travelled with some members of the committee but because of other engagements, he did not travel but he was passionate when we came back and he asked us what we saw and did. 

Madam Speaker, I pray for the family and the country. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.28
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance to pay tribute to Gen. Aronda and to also testify about the two years that I spent with him in Masaka District. When I got there, I found a very humble commanding officer of the armoured brigade. After being terrorised by the Idi Amin soldiers, I used to fear these uniformed men but when I found Gen. Aronda, I was consoled. I want to testify about what happened in Masaka and this has made me drive and leave campaigns and come to pay tribute. 

I testify about the way Gen. Aronda helped me to rid Masaka of the robberies that were taking place on the highway from the early 1980s. I think those people who come from Masaka can testify to that. Robbers would waylay trucks moving to the western region and would offload the merchandise at gun point but because of the wisdom of the late Gen. Aronda, we put our heads together; I was RDC and as the chairperson of the security committee, we had to put our heads together and come up with a solution. 

However, it was because of the wisdom of Gen. Aronda that I got credit as the RDC and the chairperson of the security committee. He advised that we work together and we organised our operation in such a way that we dressed army people in civilian clothes, we took the CIDs onto Masaka Road and by the end of it we had impounded toy pistons, guns and real guns. For some six months, there was some peace on Masaka Road. I am grateful for that and I had to come to pay tribute to Gen. Aronda. 

I am very sorry for the family; Madam Linda Nyakairima, wherever you are receive my condolences on behalf of my people in Bubulo West. Take heart; the consolation you have is that you are burying your husband. He did not die in a plane crash and at least you have his remains unlike me who never got those for my husband during the Idi Amin days. So, that is a big consolation. It is very hurting to lose someone and you cannot get their remains. 

Madam, take heart; May God give you solace so that you live on with your family. Remember that all the testimonies you have heard from here are what Gen. Aronda has left behind and that is also very consoling. May God rest his soul in eternal peace.

5.32
MAJ. SARAH MPABWA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion and speak on behalf of my constituency, especially those that worked under Gen. Aronda - his subordinates. 

We shall remember Gen. Aronda as a towering figure both in stature and in respect. However, we also remember him for the fact that he sought knowledge and wished all those below him to be lifted to that knowledge. He insisted that each of us, when he could, makes sure that we advance in our careers within the army through training. He loved books and he would always recommend a book to read and then ask that you discuss it. He, therefore, deeply cared for our wellbeing, a testimony that the CDF gave. 

Gen. Aronda will be remembered as somebody who deeply cared and tried to bring the best out of everybody, especially those below him. He had a great capacity to listen. Stooping low to that posture, I think was to give you comfort, to give you the environment as a person who is actually not only hearing but listening to what you are saying. So, he would respond; you could feel the respect that he had even for the opinions of those that were below him. 

He had a sense of humour that may not have been known by most but he enjoyed a good laugh and would make talking to him easy. He would have a joke to ease the situation. (Member timed out_)

5.35
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to the late Gen. Aronda on two fronts: first, when he was appointed the commander of Operation Iron Fist and later on as CDF. 

I want to salute him on behalf of the victims and survivors of the LRA insurgency. One of the greatest challenges we faced in northern Uganda, arising from that insurgency, was the question of ghost soldiers. During the war, there was a very thin presence of the military in the north but when Gen. Aronda was appointed the commander of Operation Iron Fist and later on the overall CDF, he fought the question of ghost soldiers and we had the presence of the military. That is why we were able to defeat the LRA. I want to salute him in death. I told him this when he was alive. Nobody has mentioned the issue of ghost soldiers but the war in northern Uganda was prolonged because we were paying lots of money to soldiers that did not exist. 

I want to salute the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima. On behalf of the victims and survivors who witnessed his personal commitment, dedication and sacrifice, we are overwhelmed. It is because you participated in the pacification of northern Uganda and eventual restoration of peace that we are enjoying as a people. We want to salute him and we pray that the Almighty God rests his soul in eternal peace. Amen.

5.37
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion. I would also like to associate myself with the attributes that have been said about Gen. Aronda this afternoon. 

On behalf of the people of Budyebo and Nakasongola District in general, allow me to extend my deep-felt and sincere condolences to the family, the UPDF fraternity and my fellow countrymen for this untimely death of Gen. Aronda. Uganda has produced a long line of illustrious servicemen - officers, men and women – and there is no doubt that in that long line, Gen. Aronda is among them. He has been among the finest, the bravest, the most patriotic and most gallant and indeed, most revolutionary that Uganda has ever had.

Gen. Aronda has enjoyed many military exploits in the country and in the Great Lakes Region. It is my prayer that these exploits will be etched in our military tradition forever so that they act as a guiding star in the preparation of our military forever in this country. Madam Speaker, there is nothing much we can say except to pray to God Almighty to rest Gen. Aronda’s soul in eternal peace. May God Almighty bless his family and give them comfort.

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR THE YOUTH (Ms Evelyn Anite): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the young people of Uganda and on behalf of my husband, who is a godson of Gen. Aronda - I got to know Gen. Aronda through my husband in 2010 when he took me to meet him because I was going to contest. Gen. Aronda, having mentored my husband right from childhood to today, was very happy to see me and willing to support me. It is very sad to speak about Gen. Aronda today in the past tense. Gen. Aronda was very close to our young family; he not only supported my husband in his political career or social life but got him a wife and that is me.

Madam Speaker, I feel a lot of pain to speak about Gen. Aronda as being no more. To us, the young people in this country, we will dearly miss Gen. Aronda. Just on 21st of last month, Gen. Aronda was with the young people of this country from all political divides in an inter-political party youth meeting where were making the National Youth Manifesto 2016-2021. I have this manifesto in my hands. Gen. Aronda was the guest of honour at the making of this youth manifesto.

This national youth manifesto was made by young people from all political designs. Gen. Aronda did not only go there as guest of honour but he took us through all the processes of making this youth manifesto. I still remember vividly what he told the young people. He told us that we are soon having elections and he warned us strongly against allowing ourselves, as the young people of Uganda, to be used by politicians and engage in election violence. (Interruption)- Madam Speaker, just give me one minute to conclude and lay this on the Table. 

Madam Speaker, the death of Gen. Aronda has sent a lot of shock waves to the young people of this country. We feel touched and we feel we have lost a leader who did not discriminate against us as the young people of this country.  Allow me to lay this on the Table such that we have the memory of Gen. Aronda. The tile is, “A Social Contract with the Young Ugandans: the National Youth Manifesto 2016-2021.” Allow me to lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Was that contract signed?

MS ANITE: Yes, it was. He went through the process. He contributed and was the guest of honour when we were making it on 21st of July. 

Madam Speaker, finally, I would like to say that life is but a journey; unfortunately, for Gen. Aronda his journey has ended too soon. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (TESO AFFAIRS) (Ms Christine Amongin): Madam Speaker, I stand to second the motion. We are here to mourn a man of exemplary and admirable character. The character and the natural disposition of hon. Nyakairima was that of friendship. He was indeed a friend to all of us in this august House.

Madam Speaker, Gen. Nyakairima was a team player. He worked in harmony with his subordinates. Most of the time, he wanted to speak to people while closely looking in their faces. One thing that Gen. Aronda told me is that as soldiers, they sign with all 10 fingers and he added that as a soldier, once you start doing wrong things using one finger, the one on the other hand will be recording. He further said that once you disobey that signing with the 10 fingers, you will never make a good soldier in your life. He looked at his 10 fingers doing the same work for the peace and security of this country. 

Gen. Nyakairima was a practising Christian who supported churches in Teso. Whenever we would have fundraisings in Kumi District, the LC V chairperson would always call Gen. Katumba Wamala and Gen. Aronda Nyakairima and they always contributed. However, the LC V chairperson would always announce that he was the highest contributor and yet it was these two generals who were supporting the construction of the churches. Last Sunday, we moved through five churches where this general had contributed money to announce his demise. The people of Kumi join Parliament and the country at large –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Take half a minute to conclude.

MS AMONGIN: To the widow, Linda, you are lucky that your children are young. I would like to say that you are not the first and last. If these children were of voting age, you would be disturbed by people advising you to send one of them to contest. I would like you to remain peaceful, calm and know that the journey has just started. May the Almighty God rest the soul of Gen. Aronda Nyakairima in eternal peace.

5.47
THE MINISTER FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion with deep sorrow.

I first met Afande Aronda - I normally called him Afande Aronda - in 1986 when we had just come to State House. We were a concoction of people from different clusters; there were those from the diaspora, from public service and those afandes who were coming from the bush. We all came with different habits but Afande Aronda tamed and unified us and we became one. He was an intelligence officer but de facto, he was the commanding officer. I learnt a lot from him and it helped me later in the years when I became a PPS.  

In Cabinet, I normally sat next to him and as soon as he came in, he would write notes to all ministers because he knew what each minister was doing. He would ask, “How is your constituency? How are your projects?” He knew everybody. In my case, one time he asked me how my constituency was and I told him that I was going to an island by canoe and he refused me to. He said that I could not go by canoe and offered to get a police motorboat. I laughed because I thought it was a joke but indeed, he got me a motorboat that took me across. That showed that he was reliable, selfless and cared.

In the Ministry of Trade, he is the one who developed this idea of a multi-sectoral approach. In the case of the National Identity Card Project, all the ministries came on board. It is normally very difficult to sustain; they come in the first few months and then after that, everybody goes apart but he sustained it and we carried it through. 

As the Ministry on Trade, we benefited since he removed the non-tariff barriers. We benefitted from sorting out the illegal immigrants and all the others. He was also reliable, selfless and a revolutionary. He was an epitome of clean leadership. We used to talk about clean leadership and Afande Aronda was that. 

To Linda, the children and the Ngabirano family, may God strengthen you. He has left a legacy for you as an icon of perfection and excellence. Rest in peace gentle general. I thank you. (Applause)

5.50
MR ROBERT KASULE SSEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank you again for having allowed me to lay a wreath on your behalf on the casket of the man I came to love in a few years. 

Speaking about busy schedules, I think we all have those busy schedules and I also pray that you, Rt Hon. Speaker, cut down on your own schedule. We are praying for you but please, cut down on your schedule. I recall that we were here on the Floor deliberating - that time we had a very long Order Paper – and Gen. Aronda Nyakairima and I were on the Order Paper. I did not know that that very evening, we were both flying to Nairobi. This was four weeks ago. When we finished Parliament here, I rushed to Entebbe and I found Gen. Aronda Nyakairima preparing to leave for Nairobi while I was going to Arusha. We left together. I stayed in Arusha for one night and returned but again, I was with Gen. Aronda Nyakairima. 

When we returned, we were invited to come and pass the districts and municipalities and we found ourselves on the Order Paper. Immediately we finished passing the municipalities, I rushed to Entebbe for your UNAA assignment and Gen. Aronda Nyakairima also rushed to Seoul. That is a busy schedule. These are long trips and yet we do not even stay there for three days. 

These schedules are going to kill us, Madam Speaker. We should all be very careful. I have been sick ever since we came back and struggling with campaigns and yet the doctor wants me to rest. So, long schedules and work are –(Member timed out.)

5.52
MS JANEPHER NANTUME EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join the rest of the Members to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima. On behalf of the people of Buvuma District, I send condolences to his wife and children, relatives and friends.

Madam Speaker, there is something that always disturbs me; we are all going to die and we believe in life after death for all believers. To the relatives and friends, we believe that everything is planned by God and beyond that, there is something that God knows that we do not know. It is a culture here in Uganda that when someone dies, so many good things are spoken. After the burial, friends will go and sometimes so will relatives and they leave the family and the young children alone. 

A hero and peacemaker like Gen. Aronda Nyakairima was in the bush for some time but even after leaving the bush, Uganda was still not peaceful and so he went to fight the Kony rebels. He has been in Parliament deliberating on behalf of Government and it is also very painful that he died while on duty serving his country, Uganda, and not his own family. As Nantume, I see the late Gen. Aronda and I cannot say - He has died at the age 56, but he finished university and went to the bush in his twenties and this should have been the time for him to enjoy life and it is the very time that he has died. 

Madam Speaker, I know at the time when such motions are being moved, it is hard but I would believe that since things have not been –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am mindful that the family has been stressed for so many days and they want to go.

5.55
MS FLORENCE NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On my behalf and on behalf of the people of Butelaja District, I support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Aronda Nyakairima.

Recently in my constituency, there was a very big wrangle concerning land in the Doho Rice Scheme. People were fighting each other not with guns but pangas. Along with my colleague, hon. Dombo, we contacted the late and he responded without fail. He immediately left what he was doing and travelled to Butaleja District. He calmed the situation with all his skills and gave assurance to my people. As I speak, ever since he came to my constituency, they have not fought again since he gave them assurance.

Not only has Uganda as a country lost a responsible man, we have also lost a person who was transparent, hardworking, sociable and had a very good sense humour.

To the family, there is nothing we can say to bring him back but all you have is our prayers for God to comfort you and give you strength. On my behalf and on behalf of my people of Butaleja, we pray that we continue to remember the late Gen. Aronda for his good deeds as Uganda. May his soul rest in eternal peace.
 
5.56
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen comrade and hero.

It was not long ago that I started freely interacting with the late Gen. Aronda. Before then, I used to see him as a reserved person, very tough-looking and therefore unapproachable. I was used to the rest of the generals such as Gen. Katumba Wamala and Brigadier Angina and we freely interacted. However, he surprised me a few months ago when we were in the canteen and he called me by my names; he said, “Hajji Sulaiman, please come and join us here for lunch”. 

I was amazed that this tough general knew my name. I went closer and he registered a request with me. He wanted me to undertake a simple assignment for him through research. He said, “I have looked at the reverends, the priests and the bishops and they have their theological foundations from theological institutes and colleges; where do the Muslims go to get those skills? Kindly undertake that assignment.” I jokingly asked him whether he was ready to facilitate me because he was talking of research. He said, “We wacha; we shall handle that”. 

A few weeks back before he went for this trip, which later on turned out tragic, he called me to get an update on the progress of the assignment and I said, “General, you have not facilitated me”. He promised that when he returns from his trip, we shall sit and see. He asked how far I had gone and I told him I am progressing well because he intended - (Member timed out.)

5.59
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Ntoroko District and on my own behalf, I would like to express our deepest sympathy to the bereaved family, the UPDF and the entire nation.

Madam Speaker, most colleagues have talked about Gen. Aronda and I want to add something little. Gen. Aronda was a very good man; he was very social, a gentleman and very soft spoken. However on the other hand, he was a very firm and powerful general. 

The memories of the people of Ntoroko are very fresh about Gen. Aronda. He visited Ntoroko District in 2012 and by that time as a border district, we had threats of the ADF from DRC. While here, I whispered to him that my people in the district are under threat from the ADF across. I asked if he could kindly pay us a courtesy call so that he can assure the people that we are safe. After a few days, he came over and interacted with the people and assured them about the peace and he really made friends with most of the locals. They even exchanged telephone contacts - (Member timed out.)

6.01
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My condolences go to the family, to Uganda and to the institution of the UPDF from the people of Padyere and on my behalf.

Madam Speaker, sometime back last year when we had issues of the generals threatening a coup d’état in this country, I remember Gen. Aronda was asked about that here and he gave a very clear answer. He said, “No; the threat message was intended for a few people and they have got the message.” I went ahead during the Tarehe Sita launch in Zombo and asked him to clarify further. The ease with which he calmed the people down was a mark of a very distinct person.

Some things have not been said here. We in West Nile, when we see men in uniform we just get scared but when they came over for the Tarehe Sita celebrations, Gen. Aronda sat as the chairperson of an interactive session between the civilians and the military. He allowed people to ask questions and he answered all the questions. The human face that he brought to the day called Tarehe Sita was really very distinct.

Madam Speaker, between Karuma and Pakwach, we were waylaid at night by armed robbers. We were beaten and they did everything they wanted. The following day I reported to Gen. Aronda and he said he is going to move on that road one day at night to see whether the police are really patrolling the park very well at night. That is when he beefed up the security in the park and nobody will cross through the park - this is recent; about two months - because of his work. 

Madam Speaker, on the social media outbursts, let me say this: in Alur land where I come from, good people do not die; it is believed that good people are killed. People will complain but it is also good news that when good people die and people are complaining, you cannot take them to court because of what they are saying about good people who have died. However, when you are bad people will celebrate. Therefore, when people are raising questions and they are concerned, the Government should take it positively and go further to investigate and demystify all the disbelief. That is what I believe. Thank you very much.

6.04
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to convey my condolences to Mzee and the family of Gen. Aronda. I would like to join in to celebrate Gen. Aronda’s enormous contribution to this country and the distinguished life that he lived, which is an example to all of us.

Madam Speaker, three things come to my mind. One, I would like to think of Gen. Aronda, the Minister of Internal Affairs, who followed through everything we raised on the Floor of this House and ensured that action was taken. I hope that Cabinet members will learn from Gen. Aronda. Some of them, even before you finish a sentence they have the answer. That was not Gen. Aronda. He called you out and got the details. He acted on those security concerns of Teso. He went there and gave me a report. I am only worried whether, after he is gone, people will follow through the commitments that he made.

Secondly, there is unfinished business. I heard the expressions of the Frontbench. Hon. Aronda made a commitment to deliver a peaceful election to this country. Some of the violence in the last elections was presided over by some military people in this country going around intimidating the population. I would like to pray that in honour of Gen. Aronda, the military makes it very clear that they will not intimidate the population. That is unfinished business and it must be finished.

He initiated dialogue with the Opposition. People were used to teargassing us but he said, “I will talk to them”. He summoned us, sat down with us and we agreed on how to work without necessarily teargassing us. That was Gen. Aronda. 

Madam Speaker, all of us will die someday. Let me remind you as the Bible requires each one of us: prepare now to meet –(Member timed out_)

6.08 
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Please, give me an extra minute since I am a president of a party.

THE SPEAKER: You are a poet; use the two minutes.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Lubaga South and the Conservative Party which I lead in my capacity as President, I bring condolences to the family of Gen. Aronda, including Mr and Mrs Henry Ngabirano who are personal friends.

Madam Speaker, in Gen. Aronda was a character so spectacular that it has taken time to find one of his kind. He was a polite man, he did not know rank, he was tolerant and a man of joy. 

There is something that you all need to know from my testimony. Sometime back when he was elevated to the position of Minister of Internal Affairs, I was one of those that contested the constitutionality of that appointment and I wrote a very strong article in the Observer newspaper. After he had read that article, he called me and I started panicking and asked myself, “Now what is he calling me for?” (Laughter) Little did I know that he was calling me for small talk with him in the corridors of Parliament. He said, “Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, there are very important issues you have raised but do you mind stopping there so that you do not prolong the story?” I did exactly that. I would like to commend and give him recognition for that kind of behaviour. Very rarely do you find a man of his kind, a senior soldier, behaving with that politeness. 

Madam Speaker, this House should also know that this man was unique. Apart from the Prime Minister, Dr Rugunda, who has ever thanked me for moving a motion for peace talks with the LRA outside Uganda, nobody else has ever congratulated me. It was Gen. Aronda who congratulated me for moving such a motion, which brought us permanent peace. Even the President of this country does not know that an Opposition member like Ken-Lukyamuzi could have thought gigantically to cause peace through dialogue –(Member timed out.)

6.10
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, we are marking a sad moment in the history of this Parliament with the loss of Gen. Aronda. We are all saddened and we are speaking with the same voice. 

Madam Speaker, I remember Gen. Aronda on a number of fronts but I will pick two. One is that he was a very good listener. One can talk tough but I interacted so much with him when I was in the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs as Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs on the issue of Somalia and the issues regarding what has now been termed as the tribal sentiments; in fact, they were anti-tribal sentiments. We were fighting anti-tribal sentiments and on the third occasion, Gen. Aronda asked me what the problem was and he said he wanted to talk to me. He talked to me in my small office for five solid hours and he told me that we shall find a solution and indeed a solution was found. Many generals were promoted to that rank because of the silent efforts that were committed to by Gen. Aronda.

I would like to make my last point on the issue of the post-mortem. It is sad that we have not been generally satisfied with the results of the post-mortem. I request the Prime Minister to take an extra effort so that we can have a supplementary report from the doctors in Dubai and South Korea. I am sure they are also interested. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.12
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Madam Speaker, my condolences go to the family. Madam Speaker, you know how passionate you and I were in following up the issue of sanitary towels for female inmates. Under the leadership of Gen. Aronda last financial year, we were able to deliver this to the female inmates of this country. Under the leadership of Gen. Aronda, I followed up the process of a passport and I was able to get it in a record three hours. I pay tribute to that general lying there.

Madam Speaker, the last time we were in Parliament in the first week of September, Gen. Aronda was fidgeting with the issue of moving a motion for the House to resume. He did it so easily and we kept on laughing the whole evening. It was such a good moment that when we received notice of the death of Gen. Aronda, my tears are normally so quick to come and I felt so sad. 

I send this message to Government: As a country, Uganda should be tired of having generals or big army officers die and no logical conclusion is given or followed about their death. I would feel very sad next time, God forbid, if it happened to my brother, Gen. Angina. Mayombo lay in state here and up to today, scanty information has been given about his death. When it comes to - (Member timed out.)

6.14
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the DP Whip, I would also like to offer condolences from the Democratic Party and also from the people of Kalungu.

Madam Speaker, training a soldier from the rank of a private to that of a general is not a simple matter. If you are to ask that soldier what he goes through to become a general, you will not love it if you are not one of them. Therefore, I am cautioning the honourable Minister of Defence that when anybody raises a matter in the public or social media, take keen interest, especially when it is the army spokesman giving contradicting information about the death of a general.

Secondly, it should have been you, Mr Minister, to inform this House about the highest level of performance of this general in the army, who repaired Nakasongola Airfield, repaired Gulu Airfield and changed the system of soldiers earning their money from the barracks to their accounts. For some of us who taught in army schools, we would find soldiers almost killing their wives. They would go for operations, come back and find that their wives had withdrawn money – bibi alikuwa na shida, mtoto alikuwa analia, si ina kyakula, sisi tufanye namna gani? Gen. Aronda ended up putting the money on their accounts. 

Talk about what Gen. Aronda succeeded from Gen. Kazini; what did he find in the army? It was a divided army - those who were learned against those who were not learned. Kazini was just giving ranks the way he wanted; let him rest in peace. This man brought transformation; before you got a rank, you go for a course. It is after that course that you would rise in rank. When you see these soldiers dressed smartly and wearing clean shoes, it is about training. This is what Gen. Aronda was doing. 

As an army commander, Gen. Aronda would brave the traffic jam with his patrol and escorts. What is happening with some of these people? Of recent, we have even seen secretary generals of parties getting patrol cars leading them. They want to be like the Speaker of Parliament and yet this is a high office in this Government. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, as I talk, the relation structure in the army was all Aronda’s work. The only issue on which I disagreed with Gen. Aronda was the way he stopped the boarding schools in the army. When I asked him why he took the decision of making soldiers’ children not stay in boarding school, the issues he raised were pertinent. Soldiers were taking children who were not theirs and there was also fraud in schools. He said, “But also, we must also train soldiers to look after their children”. (Member timed out.)

6.17
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of West Budama South and on my behalf, I would like to extend our deep-felt condolences to the family, the nation and this Parliament. 

On the 6th of this month, I was with the honourable Gen. Aronda in my constituency. He gave me a ride in his official vehicle for the first time and we moved around Tororo. We went to a local church called Yolwa Catholic Church and he spoke very kind words. Little did I know that six days later, he would be dead. We had a meeting somewhere with Brig. Phinehas Katirima and hon. Mulongo. 

Madam Speaker, it is very heart-breaking. I thought that the two minutes would not be enough to talk about a gentleman I was with in the car and in my constituency. He was the first general to visit a local church, the first Cabinet minister to visit a new Catholic parish church, and he made a generous contribution to that church.

I would like to agree with those who have said - All that has been said here is, “well done is better than well said”. Well done is better than well said for Gen. Aronda. He did his job and we are here to pay tribute and testify. Shall we bury his heart and not the dreams? Shall we bury his eyes and not the vision? Shall we bury his feet and not the path of light that he was taking?

Madam Speaker, if I could ask him what is happening, he would jokingly say, “Oboth, we have not lost the game; we have only run out of time”. This is how jokey this general was. I told the people of West Budama South that meeting him made me think I needed to join the army. If I had met him early, I would be Afande Oboth, there is no doubt about that. 

The humility in this gentleman was overwhelming. While in that church, he was holding himself like this as he always did. I gave an example of a humble general holding himself when other corporals would be moving with their hands as if they want to burst. Now I know that his humility started with his Christian walk. If you removed God from his life, Aronda would have been a different person.

Madam Cecilia Ogwal said something and I wish that could be done in memory of Gen. Aronda – that medical units be established in the Police Force so that we can all cherish –(Member timed out_)

6.21
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On my behalf and on behalf of my family and the people of Gulu, I would like to convey our heartfelt condolences. Indeed, it is not very easy especially for the widow. When you sit by the side of your loved one and nurse them, you can believe when they are gone, but this one was just abrupt. It is very disheartening. We pray that God sends a guardian angel to console the bereaved family.

I would like to narrate an experience. First, my husband was the headmaster of Kitgum High School for a long time; he retired last year. I think he got in touch with Gen. Aronda and Gen. Aronda really supported him. First, he sent troops to Kitgum High School and they rehabilitated a big dining hall and donated some furniture to the school. This is exactly what we should do. We should never forget where we have passed through. He never forgot that place. He even promised to continue giving support to Kitgum High School. He became a friend to my husband. This is really not someone very easy to come by. 

When Gen. Aronda was nominated for Minister of Internal Affairs, some of us were really opposed to him. I am on the Appointments Committee and we really opposed him. He even came and lobbied me. However, for the one and a half years that he worked as Minister of Internal Affairs, he convinced me that he did not work for one party as we thought he would; he worked for the country. That is why he condemned the crime preventers, Kalangala Action Plan and any militia group which is coming up to disrupt the peace of the country. All of must really learn from the general. He went to Gulu to commission - (Member timed out.)

6.23
MS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to bring condolences from the people of Masaka. The people of Masaka remember Gen. Aronda Nyakairima with such fondness. Gen. Nyakairima was the commanding officer of Kasijagirwa Brigade for 10 years and this was immediately after the war when the people were very frightened of people in uniform. Gen. Aronda, in his wisdom, initiated a practice of the army and the people to intermingle in a friendly way so that we got rid of the fear of people in uniform forever. This has stayed with us in Masaka.

Madam Speaker, the people of Masaka remember Gen. Aronda for his continued friendship to Masaka even when he left after the 10 years of service. He was a founder member of the society called Friends of Greton. This was an association to bring members of the professional class - the teachers, doctors, lawyers - and people who were generally very afraid of the army –(Member timed out.)

6.26
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf the people of Namayingo and on my behalf, I rise to say a word of condolence to the bereaved family.

Madam Speaker, hon. Aronda will be remembered in Namayingo more so when early this year we had a lot of insecurities to the extent that some of us were not sleeping in our homes. I approached him and he told me they would come and indeed he came, not just once but twice. Today as I speak, we are now peaceful in Namayingo and it is partly because of his contributions. The people of Namayingo are in deep sorrow when they heard of his death. We know there is time for everything and we pray that God raises for us another leader of his calibre.

Madam Speaker, Namayingo borders Kenya and many Kenyans migrated to Namayingo some years back. Therefore, during the time of registration for national IDs, most of them had been left out, more so those in Bukhooli island. I approached him and told him some of those people qualified to be nationalised. He kept on telling me that I wanted to ferry Kenyans to come and vote for me and I told him to send a team to the ground so that he could ascertain those who qualify. Indeed, he sent the people and as I speak, those who qualified have been nationalised and they are very peaceful. 

We shall remember the good deeds of hon. Aronda. He has gone but we who are still alive and we need to learn from his good deeds because he was very approachable - (Member timed out.)

6.28
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring my heartfelt condolences to the family, the people of Uganda, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and the Ninth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Nwoya Constituency and my family, we are deeply moved by the sudden death of our comrade. However, on this occasion, permit me to speak on behalf of the National Resistance Movement Party to which I belong and I am a leader. I would like to start with the obvious. There was a concern that was raised on the Floor of Parliament about the activities of the party in view of what is happening. I do not have that authority to decree in this House that there will be a suspension of our activities. This issue will be forwarded to the right organ of the party and they will communicate effectively to our members.

Secondly, I am learning a lot through the tributes we are paying to our fallen hero. In greatness, I am realising there is need for humility. To those who are sitting here, when our time comes how will people speak about us? 

Gen. Aronda moved all over the country and befriended everybody here. Everybody can testify to his good deeds. However, I feel deep in my heart and soul that the character the party I stand for nurtured in him and the spirit of cadreship that made him reach out to each and everybody is what is making all of us speak the way we speak. 

Fast forward, Madam Speaker, when we were working hard to find what we could use as our party anthem, - I was assigned that responsibility with my colleagues - the first person I contacted was Gen. Aronda before I came to Gen. Tumwine. We wanted to get a revolutionary song that could reawaken our spirit of nationalism, patriotism and unity as a people. Therefore, I was thinking through the songs that they used to sing in the bush and two of them came up. When I shared with Gen. Aronda, there was one particular song that he recommended and it is about wazalendo: “Wazalendo wa NRM pamoja, ushindi wetu ni walazima…” When we sing that song, you feel touched. It connects us to the story of the struggle, commits us to the present and gives promise to the future. 

We know in you, Gen. Aronda, many of us derived a lot of inspiration. He was a good mobiliser, researcher and he was to the dot with information. He nurtured many of us and when we were with him, he would give you facts in your constituency –(Member timed out.)

6.32
BRIG. CHARLES ANGINA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker and members of this House. I rise also in support of this motion. I extend my condolences to our beloved family of the fallen general and also to the Commander-in-Chief who commands us in the armed forces and the entire country at large.

Madam Speaker, we served under Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, who is our hero, for the gallant contributions he has made throughout different assignments in the rank and file of the UPDF. I served with him in the intelligence and he was an icon in the performance of intelligence. At this moment, we would like to say he laid a very strong foundation in the UPDF that will make us continue with the professionalisation and we assure this nation and the region that the UPDF will be a force to reckon. We give this attribute to the general who is lying before us.

The caucus of the UPDF, therefore, having seen his contributions and associated with his efforts and tireless supervision of the forces, would associate him with the biblical Paul; we say he fought a good fight and he has run a good race successfully. This has not been possible without his beloved wife, Linda, standing by his side to ensure that the general is able to perform excellently and become an outstanding general. The UPDF caucus, therefore, has contributed Shs 10 million. We are putting it on his account in Wazalendo in support of the education of his children. The family will access it after the due process. We submit, Madam Speaker. Thank you and may his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I know that Gen. Aronda had many friends in this House and many more members would like to contribute but I am mindful that Linda and the family have been under emotional stress since Saturday. They still have to prepare for church tomorrow as well as Saturday and Sunday. Therefore, I would like to close the tribute to Gen. Aronda.  

I should say that in the Appointments Committee, we normally work by consensus and there have been only two occasions when we had a near break-up of the committee. One of them was the appointment of Gen. Aronda. This is because we had a contradiction in the Constitution; one part under Article 78 said that the Parliament shall be composed of some officers of UPDF of which he was one and another part said the military should not join politics. After a lot of acrimony, I ruled that he was not joining politics because he was already part of us. He was no less a Member than other Members and that is why we approved him. I am glad that those who opposed and walked out have spoken very well today. I know them but I will not name them. (Laughter)

Honourable members, on a personal note, I would like to thank Gen. Aronda. When Tarehe Sita came to Busoga, they spent so much time there and did many projects throughout the 10 districts. I particularly want to thank him for three things: the borehole at Kyankole Trading Centre in Kidera, running water in Butende in Kitayungwa Sub County, and the public latrines on the landing site at Kanganyanza; he could not even pronounce the name. I kept on trying to teach him how to pronounce it. He gave us those facilities. 

My final thanks is for enabling my village of Busobya LC I, which had been deleted from the register, to get back on the map. When I went home, I found that the village had sat and said that until their name was brought back, no one would register. For one and half months, my village refused to register and they directed me also not to register. I therefore did not register. I kept on telling him, “General, my village is lost”. Eventually, he directed and our name was given back and then we registered. That is how I got an ID. I would like to thank him for that. 

I would like to announce tomorrow’s programme. Prayers will commence at Kololo Independence Grounds at 10.00 a.m. and close at 2.00 p.m. Honourable members, please be seated by 9.30 a.m. so that we start on time and close on time. After the prayers, the body will be taken to his residence in Buziga. On Saturday, the body will leave for Rukungiri. On Sunday, burial will take place at 2.00 p.m. but the service will start at 10.00 a.m. The location is Nyakiju village in Buyanja. If you get lost, hon. Mugume, hon. Paula Turyahikayo, hon. Jim Muhwezi and the other members will be able to give you directions. 

I normally do not talk about my party but I do hope my party will understand the request made in the interest of our colleague. You will tell us what to do thereafter.  

Honourable members, I put the question that this House do pay tribute to the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now direct the Clerk to extract the text of the Hansard together with the tribute. When it is ready, it should be given to Mrs Nyakairima and her family. This is in order for them to have the record of what we have said here about our beloved colleague. We have a message from hon. Mike Mukula, which will also be passed on to the family. 

The East African Community Anthem

The National Anthem
(Exit of the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to first thank you for returning to the capital to do this noble duty, to give tribute to our colleague. I know it has been a difficult decision but I would like to thank you for coming.

I would like to thank the armed forces - the police and the UDPF - for the work done. I would like to thank the Government too for all the efforts they have made to ensure that our colleague’s body is given a befitting burial. I would also like to thank the Clerk and her staff during this difficult situation.

The House is adjourned sine die. I hope I do not have to recall you for anything else until we call the House formally from the recess. Thank you very much. House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 6.45 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)










