Friday, 25th September 2015

Parliament met at 11.13 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning sitting. I also congratulate the Muslim community for completing one of the pillars of Islam with Idd-al-Adhuha. Unfortunately you must have heard yesterday that over 700 people died in a crash outside the Muslim city of Mecca.

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I would like to confer deep condolences to the Muslim fraternity upon this great loss. I understand there was also a Ugandan lady among those who died. I would like to send sympathies to her family. She is probably from Masaka. I also wish a speedy recovery to those others who are injured – about 800.

I am told it was one of the worst incidents in the last 25 years around the Muslim holy site. In that regard, let us stand up for a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence)

Honourable members, I would also like to thank our committee which remained here during that holiday to do work. I hope they will be able to report on their progress. However, I would also like to inform you that I have permitted Mr Goffin Candria who is seated there - he has come to see the proceedings, but he cannot be wheeled anywhere else. That is why I have allowed him to sit there. He is the chairman National Council for Disability. You are welcome. (Applause)

11.17
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, as I had requested earlier, I would like to bring to the attention of Parliament the fact that the barefooted footballers are going to be awarded medals of honour on 9th October. I am giving this information to Parliament because the barefooted footballers come from different parts of Uganda. I am only aware about one who comes from Dokolo.

Their names are in the newspapers and I would be very glad if you could play your roles as leaders in your respective areas to identify these persons and let their relatives or wives come to the celebration venue in Dokolo to receive their medals if they are not alive.

Secondly, I would like to bring to the attention of Parliament that as a leader, I am very concerned about the fact that the people in the constituencies feel that they have not been paid their pensions because they have been reading in the media that Members of Parliament are receiving money. We know that the Ministry of Local Government has never come to complain to this Parliament that they have not got the budgetary allocation for pensions. We are wondering why pensioners have not been paid for the last three months. It is very important for us. 

As leaders, we go back to the constituencies and people continue to ask us what has happened. The most important thing is that those who have approached me use their pension money to pay for school fees and medication. If they do not get their pension money, then we are really putting these people at great risk.

Therefore, I would like to bring this to your attention and it must be taken as a matter of urgency because all of us are going to be confronted with that problem when we get back to our constituencies. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Does the minister have something to say about the pension?

11.20
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The process of paying pensions has been decentralised to the accounting officers in all the districts and in the various entities. It is no longer centred in the Ministry of Public Service. All that we do is perhaps to look at the figures and agree or disagree with the figures. The payment is from the Treasury to the accounting officers in the districts. Thank you.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I remember that before we broke off, I brought the issue of pension as a matter of national importance concerning retired people in Mbarara who had not received their pensions.

When the late Gen. Aronda was lying here, I brought it again because I wanted to excite the ministries of Public Service and that of Finance to completely save us from this. I drove from Mbarara; the people of Mbarara are not receiving their pensions and this has gone on for more than three months.

Madam Speaker, the clarification I would like to seek from the First Deputy Prime Minister is; where do we go? Do we go and start fighting with the CAOs. By the way, this is also happening to the UPDF. Hon. Dr Crispus Kiyona, even the UPDF soldiers in Mbarara are saying they have not received pensions. Who is this wonderful man who has no heart and has opted to sit on the pension of retirees?

Madam Speaker, this Parliament should be clear tonight. We should go with one voice to save the retirees. People are dying. 

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Minister of Public Service does not seem to know what happens in Public Service. This is because it is a supply chain in the payment of pensions. Files are prepared in the Ministry of Public Service and they are sent to the districts. The complaint in the districts is that these files are always delayed in the Ministry of Public Service. Therefore, the minister should expedite the processes of payment. The districts do not prepare the files. 

Therefore, the Minister of Public Service should be able to tell us where the problem is. Is it in the districts, Finance or Public Service? Thank you.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to echo the same problem with the pensioners in Bukedea. It seems this is a countrywide problem and what the Ministry of Public Service can only do is to liaise with the Ministry of Finance and come up with a statement to Parliament regarding this issue so that we know where the problem is.

Otherwise, the explanations my honourable minister and the Prime Minister have given are not satisfactory. We need a statement that explains the real issue behind all this. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS AMOIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also have a concern. Recently, while His Excellency the President was visiting Budaka District, he was asked a question of the veterans. What I learnt from there is that the issue of veterans is now only affecting a particular region and other regions have been catered for. All the veterans there have got their money yet our people do not have access to this money. The veterans that time rose up and said –(Interruption) 

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable Member that it is not only in her district but it is all over the country. It is in Kalangala and even Kampala.

MS AMOIT: Madam Speaker, the issue of veterans must also be handled comprehensively so that we stop having people coming to ask for assistance. The offices which have been put in the districts are not very useful. I would like to assure you that when His Excellency the President was there, we were told that veterans from other places have been cleared and there are no more claims. What is going to happen to the rest of the veterans in Uganda?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the - I think we need a full statement and an account district by district on how the pensioners and veterans have been handled here.

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, related to that, I am seeking information from whoever is concerned, maybe the Ministry of Defence about ex-servicemen. I have a survivor and relatives of the ex-servicemen in my constituency and they have been made to move from districts to other centres. As a Member of Parliament, I have no information on how I can assist these people. These are the people who struggled in World War II and they have been promised that their money was released but they continue to be knocked down by old age or disease without getting the proceeds of their sweat. I am seeking clarification on how these people can also be helped. Thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The response from the Minister of Public Service is surely wanting. It demonstrates that he is not very sure of what is going on in his ministry.

Last time, when this matter was raised by Dr Bitekyerezo, the Minister of State for Finance told Parliament that issue of pension payment had been decentralised to various ministries and agencies. 

Now, what is going on is that personnel officers from various ministries and other agencies are piling up in Ministry of Public Service, sometimes spending weeks without coming up with a full list of the various pensioners under their ministries and departments. Most personnel officers and ministries are frustrated by the slow pace with which Public Service is clearing the mess in their house.

In fact, the main problem, in my opinion, is the slow pace of clearance from Ministry of Public Service. In any case, even whatever they give out to the various ministries is in piece meal. Remember, most of these pensioners are elderly. The worst curse one should get is from an elder. Why should we attract curses from these elders by mishandling their pension to that extent? 

Hon. Kajura, if you need to be helped, it is better you speak out and maybe Government find ways of giving a backup support to Ministry of Public Service to expeditiously deal with this matter rather than appearing not to be in charge of your own docket.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I only wanted to draw the attention of the House to the plight of a certain category of pensioners: the East African Community former employees. Their case has been very mismanaged. It has become a matter of court and scandals - the famous pension scam - to the extent that those pensioners actually still exist and nobody is even thinking about them. Their names and pictures were taken advantage of and the ministry is not thinking about paying them. 

If Hon. Kajura is going to come here with a statement, he should include an explanation on how he intends to deal with those defrauded or if they were not defrauded, those pending cases of the East African Community former employees. They are very desperate. There is no direction now and they cannot go to court. They have already submitted an application to the ministry with their pictures and names and money was - It is a very pathetic situation, Madam Speaker.

11.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. This is the fifth time we are responding to this issue and we owe an apology to the House why it has not been sorted out in time.

Madam Speaker, Ministry of Finance working with Public Service, agreed to decentralise the payment of pension. For this quarter, we released Shs 89 billion to different votes.

Therefore, the Ministry of Public service sent a list of pensioners to respective votes. The accounting officers said they could not pay against those lists and they needed files. They went back to Ministry of Public Service and the ministry said the accounting officers had the files because they originated them and wondered why they could not verify them. 

It, therefore, became a ping-pong and we agreed to put a committee to quicken the process of verification. We had given ourselves up to the end of August. It ended without clearing this and when we close our eyes and think about the agony the pensioners are going through, we think we could have done it in a different way. 

However, Madam Speaker, on Tuesday at the next sitting, we will come up with a schedule of different votes and how far they have gone in paying and maybe have punitive measures to different votes, which have not catered for this. For sure, I know as Ministry of Finance, we are only remaining with 90 pensioners. The process has been moving. 

However, there are others who have not cleared even five people. Therefore, I will come - (Interjections)- For one ministry but not for the entire Government because Ministry of Finance is also a ministry itself. We will therefore come up with a schedule indicating how the money was released and how far they have gone. However, we are mounting enormous pressure to the extent that we are threatening to hold on the release of the next quarter until these different votes finish up this issue. We will count on you to put pressure on different votes so that we can sort these things out. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you can give us those votes that are not operational. This is because we are making pensioners look like dirt. I do not think it is right in this country that people who serve this country should just be treated like rubbish. Therefore, give us the report together with those ministries that are not complying so that we can deal with them here. 

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of procedure. The Rules of Procedure in this House provide that Bills that are assigned to committees should be reported on in 45 days. I am glad that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs withdrew their Bill on the Children’s Act (Amendment) Bill. They left and accepted the Private Member’s Bill. 

Madam Speaker, the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development has requested twice for an extension on when they would report about the Children’s Act (Amendment) Bill. Today, I see another 45 days elapsing. The problems of children in this country are growing by day. Allow me to even bring examples of issues that have started affecting Ugandan children that have already been adopted because of adoptions that have gone bad, especially in the USA. 

There is a child who was double adopted. This child was adopted by a family and then that family let the child be adopted by a second family. The second family put a caveat on the child. The family that adopted the child first could therefore not access it nor take it for medication and now they are in court. The US Embassy has made notice to the Uganda Child Rights NGO Network about the issue. This was spearheaded by Mr Ogwang Dickson. They are now seeking for their intervention. 

Madam Speaker, another case is that of a child who was adopted again in the US. After five years, this child was brought back and simply dropped. The parents have nowhere to go for redress. I hear this child is just trying to be fixed into Green Hill Primary School. I am sure there are so many unmentioned cases of adoptions that have gone bad. Can we know when the committee on Gender will be ready to table their report to this House - (Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for allowing me to give her information. The Committee on Public Accounts considered a value-for-money audit on the adoption procedures in this country. 

Madam Speaker, we found out from that report of the Auditor-General that over 10,000 children in this country have been adopted outside the framework of the Children’s Act.  There is something called legal adoption or legal custodianship whereby they bypass the Children’s Act. 

This is because the Children’s Act, through the Registration Services Bureau, would require a record of every child leaving this country. As we talk, over 10,000 children have left this nation and there is no record. If the committee does not speed up the amendment of the Children’s Act to close that gap and strengthen the provision, we will look for the children forever but they will continue to be syphoned out using that narrow small excuse of that provision of legal adoption. The provisions of the Children’s Act as of now are so weak. They cannot protect our children.

MR OBUA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, in addition to what hon. Alaso has said, in pre-emption of this amendment Bill, the number of children that are being adopted and for whom passports are being applied had been 60 per day. As we speak, it has increased to 220 per day. They have already foreseen that this Bill is coming to fight that illegal adoption and they want to take advantage in the interim. Therefore, the sooner this Bill is brought here, the better. 

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleagues for the information they have given. There are very many unheard voices about parents who want their children back. However, there is no law to protect them. This is because their children are suffering. 

How can a child go through double and triple adoption? I think this is child abuse. I think the issue of adoption should be addressed very clearly and I would like to request that the committee speed up their issues on the Children’s Act (Amendment) Bill and bring their report as soon as they can. This is in order for us to address these critical issues that are coming up concerning our children. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Chairperson of the committee on Gender? I would like to know how far you have gone. Let us have the Government Chief Whip take the Floor as we look for the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the committee on Gender.

11.40
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been interacting very closely with hon. Komuhangi who is the chairperson handling this Bill. As you remember, colleagues, the history of the two Bills -

THE SPEAKER: It is actually the drama of the two Bills. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: The history of the two Bills - having the same objective, tabled on the same day for first reading and each carrying a Certificate of Financial Implication; one of championed by Government and another one championed by a private member. It happened. 

The Speaker subjected both Bills to the committee. The committee was grappling with harmonising both Bills. The Chairperson gave me a brief. When the Business Committee sat chaired by the Speaker, I indicated to them that Government is interested in pushing this Children’s Act (Amendment) Bill. I convinced the Business Committee that I was going to talk to the Minister of Gender to formally withdraw –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it is very painful to put a Whip to order, especially the Government Whip. The Government Whip ought to have been informed, in her absence just in case she was not there, that the Government actually withdrew. Therefore, we should not engage Parliament to discuss something which is already defunct and buried. Can the Whip now whip us in the right direction? This is in order for us to focus on only one Bill and we go forward. (Laughter) Is she therefore in order for filibustering yet she knows that we have no time and we have so many urgent matters to deal with? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Whip is preparing the ground for a speedy handling of the remaining Bills. She is therefore in order. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know where my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, is coming from so it is understandable when she becomes impatient. I would like us to appreciate this because the honourable member is rightly pointing out that we are delaying. However, we have to be briefed of what caused the delay and where we are going.

After getting information from the chairperson, I informed the Speaker, who was chairing the Business Committee, that I was going to tell the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to formally withdraw the Bill, so that together with the Private Member, we can move one Bill because we have the same objectives and that is what happened.

Hon. Muruli Mukasa came here and withdrew the Bill. What happened thereafter was the handling of pressing business that had constitutional timeframes, which business consumed the time of this Parliament. Hon. Komuhangi kept on requesting me to ensure that we deal with this Bill and conclude it.

I would like to believe that the committee is ready because they remained with only one Bill, having sorted out the Bill that was championed by Government. If we had time, we would consider this as a matter of urgency because everybody believes and agrees that it is the way to go; we need to save the children of Uganda.

It is therefore up to the Business Committee to schedule the committee so that they can table the report as we handle the second reading and then we move on.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to have a definite position on the committee. What the Government Chief Whip has done is to give this House the chronology of things. What hon. Flavia is asking is whether there is a report now. Can we consider the Bill today?

While we appreciate the wealth of information that hon. Nankabirwa has given us, we would like the chairperson of the committee or the committee members to come here and tell us if they need more time; say a day or two. If they have it ready, let them tell us. I do not think that the submission of the Government Chief Whip addresses that particular element. Is the committee ready? Where is the report?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the background to that Bill and the other dramatic one is that we have been demanding for these reforms for 10 years. We have therefore lost time. Therefore, I would like to know from the chairperson or the vice chairperson, where we are on this report. Where is the vice chairperson of the committee? I would like to hear from a member of the committee.  Are you a member of the committee?

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sit on the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development. When you referred the Bill to the committee, like the Government Chief Whip said, it was a big task for us to handle the two Bills.

However, we finally tried to harmonise and it is good that the minister withdrew the government Bill. We then had to focus on the Private Member’s Bill. We did our part and interacted with various stakeholders. We went ahead to process the Bill clause by clause and we have a draft report. However, as the Government Chief Whip said, the constitutional review process consumed much of our time and shortly thereafter, we went into recess. However, we have a draft report, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can I have that report before Independence Day? You said that you have a draft so you can complete it.

MS NAUWAT: We will need to link up with the clerk.

THE SPEAKER: No, you do not need the clerk. Finish your report and give it to me. You only need the clerk of your committee.

MS NAUWAT: Madam Speaker, let me link up with her.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I would like to know whether the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development is bringing the statement on externalisation of labour. Is the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development here? We needed a statement today. As you look for him, can we go to item 3?

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

11.48
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Bakka): Madam Speaker and honourable members, on Tuesday, the Attorney-General read, for the first time, the following Bills: The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2015, the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2015 and the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2015.

Madam Speaker, in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, you referred these Bills to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. We immediately started work in the committee by inviting stakeholders to appear for public hearings on Wednesday at 10.00 a.m.

On Wednesday, the committee ensued with the process of listening to our stakeholders that we had invited. Madam Speaker, as we started the public hearings, the committee noticed that it was not practicable that we would be able to report on Friday at 10.00 a.m., as directed by the House. The committee therefore resolved to come and seek leave of this House to be able to report on Tuesday at 14.00 hours. 

The justification is that the committee noticed that there is a lot of interest from our key stakeholders as seen on Wednesday by those who turned up. We only managed to receive memoranda and we discussed with a few of them. Others were referred to today at 10 o’clock and as we talk, the committee is now receiving views from various stakeholders who have gathered in the committee room.

Our prayer is that this House grants us more time to be able to do wider consultations and seek views from key stakeholders so that we can make a credible report. Our prayer is that this House grants us leave to report on Tuesday at 14:00 hours. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committee is requesting for a few more days so that they can report on Tuesday. Of course the matters are serious because they touch on many institutions. Is that okay?

11.51
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I have a proposal to make. Today is Friday and tomorrow is Saturday. We all know that we are very busy in our districts and we know what is happening there. If we say that Tuesday is okay, we first need assurance from these Members as to whether they will spend their weekend here. If they will not spend it here, I would like to propose that we have the sitting on Thursday so that when we come here, it will be for serious business.


Secondly, Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to propose that there should be constant communication. They knew that Friday was not practical and if we had been informed, we would not be here. Therefore, I encourage the Clerk and the relevant administrators to always communicate any changes that may come up. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: No, the Clerk could not communicate because this is a decision of the House. The Clerk could not communicate the failure of the committee; it has to be done here. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you look very unhappy.

11.52
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Electoral reforms are very important and it would be good for the committee to be given enough time to deal with them. The moment we pass them in a hurry, we will have a problem.

The reason we are saying this is because even the election date is not cast in stone and that is how it should be. The issues, which are being raised, include that elections are not free and fair. 

In that regard, I do not think that next week is appropriate because we have a lot of information that we would like to give to the committee. I received an email last night asking the FDC party when we are appearing before the committee to present. In my reply, I said that we have prepared our document. The moment you talk about documents - These memoranda are 20-30 pages and the committee cannot finish it in one or three days.

Madam Speaker, my proposal is that the committee should be given ample time. My sister was proposing Thursday but Thursday is quite near and I do not think they would have completed their business. We need more time.

Last night, I also got a phone call from members of the Electoral Commission. One of them was saying that he joined at graduate entry during Akabwai’s time and that he has remained a graduate. Even those that are joining today are facing the same situation and that their salaries have remained the same for the last ten years. These issues need to be looked into because if the presiding officer is unhappy, he will do anything.

They are saying that there has been recruitment of 26 Electoral Commission staff but 16 of them come from one specific area and the remaining 10 are from all other parts of the country. These are things we need to look at.

Madam Speaker, I would plead with Members that one, the election date is not cast in stone. Two, recently the NRM was supposed to have elections but they discovered that they were not ready. They have now postponed this indefinitely because they also discovered that the rules they had put in place were not helping them. If a whole NRM party can postpone, what about the country? We have to agree. 

They are the ones who control the Electoral Commission so if they have postponed indefinitely, we could give our committee at least two weeks – (Interjections)- I have heard hon. Aston object. I know why you are interested. Even when hon. Amama Mbabazi was there, you said, “No, we better do it now.” I am sure you will be the one to say that we need time.

These things change. You can talk like this because you are in an advantaged position. However, tomorrow it can become a disadvantaged position. What I am trying to request is that Uganda is not getting finished tomorrow; it is here to stay. I think the committee needs more time. We need to go to the committee, give our views and explain why we need these electoral forms. The committee may want to come and please us here and do a wrong job. Let us give our committee ample time so that they do a good job, which we shall all agree with. Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, it is indeed true that although the amendments that have been proposed are few, they can be very contentious and one will need to do thorough surgery so that we come up with something that will benefit all interested parties.

However, my concern is that you sent us to recess and we have been calling Members of Parliament from recess; this is the second time. If we give ourselves one or two weeks, like hon. Nandala-Mafabi is suggesting, shall we be in recess? Are we going to call Parliament back so that we give ourselves - The Business Committee sat and we agreed that if we go to recess, we shall come back by 25 or 26 because the Opposition shall have gone through what they have been going through and the NRM shall have gone through what we have been going through but the prevailing circumstance is that we are still there.

Madam Speaker, my concern is that if we give ourselves two weeks when the committee is sitting and they are calling people yet they are also interested in campaigns, we will be doing a disservice to them when the rest of us are away in recess. Therefore, are we going to break the recess, come back and deal with these pertinent issues? 

Probably there are others, which we can handle in these two weeks because calling back Members of Parliament from recess is costly to the Parliamentary Commission and it is costly politically. How are we going to deal with that? I would rather –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have a high regard for hon. Ruth Nankabirwa who was a member of the Young Parliamentary Association (YPA). If you were thinking while young, it is unfortunate.

Madam Speaker, we knew that elections would be held in 2016. It is not abrupt. We also knew that parties would go through primaries. Now you are saying that something that we should have done many years ago is to be done in one day or one week. Is she in order to say that the time we are requesting for is too much yet these laws should have come to Parliament in 2012? 

I remember, Madam Speaker, that you used to ask them, “When are you bringing the laws?” They have not brought the laws for the last three years and now they come on Tuesday to stampede Parliament. Yesterday was Eid and we are still in the Eid mood. Is she in order to come and stampede Parliament yet these laws should have come long ago? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been reminding you that we are still on duty until May 2016 but at the same time, I think we should not unduly put pressure on our colleagues on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to remain here while the rest are campaigning. 

Therefore, I would like to propose that we give them today, Monday and Tuesday and we convene on Wednesday. If we do not finish, we can complete on Thursday. Let us adjourn to Wednesday to give them time.

I want the Clerk to put up very serious notices so that the stakeholders can come between now and Tuesday.

12.02
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I would like to give a very honest statement in this Parliament. Some Members of Parliament come from very far while others come from very near. You know very well that Arua to Kampala is 600 kilometres. 

Madam Speaker, right now our opponents in the constituencies are saying, “They are not working, where are they?” We must drive back to our constituencies to sort ourselves out because if we do not do it, we shall get a problem.

I do not know whether there is something for the Members as far as September is concerned because we are even selling our cows to travel back and forth. Is there a possibility for us to be given ample time to go and campaign and we come back and finish these things instead of coming back and you tell us that they are not ready again? We are becoming fatigued.

THE SPEAKER: How can you start addressing issues when the committee is not ready? Even if you remain here today, tomorrow and Monday, they are not ready. Honourable members, House will convene on Wednesday at 2 O’clock.
 
If we do not finish on Wednesday, we complete on Thursday, then I will let you go for good until you win the elections. Honourable members, this House is adjourned to Wednesday at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 12.03.p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 30 September 2015 at 2 p.m.) 

