
Tuesday, 30 September 2014

Parliament met at 3.08p.m.in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I apologise for the late start.Today, we have a number of diverse and complex issues to deal with, so we were sorting out the technicalities thereof. Otherwise, you are welcome.

My office received nomination of hon. Dr Rugunda for appointment to a position of Prime Minister of Uganda on 19th September 2014. (Applause) However, on the same day, a petition authored by Prince Apolo Oyo Nyabongo and Moses Kakama was also delivered to my office.The grounds of the petition were that hon. Dr Rugunda as Chairperson of the National Consultative Forum for the Political Parties and Organisations is incompetent as there is a petition against him in the courts of law.

Secondly, that hon. Dr Rugunda is being investigated by police and that investigations are not yet over. Third, that hon. Dr Rugunda is among several other people being investigated by the IGG for misuse of funds and corruption-related cases.Four, that the Auditor-General and PPDA are investigating management of public funds under NCF.

However, in a turn of events, other persons who are on the National Consultative Forum also furnished my office with a  letter exonerating hon. Dr Rugunda of any wrong doing and asserted that he is not the accounting officer of the National Consultative Forum and therefore, could not be responsible for any financial impropriety. The letter also unveils the petitioners as imposters who are not members of the National Consultative Forum but most importantly, they furnished my office with a judgment that dismissed the claims of the petitioners. So, their case was dismissed as it is not subsisting.

The above notwithstanding, my office carried out preliminary enquiries into the allegations levelled against Dr Rugunda and I want to inform the House as follows:

My office interacted with the investigating officer at the CID who informed us that there is no evidence pointing to Dr Rugunda’s culpability since he was not the accounting officer.The accounting officer to the forum promised to furnish the officer with the requisite accountability.

Secondly, in the same vein, the Inspector General of Government has written to my office and informed me as follows:

    a) Hon. Dr Rugunda was not responsible for disbursing and accounting for money allocated for the National Consultative Forum.

    b) While Dr Rugunda and other committee members were paid sitting allowance for the different days, the moneys in issue were fully accounted for to the satisfaction of the electoral commission and there is no evidence that hon. Rugunda received any other payment or that he otherwise participated in the management of funds disbursed to that organisation.


    c) That as an office, the Inspectorate of Government has no objection for Parliament proceeding to consider a nomination of hon. Dr Rugunda as Prime Minister.

My office has also consulted the PPDA. PPDA continues investigations but the findings, preliminary at this stage, indicate that the likelihood of Dr Rugunda being found culpable in this matter is extremely remote since he was never responsible for administering and disbursement of the funds.

As a result, I am satisfied that there is no impediment with proceeding with the nomination of hon. Dr Rugunda and I propose that the motion be moved so that we carry out our constitutional duty.Thank you very much. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS BILL, 2014

3.13
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 be read for the first time.

This Bill is key, in relation to registration and identification of persons in Uganda. One important principle of the Bill is that it aims at –

THE SPEAKER: Has it been seconded? (Members rose_) Okay, it is seconded by four other colleagues; ministers for ICT, Defence, Land and Trade.

GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA: Thank you for the guidance. The Bill is a key registration tool relating to registration and identification of persons in Uganda. One important principle of this Bill is that it aims at removing duplication in registration and identification of persons in Uganda by centralising registration and identification into one body.

It presents registration of persons as citizens of Uganda for purposes of issuance of national identity cards.

I beg to lay the Billon the Table and I have a certificate of financial implications. I beg to lay.Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for perusal and report back.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Internal Affairs has just tabled a Bill which I believe is relevant to what we have gone through the last four months. At that time, we did ask for this law to precede the registration of citizens in this country and now, the process has gone more than half way through, and we are reliably informed that registration will stop in February next year and then thereafter it will change course.

What will be the relevance of this law now that we have already gone into the exercise for five months? How is it going to relate to whatever has happened? I beg for your clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the experience of the last few months in registration will assist us in making a good law. Let us go to the next item.





MOTION SEEKING PARLIAMENTARY APPROVAL OF THE APPOINTMENT OF HON. RUHAKANA RUGUNDA AS PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 108 (A) (1) OF THE CONSTITUTION

3.17
THE VICE PRESIDENT (Mr Edward Sekandi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, in view of the revelation that has been made by the Speaker on the appointment by the President of hon. Ruhakana Rugunda as Prime Minister, I beg to move a motion in order to fulfil the requirements of the Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, seconded by several Members.

MR SEKANDI: Madam Speaker and honourable members, the motion reads: 

“WHEREAS the Constitution, under Article 108 (a) provides that there shall be a Prime Minister who shall be appointed by the President, with the approval of Parliament, by simple majority from among Members of Parliament.

AND WHEREAS the President has appointed the hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda as the Prime Minister and seeks approval of this Parliament for that appointment;

AND WHEREAS, the hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda qualifies to be elected a Member of Parliament;

NOW, THEREFORE, I move that Parliament resolves as follows: 

That Parliament approves the appointment by H.E the President of the hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda as Prime Minister of Uganda.”

I beg to move.

The justification of this motion, Madam Speaker, can only be made out by presenting to you the profile of the hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, which will reveal the track record of the said person.

The hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda is currently the Minister of Health of the Republic of Uganda after being appointed to that position in May 2013. Previously, he had been the Minister of Information and Communication Technology after serving as Uganda’s Permanent Representative at the United Nations from January 2009 to May 2011.

Prior to that appointment, a position he held at ministerial level, the hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda was the Minister of Internal Affairs till 2009.He has extensive and varied experience in government and public service, having held several portfolios as Minister of Water and Environment, from 2001 to 2003; Minister for Presidency, from 1998 to 2001; Minister of Information, from 1996 to 1998; Minister of Foreign Affairs, from 1994 to 1996, Minister of Works, Transport and Communication, from 1988 to 1994; and Minister of Heath from 1986 to 1988, among other positions.From 1989 to 2001, the hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda represented Kabale Municipality as a Member of Parliament.

During his tenure as Minister of Water and Environment, he was elected the President of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environmental Programme and the President of the African Ministerial Conference on the Environment.

Dr Rugunda led the Government of Uganda delegation to the Juba based peace talks between the Government of Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army, from July 2006 to January 2009.
The hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda attended Kigezi High School and Busoga College Mwiri, before joining Makerere University and later the University of Zambia where he graduated as a medical doctor in 1975. He also holds a Master degree in Public Health specialising in maternal and child health from the University of California obtained in 1978. He also studied paediatrics at the University of Nairobi from 1982 to 1984.

The hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda started his medical career from Zambia as a physician before working at the Washington DC General Hospital as a resident physician and at the Kenya National Hospital in Nairobi, Kenya.

The hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda was keenly involved in student activities and held responsibilities - as President of the African Students Union at the University of California; President of the National Union of Uganda (NUSU) while at Makerere and the President of the Kigezi United Youth Association.

His publications include: Health Services in Namibia, Maternal and Child Health in Zambia, Family Planning in Uganda, and Neonatal Physics at Kenyatta University in Nairobi.

The hon. Dr Rugunda is married to Jocelyn and they have four children. His hobbies include: reading, chess, tennis, farming and public health.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this profile speaks for itself and is justified as approving the appointment of hon. Rugunda as Prime Minister of Uganda. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Your Excellency the Vice President. May I now invite hon. Dr Crispus Kiyonga to second the motion?

3.38
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I take the Floor to second the motion which has just been moved by His Excellency the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda. Madam Speaker, in supplementing and supporting the motion, I want to take this opportunity first to congratulate my brother, comrade Rugunda, on being elevated to the position of Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda.

Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda rose to national prominence very early in the course of his life. In the early 1970s, he became president of the National Union of Students of Uganda (NUSU). In that position, he made a mark to those of us who were still in the early stages of secondary school education because his leadership spoke loud and clear and just to illustrate that, I want to tell you a very brief story. In 1971, on the day that former President Idi Amin took over power, I was deep in the village in Bundibugyo; I was in my long vacation after S.4 and I was working as an interpreter for a white man who was doing research there -(Laughter)- and in those days, radio was not easily available. So this white man is the one who brought me the news in the morning. He said, “Amin has taken over Government” and my immediate reaction was, “What has Makerere said?” In other words, we had been so captivated by the NUSU leadership; we knew that if any problem came to be, we would be led by Makerere on how to solve it. Of course the white man could not understand why I was asking about Makerere but that tells the story of how the leadership of Ndugu Rugunda as president of NUSU spread so deep into the country side. 

Ndugu Rugunda has been a freedom fighter for a long time as we all know and because of his relentless fight for freedom, democracy and transformation and because of the difficult history we have gone through, he had to become a refugee twice in his life time. First, during Amin’s time; he had to go outside this country and stayed mainly in Zambia. He returned with UNLF in 1979 only to go back when another phase of a struggle started in 1981 and he lived in Nairobi and Sweden as a refugee but in that position, he continued the struggle for freedom, democracy and transformation.

I have known Ndugu Rugunda for a long time as I have already stated and I believe through the nomination by His Excellency President Museveni and the acceptance of that nomination by hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, Uganda is being offered a seasoned revolutionary freedom fighter, a patriot, a distinguished diplomat, a team player, a very experienced professional as we have heard from His Excellency the Vice President; a reliable, honest politician to offer leadership to our country as Prime Minister.

In seconding the motion, therefore, I commend hon. Rugunda to this House so that we can approve his appointment as Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda. I beg to support.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. May I now invite the MP for Bukoto South, hon. Nsubuga.

3.41
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand to second the motion for this House to approve the appointment of hon. Dr Rugunda as Prime Minister of Uganda. I have known Ndugu Rugunda since 1981. I remember those days when we were in the struggle to liberate this country –(Laughter)– the likes of Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, the former Prime Minister Amama Mbabazi, John Nasasira, Crispus Kiyonga to mention a few in the House and those outside this House and the second Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Kajura - I remember well that during those days, we used to converge sometimes in his flat at Kenyatta National Hospital where he used to work and those were not easy days but because of his skills, he would bring Ugandans together for a common goal of liberating Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga, just hold on. Hon. Members, I have discussed with the Leader of the Opposition and we have agreed that members can sit freely. So, those members who are standing can move to the Opposition side. (Laughter) 

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, it was not until Balaki Kiirya was kidnapped and brought back to Uganda that the former Prime Minister, Amama Mbabazi, Ruhakana Rugunda, Kirunda Kivejinja relocated to Sweden and we continued with the struggle. From what I have seen and read and what has been said by the mover of the motion, Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda is well educated. He has shown leadership skills right from his youth days when he was in secondary school. To be a leader, you must start from the beginning and that is why I second him to be the Prime Minister. 

Ndugu Rugunda is the chairman of the National Consultative Forum, a forum of political parties in Uganda. As Secretary General of the Democratic Party, I am a founding member of the National Consultative Forum. He is deputised by Mr Amanya Mushega. Hon. Rugunda with his skills, putting together 35 political parties is not something easy. We all come together as National Consultative Forum for the common good of this country. He has exhibited rare qualities in bringing us together because as I have said, each political party wants power but because of his skills, he has managed to put us together and indeed we have come up withdemands as a national consultative forum of electoral reforms and constitutional amendment. I am sure that hon. Rugunda as chair, soon or later, will table both as a Prime Minister and a chairman of National Consultative Forum those demands or those electoral reforms that we have brought together as political parties in Uganda.

I am also a member of IPOD, the six political parties in this House we sit together with national consultative forum and indeed we have also come up with our stand on electoral reforms and constitutional amendments.

I want to support those who have come to your office to say that Ndugu Rugunda is innocent of those accusations that were levelled against him about the misappropriation of funds of the National Consultative Forum. It is the permanent secretary of Electoral Commission, Mr Sam Rwakoojo, who is the accounting officer of NCF not the chairman. I think those who brought those accusations were not correct. I am a member and I think you are exonerated on that.

You have been told how Ndugu Rugunda participated in negotiations with Kony. It was not something easy for a Ugandan - it is like giving your life to your country to negotiate with Kony. We think that was commendable and we want to thank you for that. 

Ndugu Rugunda, you represented us well in the UN. Many people especially when appointed to represent their countries in international organisations are involved in scandals. But you went and represented the country and came back without any scandal.

You are going to be appointed a Prime Minister; I want you to look at both sides of the House - it is not always your House.
Just like now, you are seeking appointment or approval by both sides of the House, you should always look even on this side when we have matters of national importance. For example, I have just mentioned the electoral reforms, funding of political parties, constitutional amendment; you should look at all those as a nationalist the way you have been.

You need prayers because the way your predecessors, right from the late Dr Samson Kiseka, Amama Mbabazi, the late Adyebo, were removed was very unceremonious.I support your approval; of course you know I do not support your party but we want your party - and you should know that there is always life after politics. You should know that you will be Ndugu Rugunda even when you are not Prime Minister just like Amama Mbabazi is seated there. With those words, I second the motion that this House resolves to approve your appointment as Prime Minister of this country.

3.40
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryadongo): Madam Speaker and members, I rise to second this motion that approval of this House be granted for the Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda as Prime Minister. I want to congratulate Ndugu Rugunda upon winning the President’s favour in identifying him as the next Prime Minister.

I also want to thank the outgoing Prime Minister, Mr Amama Mbabazi, for serving with humility and for departing with humility. I am saying this because we have had people who have been disappointed before and they get out saying very many words and he has not done that.What you would call bitter departures, when things like these happen, it gives us an opportunity to see all these things and we could not have seen them if they had not happened. This is the positive side.

I also want to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker for upholding a very important Article of our Constitution namely, Article 28, about presumption of innocence when you told us about allegations that were being made about the Prime Minister designate. For those of you who could have watched news yesterday, the IGP said something that I thought the communication from the chair helped us to feel comfortable with.He made statements to the effect that this principle of presumption of innocence is making people get away with things and probably we should do away with it. I thought that that is a big departure from the principle of natural justice. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for upholding that in your communication from the chair.

I don’t want to risk stating the obvious because the obvious has already been stated by the mover of the motion,His Excellency the Vice President, and those who seconded the motion.If this House was constituting itself into a court of law to pass a verdict whether Rt Hon. Rugunda should be Prime Minister or not, I think we would only be asking ourselves what is the reasoning of this House to pass such a verdict and I think the reasoning is only doctrine which is that of Res Ipsa Loquita for those 
itself, but suffice to say - one Member from behind was saying that you stop there; the CV is too loaded; don’t tell us all the things that he has done; it is too much. He is over qualified. 

I also want to state that I was overwhelmed by this CV and it just reminds me that in Uganda, we have potential leaders except that sometimes we may not see them.We all know that His Excellency the President owes us no duty to explain why he appointed somebody or why he disappointed somebody. But as people, I think that is why the Constitution was framed in such a way that we can talk about the appointment of the person of the calibre of a Vice President and a Prime Minister in the Committee of the whole House.It helps if we can read the under currents because these also help the person who have been appointed to know or to read through those undercurrents and probably take exception as to why theirpredecessor has gone. The undercurrents are for all of us to see but I only want to congratulate the President for appointing a very able and senior citizen to this position.

May we be reminded again that in this game of politics – the Deputy Speaker re-echoed it when he was in the Chair the other day - that when we are in these political offices, we are in the departure lounge.  For Members of Parliament probably, I would not hesitate to tell you that the attrition rate is very high and I take strong exemption when I hear that there are some people who can go out there and celebrate that somebody has been removed from a particular office. I do not think that is a good reason enough because the attrition rate is very high for all of us and it is one thing that we have to keep in mind.

Madam Speaker, this is a democratic process that we are engaged in right now and I want to remind Ugandans that the whole world is demanding for democracy. We have seen the most recent being in Hong Kong where protestors are saying that, “We may have everything but we want democracy.” That is my message to the Prime Minister designate: as you lead the Government side, please uphold the rule of law and urge your side of the aisle to walk the path of democracy because the whole world is asking for democracy.

Historians have always said that history repeats itself. But other people have crafted it another way that nothing happens in the world that has never happened before and it is a statement of fact. We have approved Prime Ministers here before and the history of this country is quite rich and that is why we even anchored it in the Proclamation as you read our Constitution. I would like to ask my colleagues who are leaders, political and other levels of leadership, that we must begin to read the political history of this country because if we do not read- I realise that actually, a lot of us do not read. Let us read and know the political history of this country so that we may avoid making the mistakes that our predecessors made in the past. I am asking this statement again because there are those who think that the departure of one colleague means a celebration of others but political history is there to exonerate us.

For example, if I asked any of you that if we are to put the political situation of Uganda right now and ask ourselves what is reminiscent of in regard to our past political history – at what time do you think we are? I leave that to you, my colleagues, Members of Parliament as I want you to find out.

I only want to urge the young people – you know this attrition rate has brought a lot of young people in this House. The young people, I think, need to begin to prepare to journey this country on a path that we want to see it, to be the change that we want to see as opposed to being what somebody would call ‘hangers on’ just to share what is going on because clearly, we can see that we are shaping our country and we need to move together in a certain direction but the destiny being ours.

THE SPEAKER: If you could wind up.

MR OTADA: Finally, I want to support the motion and commend this House to commend the Rt Hon. Nduugu Rugunda to this House for approval as Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda. I second the motion. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, we had only planned one hour for this motion and so, the other seconders should only use five minutes.





3.50
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand up to second the motion for the approval of Ndugu Rugunda as the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda.

It may appear to some a little strange –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, can I be protected?

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MR AKENA: It may appear strange to some that I, as a member of Uganda People’s Congress, is standing to second the approval of Ndugu Rugunda. But my standing here is not by accident but is dipped in history. [HON. MEMBER: “Tell us.”]  Ndugu Rugunda as a very young political Ugandan had an opportunity to interact with the leaders of the day and this was before he ascended to the presidency of NUSU. He was a guest at my father’s home –(Applause)- taken care of by my mother who sends her congratulations and deep support. 

And so, hon. Rugunda’s history is part of the nation’s history. If you look at that CV, it stretches beyond one government and Uganda and one key element that allows me to stand here to openly support the motion is the spirit of nationalism which Ndugu Rugunda has exhibited throughout his career in politics. (Applause)

I fear that if we had a young Rugunda growing up today, he will not be the President of NUSU but the President of Banyakigezi Student’s Group. So, I am urging my brother Ndugu not to forget the roots as we build a decent future for all citizens of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, on another note, when I was coming back from my second exile that lasted 20 years, my late father told me that if I ended up in any problem, I should see his son Rugunda. (Applause) I came without a problem and I saw hon. Rugunda and he assisted me in getting a passport after 20 years so that I could go back to visit my father. 

But more importantly, when my father passed on, as a family, we remain very grateful to Ndugu Rugunda for all that he did so that we could bring his remains home where he wished to be buried. (Applause) I did not have the fortune of interacting with hon. Rugunda earlier on but during the Juba peace process, we were able to do some very important work and that needed us to go beyond partisan politicking and really seek the best solution for what people had been suffering. I do not think that there was anybody with the temperament and understanding of hon. Rugunda who could have handled the situation, especially in the delicate stages as we sought the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement. 

On my part, I was able to approach the Government side and at that stage, there was a lot of mistrust, there was a belief that a member of the Opposition was only here to spoil or make political capital. Ndugu Rugunda was able to see beyond that one and we were able to get pen to signature and the cessation of hostilities came into being and people started reclaiming their lives.

On this note, I want to end that the Office of the Prime Minister is handling a very important responsibility –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR AKENA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am concluding on the point that the fifth recovery and development programme in northern Uganda is something, which is vital for the people there. It is very unfortunate that we have had situations of things disappearing from the Office of the Prime Minister. So I am requesting my brother Ndugu, with all your integrity and all the nationalism which you have shown throughout your life time, to please make sure that those in Northern Uganda get their fair share of the national cake and can be part of this nation. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.57
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I want to thank God this day for allowing me to speak about somebody I have known for some time. I also want to thank the appointing body for seeing it fit that Dr Rugunda is elevated to one of the highest offices in this country. Please allow me to also thank hon. Rugunda for what he is to us. We know him as somebody who is down to earth because he interacts with everybody. I also want to thank hon. Rugunda’s mother who played a big role in setting her son to what he is today.

I knew hon. Rugunda in 1986 when he was appointed as a Minister of Health. Indeed at that time, we had mixed opinions and feelings as one did not know what it would be like the next day but hon. Rugunda came and he knew all of us by name. He would always call us Ndugu. If he wanted you to work, he would use a persuasive language and that alleviated the anxiety of many of us and we settled down to work in the Ministry of Health.

Between 1986 and 1988, when he was the minister, he played a big role in saving the health services of this country. I thank you, hon. Rugunda, for that and that is why when he was returned back to Ministry of Health as a minister, I was one of those who was very excited because I felt he would lift the Ministry of Health and health service delivery to the communities of Uganda. This is because when he was with us, he exhibited his attention to the community. He was a minister who visited this country widely to see the situation of health facilities and the plight of health workers. I thank him for that.

I knew hon. Rugunda as somebody who is very honest, trustworthy, nationalistic, people centred and patriotic. My dear ministers, you are lucky to have a friend who will listen as a prefect for your ministries. I believe you will find that comfort in him.

Hon. Rugunda, I wish you to fare well in the new position. You deserve it. I believe that God saw that you were the one who could do it and I am happy that God is giving you this blessing because you deserve it.

We are behind you, we want you to settle down and work. For those of us who will remain here, we shall support your efforts and pray for you. I know many things are being said but take it with courage. You have excelled among many challenges and I believe you will go over this new one.

One thing I want to say to you is that a wealthy country depends on the state of its health. Therefore in your office, make sure health services to the communities are at their best. Although I thought you would have corrected the short falls in Ministry of Health, now at a higher level, I wish you the best. Thank you very much.

4.02
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to support the motion moved by the Vice President. I would also like to congratulate Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda for his appointment as Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda. I want to say that I knew the Prime Minister designate, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, when I was the vice president of the Uganda National Students Association and a photo of Dr Rugunda was always there as president of NUSU by then and now the UNSA. 

Among the former presidents of the students’ union of Uganda, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda was ranked highly in leadership in regard to championing the students and the youth cause in Uganda, which we felt very proud to associate with.

I congratulate hon. Dr Rugunda because when I was at the great university of Makerere, I came to know him when he was mobilising us as students to join the Pan African movement in Kamwokya together with hon. Kahinda Otafiire. Hon. Rugunda was easily approachable and I remember at one time when hon. Rugunda was the chairperson of the NRM electoral commission and I was still the president of the students of Uganda, I consulted him and said I wanted to be a member of Parliament representing the youth of Uganda. He automatically told me, I will support you and there and then, he gave me guidance. Even though I postponed my victory by leaving it to hon. Nalubega Mariam, I credit hon. Rugunda because he had given me all the necessary mentorship and support.

Therefore, on behalf of the students’ fraternity and on behalf of the youth fraternity of this country, I think the President of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, took a wise decision to ensure that hon. Rugunda deserves the Prime Minister position in this Republic, based on his experience.

I want to encourage all of us who are here that the Bible is very clear that there is a time for everything. It is now for Ruhakana Rugunda to lead the country forward in that position as a Prime Minister of Uganda and I second the motion that he leads as the Prime Minister.I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We have exhausted the one hour. Let me just invite hon. Amama Mbabazi, three minutes. (Members rose_) honourable members, not everybody can really contribute. I think there is general support.

4.06
MR AMAMA MBABAZI (NRM, KINKIIZI COUNTY WEST, KANUNGU): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. (Applause) I do not know if I heard you well, Madam Speaker. Was it three minutes? 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I adjust to four for you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: It is possible that in this Parliament, I have known Ndugu longest because we have been friends, we have been workmates, we have been comrades consistently for the last 56 years. So, the Vice President and all the seconders have said everything about him. I thought I could give you another angle.

Because of my knowledge of him, I can, therefore, confirm to you and to the country that the choice of Ruhakana Rugunda as Prime Minister of this country is the right choice. (Applause) He has been in positions of leadership as you heard and I would like only to concentrate on his leadership in our struggle for freedom.

Our struggle started a long time ago when we were students and Rugunda was our leader. We struggled against the poor politics of the 1960s - this fact is not very well known because we took principled positions on domestic politics. We were pan Africanists, we believed in the liberation struggle and we fully subscribed to it and in that, Dr Rugunda led us well.

When dictatorship came in Uganda in 1971, we didn’t wait to oppose it. We opposed that dictatorship and Dr Rugunda actually led that struggle. When the armed struggle started, he was the direct link between us and the leader of our struggle then, Yoweri Museveni, who lived outside and linked through Dr Rugunda and a few others.

From 1971 to 1973, he directly participated in the fight inside Uganda. In 1973, we suffered a serious setback because Idi Amin forces delivered a very serious flock against our own forces. As you recollect, those various public executions that took place in Gulu, Fort Portal, Mbale, Jinja, Kampala, Mbarara, Kabale, these were comrades. One of the people that was supposed to be executed was Ruhakana Rugunda, he survived because he knows many things, he has many skills; I will talk about one later on, but one of this greatest skills is to make friendships. (Applause)

He has friends, he had friends then and that is why he is alive today. (Member timed out.)

HON. MEMBERS: No, Madam Speaker. More minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, three minutes only and you conclude.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you. Let me summarise it. In 1973, one thing happened for the first time and it has never happened since. We, the very close comrades of Ruhakana Rugunda shaved off his beard -(Laughter)– this beard you see here is not the original beard which grew on his face because in 1973, in order to save his life, we shaved off that beard and you cannot imagine, what Dr Rugunda looks like without a beard. (Laughter) But it saved him; thank God he is alive today. As the Vice President said, he went to Tanzania and then Zambia.

In 1975 up to early 1976, Yoweri Museveni and I on a crusade to mobilise Ugandans in the fight against dictatorship went to mobilise Ugandans from capital to capital, Kenya, Tanzania, we went to Zambia and it is Dr Rugunda who hosted us and mobilised his colleagues who were in Zambia at the time to come together.

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Where was hon. Anite?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Hon. Anite was still in the making. (Laughter) In our struggle, as you heard hon. Mathius Nsubuga say correctly, I confirm everything he said, it was accurate - in our struggle, we entrusted Dr Rugunda with the work of diplomacy. He took charge of Western Europe and the Soviet Union at the same time. That is how deep our confidence was in his diplomatic skills. To take charge of Western Europe and the Soviet Union at the same time at that time – he executed his duties very well. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Let me now invite the hon. Kabakumba and Muhwezi but for only three minutes each.

HON HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No!

THE SPEAKER: Order members. Honourable members, I now understand the hon. Kabakumba Matsiko has surrendered her of three minutes but please –

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay, I thank the hon. Princess Kabakumba Matsiko for her gracious consideration and I promise not to use all the three minutes; I have to leave some of her time for her to make a point.

But the point I was making was that he performed so well and that is why when he became our representative to the United Nations, he became the President of the United Nations Security Council twice, in two years. (Applause)  That was totally unprecedented. That is evidence of the exceptional skills he has in diplomacy.

Now let me make this point. The veterans of our struggle put their lives on the line to usher this country into peace and have since the capture of power in 1986, protected the freedoms we enjoy today. They have dedicated their lives to their country and deserve to be recognised for their commitment. Dr Rugunda is such a veteran. (Applause) Ndugu has shown that commitment and hard work succeeds. This takes not just skills but extreme dedication and commitment.

In leadership, as it is in sports, you need three things to win – discipline, hard work and of course maybe before all these, commitment. No one will make it without those three. And in my 50 years of comradeship with the hon. Dr Rugunda, I can confirm that he has all these three. (Applause) So, Ndugu, congratulations. I will incidentally have of course the opportunity to say more because I have not handed over yet –(Laughter)– in case you didn’t know. So, when I hand over - and as soon as he is ready to receive the instruments of authority of the Office of the Prime Minister, which I still hold – (Laughter)– I will have the opportunity to say more. But for now, congratulations, Ndugu. You will enjoy my full support throughout your tenure of office. Thank you. (Applause)


4.21
MS KABAKUMBA MATSIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, a lot has been said about the hon. Dr Rugunda. I have known the hon. Dr Rugunda for the last about 30 years. But more concretely for the last 25 years when one of his brothers decided to take me in marriage and since then, the hon. Dr Rugunda refers to me as Mulamu. So, I can confirm that the hon. Dr Rugunda is able to balance the various roles including being a family man. (Applause)

The hon. Dr Ndugu Rugunda is a reliable, patient and very difficult to annoy man. He is always full of humour. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I recall one incident –(Interjections)– and handsome of course – in 2001, during the campaigns and at the climax when his opponent decided to dress Ndugu’s campaign T-shirt and dressed it into a dog. And we all waited to see the reaction of Ndugu Rugunda and all of us were very annoyed. But when he arrived, he just laughed it off and said, “Comrades, that is key and normal. Leave them. It is alright.” That is the hon. Dr Ndugu Rugunda.

So, I want to congratulate you and I know you carry all these skills and experience to that office you are going to hold. Congratulations, hon. Dr Rugunda. I wish you well.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, please join me in welcoming students of St Charles Lwanga, Muko Secondary School, represented by the hon. Banyenzaki and hon. Ninsima from Kabale. I also ask you to join me in welcoming students from Bugema University, represented by the hon. Dr J.C. Muyingo, also the Minister of State for Higher Education, and hon. Brenda Nabukenya in Luweero.

Honourable members, let us have the final contribution from the hon. Maj. Jim Muhwezi but for only three minutes.

4.24
MAJ. GEN. JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion of approving hon. Dr Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda. On behalf of the people of Rujumbura County and of the people of Rukungiri and the greater Kigezi at large, I want to say that we are very happy that H.E the President would want once again to pick from our region and in the person of hon. Dr Rugunda. I am aware that the Prime Minister of Uganda is going to serve the whole nation and I know very well that hon. Ruhakana Rugunda is a nationalist since his childhood when he was the President of NUSU.

As hon. Dr Kiyonga said, we got to know about him while we were still young and in school. So, when I came to know him, later in life, I was not surprised.He fought with us during the liberation struggle when we were in the bush. He is among those who were outside and who played their role properly without any problem with us in the bush. 

I am happy that during his approval in this House, both sides of this House have been unanimous. This shows his quality as a unifier, as a leader who can bring people together and I am sure with his great experience in the different fields he has served, both in Government and in other organisations and internationally, he will definitely help Uganda and the government in his new office he is going to occupy. I know that Ndugu Rugunda will help us a lot -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is clear that the nominee enjoys a lot of support from across the political divide of this country. So, I now put the question that the vote be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will ask the clerk to ascertain the numbers in the House because we are going to vote. 
MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard you talk about voting and I have not heard a second name being proposed for the prime ministership and I am wondering; when you have one name nominated and the nominations are closed, that person automatically is declared as a candidate  – (Interjections)– yes, even in elections; look at our electoral laws. Madam Speaker, are we procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, we are. The Constitution requires a 50 plus one. So, we must count. Okay, honourable members, there are 215 Members in the House; so, we shall vote row by row, by show of hands. 

(Voting by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when we began voting, there were 205 Members, but by the time we completed, there were 225 so those are the voting numbers.
 
So abstentions are four, votes against are four and votes in favour are 217. Hon. Members, Article 108 of the Constitution requires that the Prime Minister be approved by a simple majority from among members of Parliament. He has been elected by more than a simple majority therefore I declare that he has been approved by this House to take up his duties. (Applause)

4.29
THE PRIME MINISTER(Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.Let me take this opportunity to sincerely thank you for leading the House very well in passing this motion approving my appointment as Prime Minister of Uganda, a motion that has been overwhelmingly endorsed by colleagues. I thank all those that voted for me and even those who voted against me for exercising their democratic right.

I want to take this opportunity and thank his Excellency President Yoweri Museveni for considering me suitable and putting confidence in me to be the Prime Minister and head of government business.

Let me take this opportunity to salute my childhood friend Ndugu Amama Mbabazi who has served this country very well as Prime Minister of Uganda for the last three years. The history he talked about is basically correct having met him when we were young primary school students. 

As you very well know, the duties of a Prime Minister are very well known and defined. I will be focusing on implementation of the manifesto of the NRM, the NDP and coordinating government programmes to ensure that what Parliament has approved is indeed implemented –(Interjections)- I hear Beatrice talking about PRDP and I am very happy because as you know, PRDP is our baby and we are glad that Government has prioritised it and it will be energetically implemented. 

Our focus will be on implementation of many infrastructural projects that are underway, roads, railways and many other things. We also continue to prioritise improved service delivery to the people of Uganda. To that end, I wish to reiterate that it is our collective responsibility to ensure that our population has proper and adequate access to the essential services that they duly deserve and are indeed entitled to.

In order to address the problems of poverty and youth unemployment, promotion of private sector investments and job creation must remain a priority of Government and a priority of the country including Parliament. We must also focus on modernisation of agriculture, industrialisation and the value addition as we keep pillars of our transformation agenda.

Let us intensify our collective effort to combat corruption. [HON. MEMBERS: “That one.”] a vice that has plagued our country and society and is still a challenge today. Greater emphasis will be placed on accountability and transparency in managing public affairs. This is the responsibility of Government, the Opposition and for very Ugandan citizen. Our country has had a difficult history and many of the speakers made reference to this history. My young brother, hon. Jimmy Akena, hon. MB Nsubuga and many others including Ndugu Amama Mbabazi and Ndugu Jim Muhwezi have referred to this difficult history.

So the history of our country is scarred with wars, disease and natural calamities to which so many of our people’s lives have been lost. Through struggle and sacrifice, Uganda has since emerged out of this difficult period and is now playing a vanguard role in promoting regional security, social and economic development.

As I take on this new responsibility, Madam Speaker, I take it on fully aware of the hard times, struggle and sacrifice that Ugandans have gone through. However, our country has also attained significant achievements promising great opportunities and indeed a bright future. 

I, therefore, call upon all my colleagues in this House and the fellow citizens of Uganda to effectively consolidate these achievements as we work together in advancing Uganda’s transformation agenda. I thank you, Madam Speaker. And I say this For God and My Country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I congratulate Dr Rugunda upon your appointment and approval by this House. I also want to thank Rt. Hon. Amama Mbabazi for his contribution and services rendered to Parliament during his term of office and want to wish him well as the MP for Kinkizi West.  

Prime Minister designate, as the Leader of Government Business, I want to bring to your attention various issues that are important to the operations of the House.

One, the communication channels between your office and the Office of The Speaker should be opened and accessible for smooth coordination of business in Parliament. Likewise, you are expected to maintain close touch with other stakeholders like the Leader of the Opposition, the Government Chief Whip and entire membership of the House for smooth functioning of all our activities. I invite you to have time to socialise with members in the parliamentary canteen. (Applause)- (Laughter)

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes, the Governor. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The Governor? I also wanted to inform you that sometimes the Executive has not been responsive as Parliament requires and in some instances, proposed legislation is introduced late causing a stampede in Parliament and sometimes the output is poor quality and also affects the citizens. 

I want to say this. I think that for the up tenth time, the law on electoral reforms should have come in the third session at the latest. So we want to urgently ask you to bring those Bills for processing if we are going to avoid unnecessary stampede.

On 16 June, your predecessor submitted to me a list of 69 Bills to be processed by this House in the fourth session but as I speak now, apart from the budget related Bills which are statutory, anyway, only one of the 69 has come to this House and I want you to take note of that and not to blame Parliament.

I would want to appeal to you to improve the situation so that Government business does not stall and the work of this House should not be interrupted. 

We have agreed in principle that under Rule 103, a ministry with more than two ministers should at least send one of the two or three to attend the sittings of this House. Many times this has not happened and some ministries have been continually absent and want you to take an interest in that.   
Honourable members, there has been a public outcry about the absence of members during sittings. The absence of members is unfairly attributed to the Speaker and yet the Speaker is the one person who is always here. Yes, the Speaker is always here but when the public is complaining, they say that it is the Speaker. It is not the work of the Speaker to look for members but the work of the whips and you as the Leader of Government Business to whip members and ensure that they are here. It should be in your interest as the Leader of Government Business to ensure that the majority of members attend so that business is transacted.  

We are also aware that in many jurisdictions, meetings and consultations take place between your office, the Leader of the Opposition and the coordinator of the Independents to ensure that work is moving smoothly. So, we want to urge you to use all those methods to ensure that only matters that are not agreed upon really come for debate on the Floor of this House.

I want to assure you of our support and commitment and look forward to working well with all the presiding officers and the members of this House. We are anxiously waiting for you to take up your duties and wish you very well. I thank you so much. (Applause) Honourable members, we still have work to do.

4.53
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Madam Speaker, I stand here to congratulate Nduugu Rugunda on his elevation to the post of Prime Minister. There have been thoughts that I should have seconded the motion to – (Interjections) - if I had not been the Leader of the Opposition, I would have done it as hon. Wafula Oguttu because it would look a little but queer.
I have known Dr Rugunda for a long time since –

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Wafula-Oguttu, we had expected you to second the motion and you declined and now you are speaking to the motion.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: No, I am welcoming him. I think that it is proper that I welcome the Prime Minister. It is very ethical and proper political etiquette. I have known Dr Rugunda since 1979 and he is a good man. 

We have only disagreed once. We formed a party called UPM and sometime in the 1990s when parties were being revived, myself and a group of others wanted to revive our UPM Party and Dr Rugunda came to our meeting in hon. Bidandi Ssali’s office on Uganda House to dissuade us from reviving UPM and that is when I disagreed with Dr Rugunda. But otherwise, we have kept as good friends and have no doubt that he is going to fit into the Prime Minister’s shoes very well. He has a long service and has served long in this Government and therefore comes with wealth of experience to which we hope we are going to tap into and he is going to do good work of r our country.

We appeal to you to take the route of dialogue, consultation and tolerance as we have known you. We would like you to prioritise the issue of constitutional and electoral reforms and party funding as they are important to us. It is a good thing that you have been in charge of the National Consultative Forum where the issue of funding parties has been a very big issue. We hope that you can use your position to see that party funding is implemented under your able leadership.

We would also like to appeal to you to look at the Office of the Prime Minister and restructure it. I think the Office of the Prime Minister should be for coordination, monitoring and supervising work but as it is in this present form, this office also handles implementation and therefore, it becomes difficult when the office makes mistakes yet it also supervises. It is a structural problem, which we think should be looked at and reformed.

Lastly, the government has made a lot of assurances to the public and continues to make these assurances. We think you should look at the quantum of these assurances. They are too many, the monies involved are big and we ask you to put a check on these assurances.

Rt hon. Speaker, once again I would like to welcome Dr Rugunda for the elevation to the office. But I would also like to thank hon. Amama Mbabazi for the dignified manner in which he has handled this matter and for the work he has done as Prime Minister for the Republic of Uganda. We thank him and we have also heard that he is going to give full support to hon. Rugunda as Prime Minister and that is how it should be. This country has never seen this change of leadership in a civil way and we are hoping that one day we shall also witness it on the front of this Parliament when it happens. Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, join me in welcoming the pupils of Butabala Primary School, I do not know where they are seated. They are from Iganga district represented by hon. Baliddawa and hon. Olivia Kwagala. You are welcome.

Honourable members, I said that my communication was going to be in two parts today. so I want to go to the second part of my communication. I would like to inform the honourable members that today I received communication from H.E the President that in exercising his powers under Article 91 of the Constitution, he has returned the Finance Bill, 2014, the Excise Duty Bill, 2013 and the Public-Private Partnership Bill, 2012 to Parliament for re-consideration of some provisions.

Honourable members, in accordance with Rule 132, which I am going to read for you, it provides that when a Bill passed by the House is returned to the House by the President with a message requesting that the House should re-consider the Bill or any specific provision of it or any such amendments as are recommended in his or her message, the Speaker shall read the message of the President or if the House is not in session, direct that the message be published in the gazette.

Honourable members, since we are not in recess yet, I am going to read the message as required by our Rules of Procedure. It is dated 29 September 2014. “Proposal to recommit to Parliament the Excise Duty Bill, 2013, the Finance Bill, 2014 and the Public-Private Partnership Bill, 2012.
In exercise of the powers vested upon me by Article 91 clause 3(b), I wish to return the Finance Bill, 2014 and the Excise Duty Bill, 2013 to Parliament for reconsideration of the provisions I am highlighting below.

During the passing of the Excise Duty Bill, 2013, Parliament rejected the proposal to impose excise duty of Shs 200 per litre on kerosene. The projected revenue from this measure was Shs 15 billion. Projected revenue was meant to contribute to rural electrification.

I was meant to understand that Excise Duty on kerosene was rejected on grounds that the duty would lead to an increase in prices making it expensive and unaffordable to the rural and urban poor since it constitutes a major cost of their expenditure budget. However, there is no evidence that the ordinary consumers have benefited from the removal of the excise duty because retail prices have not changed significantly. The average retail price of kerosene in financial year 2010/2011, before removal of excise duty, was Shs 2236 and after the removal in 2011/2012, the average price moved to Shs 2836. Since the excise duty was proposed in the budget, the price of kerosene has increased by only Shs 50 a litre from Shs 2850 to Shs 2900.

This shows that the removal of excise duty largely benefited the dealers. The dealers are reluctant to adjust kerosene prices downwards relative to the price of diesel for fear of unscrupulous individuals mixing kerosene with diesel.

Parliament also omitted to discuss some measures, which have significant revenue implications. The measures omitted under excise duty are:

    1. On sugar from Shs 25 to Shs 50 per kilogram to raise Shs 7 billion;
    2. Of 10 per cent on financial transactions to generate Shs 22 billion  and;
    3. Of 10 per cent on mobile money withdrawal fees to raise Shs 16 billion.

I was informed that the proposed excise duty on sugar, bank charges and mobile money withdrawal fees were inadvertently omitted during the committee stage as the Excise Duty Bill was being discussed. The projected revenues from the above measures are quite significant and critical for financing of infrastructure like roads and power to make our country more competitive. It is therefore important that Parliament reconsiders them.

I have also noted that the Excise Duty Bill, 2013 did not have a commencement date. Parliament should consider inserting 1 July 2014 as the commencement date. I am also returning to Parliament the Finance Bill, 2014 to reconsider clause 2 of the Finance Bill, 2014 which sought to amend section 68 of the Uganda Communications Act to provide for transfer of half the revenue collected by Uganda Communications Commissions from licensed communication operators tothe Consolidated Fund. The revenue out of this measure is estimated at Shs 8 billion.

The approach to transfer half of the levy collected by Communications Commission is consistent with the Public Finance and Management Bill, 2012 in which it proposed that all non-tax revenues collected by ministries, departments and agencies should be remitted to the Uganda Consolidated Fund. This is to ensure that all revenues are appropriated by Parliament based on agreed priorities and that no sector should have excess funds at the expense of unfunded priorities.

Rt hon. Speaker, failure by Parliament to approve these measures amounting to Shs 68 billion, exacerbates the already precarious revenue situation arising from poor revenue outlook.

As of August 2014, Uganda Revenue Authority has posted a short fall of Shs 68 billion. Taking this into consideration, the revenue shortfall at the end of the financial year is estimated at about Shs 130 billion. This will in no doubt impact seriously on our efforts to construct critical infrastructure and deliver badly needed services to our people.

I am meant to understand that the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, General Duties and the PS Secretary to the Treasury met you and agreed that I recommit the above Bills for the reasons I have articulated above. He followed this with a letter to you dated 29 September 2014.

Finally, I am returning clause 26(1), 26(7), 26(8) of the Public-Private Partnership Bill, 2012 for reconsideration by Parliament. The Bill was passed by Parliament on 10 July 2014. These clauses provide that the Public-Private Partnership agreement shall not be signed- I think he forgot something- without the approval of Parliament. The import of this provision is that Parliament will usurp the constitutional mandate of the Attorney-General to approve agreements in which Government is a party.
 
In addition, this would introduce the prior approval mechanism for PPP agreements and add another bureaucracy, which will cause inordinate delays to the implementation of infrastructure projects.
Furthermore, the provision will be a disincentive to investors who may not consider investing in infrastructure projects in Uganda as their business vision will be subjected to parliamentary approval. This will negatively impact the achievement of our national development goals and Vision 2014. Signed: Yoweri K. Museveni, President. Copied to H.E the Vice President, Rt hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Finance and PS Secretary to Treasury.”

So honourable members, now that I have complied with Rule 132, I invite the minister responsible to re-table the Bill. Minister of Finance.


5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION)(Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, in accordance with part 12 and rule 132 (2), I wish to table before Parliament the three Bills that have been returned to Parliament for reconsideration; The Excise Duty Bill, 2014, The Finance Bill, 2014 and The Public Private Partnership Bill, 2014.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The Excise Duty Bill is sent to the Committee on Finance, the Finance Bill is also sent to the Committee on Finance, the other one was handled by more than one committee, so I do not know- [Honourable members; “finance”] okay, we send it to the Committee on Finance.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Except the PPP Bill, the Excise Duty Bill and the Finance Bill was thoroughly and extensively considered by the committee and also the Committee of the Whole House.

The points of departure are very well known by this House. Is it procedurally right for these Bills to go back to the committee when they can be debated and issues harmonised without necessarily going back to the committee?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I draw your attention to Rule 132 (2) of our Rules of Procedure which requires this Bill to go for two weeks to the committee. These are our rules; I am not inventing them.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Some of these Bills have been brought at a time when Parliament is supposed to be appropriating especially the laws that affect taxation area. I know under the Budget Act the Speaker has the powers to extend the time period with in which the budget for the financial year is to be appropriated.

Now, looking at the situation we are sending these Bills back to the committee as demanded by our Rules of Procedure which I am not here to argue about, it is going to take some time.

What will be the impact of further delay on these issues on our appropriation role implementation of Government programmes because I am aware this may not be- it may be the beginning. Parliament in its wisdom can decide otherwise and send these same Bills back to the President and the President may again send them to us. So, how long is this ping pong going to be and what is going to be the impact of these delays on our role as an appropriating agency? That is my fear. I do not know how you will guide us but really tomorrow we are starting October and I am afraid it may stall down the process. I beg your indulgence to guide us.

COL KATIRIMA: Madam Speaker, I listened carefully to hon. Wadri regarding these Bills which have just been tabled and you had guided that they should go to the committee for scrutiny. Is it procedurally correct for hon. Wadri to anticipate the result of these Bills when they have not been reconsidered by the committee and the House? Is he procedurally correct to anticipate that these Bills will not have any changes made on them by the committee and the committee of the whole House – is he procedurally correct to violate our Rules of Procedure?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want us to speculate. Let us just follow the rules. The committee will report back to us in two weeks’ time.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would propose that much as we are sending it back to Finance, we also ask the budget committee to work with Finance.

THE SPEAKER: Assembling the budget committee, if we have too big a committee, I do not know. You have no confidence in the finance committee?

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, it is not because I do not have confidence in the finance committee. I have confidence in the finance committee, but in fact I was trying to look at the Rules of Procedure – I was trying to check but I wanted to propose that if it is possible we would suspend the rules so that the Bill can come back as early as possible because two weeks is too long a time, in my opinion. I, therefore, beg to move that –

THE SPEAKER: No, no.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion. (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I would like to beg for your indulgence and that of colleagues to read our Rules. Our Rules and the Constitution are categorical. Rule 132 (2) saysthe Bill shall be referred to the relevant committee and the committee will report back within two weeks. If you read that rule up to the end, Madam Speaker, it is clear.

Secondly, I would like to allay the fear of my colleagues that the Constitution gives us the power to do appropriation. When we do appropriation, if you listen to the letter of the President, even revenue collection has gone down and we are now using the collection order which has not elapsed. It elapses when we finish the Bill, that is at the end of four months because we already passed the vote-on-account, which ends at the end of October. 

And so, all these taxes are being collected until the House decides otherwise and even if we are decided, until the president assents to the Bill. Therefore, the President did not assent to the Bill, which means the collection order is still in force.

In addition, even if the collection order and revenue collection is down, we are borrowing more than Shs 2.5 trillion domestically to finance the budget. So, really, we should do our job neatly, the way the Speaker has directed; the way it is provided for within the rules so that tomorrow we are not accused of violating the rules. I seek for your guidance so that this is clear.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill has been referred to the committee. Next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2014
6.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES): Mr Jacan Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, before I read this Bill for the second time, permit me to mention that the Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda has been good, is getting “gooder” and we expect him to be “goodest” –(Laugher)– as the Prime Minister of Uganda. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Appropriation Bill, 2014, be read for the second time.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. We have received a recommital of the key part of the budget, regarding the revenues. I thought we still have to agree on the revenue measures that will affect the expenditure. So, can we still proceed to appropriate before we agree on the revenue measures?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us do what we can. The report from our committee will then tell us what to do. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand on a matter of procedure –

THE SPEAKER: On what?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Pursuant to the response of the President on the three Bills. We are not in a rush to go to the moon. So, we must thoroughly check ourselves. Madam Speaker, don’t you think that in accordance with Article 91 of the Constitution, after briefing us on the reaction of the President on the three Bills, you should equally entitle us to listen to what the Constitution says under this Article in case there is such a stalemate on the Bill?

THE SPEAKER: What is the stalemate?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: The stalemate –

THE SPEAKER: There is stalemate. I have sent the Bills to the committee as per our Rules of Procedure. There is no stalemate. Please don’t invite a stalemate. Yes, minister, continue.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I had stood up on procedural matter too – (Interruptions)

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the object of this Bill –(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. First, I am not going to say anything contrary to what the Minister of Finance is going to say. So, there should be no worries.
Anyhow, a budget is an estimate of expected income and expenditure. So, nobody should get worried about anything. There shouldn’t be any worries – that there is a less income – if that happiness, that is what the country will definitely spend. That is what I wanted to raise first.  Anyway, the procedural issue I want to raise – 

THE SPEAKER: You are now smuggling-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am sorry. On what the hon. Raphael Magyezi said, I want to say that we just changed the norm recently because what we have been doing has been to appropriate before passing the Tax Bills. Of course, we could have erred but we are now changing the procedure only that in the process of changing, we have been hit by this situation.

So, I don’t think it would be procedurally wrong for us not to appropriate. We should go on to appropriate and when we fall short of – (Interjections) – yes, of course I am an expert in those areas.
Finally, Madam Speaker, since I have already stood, I want to say that I am an old boy of Mwiri where Ndugu Rugunda went. While I am the small boy and him with my brother, Dr Mutende, are now the big boys. But most importantly, I want to say that Mwiri boys are very good at work. (Applause) The only problem is that I thought this appointment would this time go to the Eastern Region of Uganda. (Laughter)

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, the object of this Bill is to provide for the authorisation of public expenditure from the consolidated fund of the sum of Shs 13,219,030,493,000 for the financial year ending on 30 June 2015.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, as you will all recall, the budget for this financial year was read on 12 June 2014. I would like to thank members for the very active participation in the debates relating to this budget process – passing the Vote-on-Account and the amounts that we have supplied to ministries, departments and agencies of Government for the first quota. Unfortunately, that supply will be ending today, 30 September 2014 –(Interjections)– I am saying those that have been –(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I rarely put my brother the hon. Fred Omach to order. But what I know is that we approved a Vote-on-Account that was one third of the budget. You know how this is done. 12 months divided by three, the answer is four. So, you have to count the months of July, August, September and October. So, is the Minister of Finance in order to say that the money we approved is ending today? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I recall that this House approved money up to the end of October 2014. Please proceed on that basis.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, there is no contradiction. I was only saying that the money that we have given out to ministries, departments and agencies for the first quota ends today 30 September. I am not saying that the authority given does not go up to the end of October 2014.

Madam Speaker, on Thursday, 25 September 2014 – and I would like to thank members for supplying for the Appropriation Bill, 2014 an exercise that was done very smoothly. So, it is my prayer that as we go to the second reading of the Appropriation Bill, this spirit be sustained. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can I now invite the chairperson of the committee to report?

6.36
THE CHAIRPERSON BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Amos Lugolobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the Report of the Committee on Budget on the Appropriation Bill, 2014. The Appropriation Bill, 2014 was read for the first time on 25 September 2014 and was accordingly referred to the Budget Committee for consideration and report back to the House. 

The committee is mandated under Rule 161 (3) to consider preliminary estimates to the national budget and compile the necessary amendments. The committee has considered the Bill and has made proposals for re-allocations.

Methodology

The committee met with the following ministries, departments and agencies: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Office of the Prime Minister and the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity.

Madam Speaker, the committee analysed the submissions from the sector committees on the relevant sectors. The committee also interacted with the Ministry of Finance on the proposals from the sector committees. The affected sectors were also invited to give their views on the proposals. The committee thereafter harmonised the proposals as reflected in the report. The amendments will be moved at committee stage of the House.

Observations and recommendations

The committee considered the finance committee report and came up with the following observations and recommendations:

Under vote 008 – Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Item 311 – Non-performing Assets Recovery Trust (NPART) which had a budget of Shs 250 million.

The committee noted that in financial year 2012/13 Parliament appropriated funds to NPART for only six months. It is during this period that this agency was expected to have wound up its activities. Parliament resolved that thereafter, no more funds should be appropriated to NPART. The committee therefore maintains the position Parliament took at the time and recommends that the allocation of Shs 250 million should not be approved by Parliament. 

Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development –PIBID Shs 9 billion 

The committee noted with concern that there is no legal basis binding the project to Government despite the injection of Shs 70 billion so far into the project. This project has been on-going for some time but remains in the names of an individual. The finance committee report confirms that the government does not own the project. The Minister of finance confirmed that the Ministry of Lands was processing the transfer of the land title to Government.

The committee recommends that the allocation of funds to the project amounting to Shs 9 billion should be knocked off and the Vote-on Account should be stayed until the land title and patents have been transferred to Government.

Vote 008 - support to Ministry of Finance – Shs 36 billion.

The committee noted with concern that the bulk of this support is meeting tax expenditure obligations to different companies, the Ministry of Finance and its agencies and NGOs. In this arrangement, Government undertakes to pay tax obligations relating to VAT and income tax on behalf of these institutions upon appropriation by Parliament. 

The committee noted the absence of a clear law in supporting this expenditure. The committee scrutinised the list of beneficiary institutions and recommends that only humanitarian and religious based institutions should be allowed this support this financial year.

The committee established that a total of Shs 36 billion is being proposed to meet tax expenditure obligations for 2014/15 under vote 008. The committee therefore recommends that a total of Shs 13,676,000,000 be reallocated for vote 008 to other votes as follows: 

Vote 108 – National Planning Authority 

The committee recommends that Shs 4.18 billion be reallocated from Vote 008 to Vote 108 NPA and these funds should be required to cover   the following:

    1) The APRM Budget shortfall of Shs 1.841 billion required to produce the APRM country self-assessment report on governance.
    2) Shs 1.91 billion shortfall for the preparation and printing of the National Development Plan II
    3) Shs 0.89 billion wage shortfall for political staff within the organisation. 

Vote 153 – Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets 

The committee recommends that Shs 1.9 billion be reallocated from Vote 008 to Vote 153 to enable PPDA develop an own home in partnership with the Uganda Road Fund.

Vote 141 – Uganda Revenue Authority 

The committee recommends that Shs 3.1 billion be reallocated from Vote 008 to vote 141 – Uganda Revenue Authority, to enable the Authority pay for annual licence fees for the Electronic Cargo Tracking System and support to the rapid response unit to this same system in a bid to enhance tax administration and compliance. 

Vote 107 – Uganda Aids Commission 

The committee recommends that funds totalling Shs 1.5 billion be reallocated from Vote 008 to Vote 107 - Uganda Aids Commission. The commission is highly underfunded yet it is critical in the fight against the AIDS epidemic. The agency has suffered major aid cuts, a factor that has impacted very negatively on their on-going programmes.

I present the table summarising the proposed reallocations as I have read them. The total reallocations in that regard amount to Shs 13,676 billion. 

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the House adopts these recommendations and support the proposed amendments which I will read when we go to the committee stage. I beg to move. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the minutes of the Budget committee on the Appropriation Bill, 2014. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the committee. Are there any comments or should we go to committee stage?

5.34
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for their report. On the PPDA house, committee chairperson, we need some bit of explanation to understand that. The PPDA has oversight function over the Road Fund and other agencies with respect to procurement; why are they working now in partnership? What is this partnership? Why isn’t this the home for PPDA? The Road Fund surely belongs to Ministry of Works.
Secondly on the PIBID project, the issue of land ownership and patents are important. However, surely these can be processed. We do not need to stall a project for a whole year simply because the land has not been transferred. Denying this project the money for this financial year - we are actually talking about putting it on hold for a number of months simply because the Minister of Lands has not transferred the land title. Madam Speaker, I would like to beg colleagues, surely let’s provide the funds as these issues are being handled. Thank you. 

5.35
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am contributing as a member of the finance committee. There is a recommendation here on vote- 008 regarding Shs 36 billion for taxes. Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance in accordance with the Budget Act has the authority of Parliament to vary taxes and even exempt entities from taxes. At this point in time when the committee recommends now that some of these tax obligations that the Ministry of Finance has already given a waiver be stopped, we are breaching contracts that already exist between Government and these organisations. These contracts obligate Government and it has already agreed to provide for these taxes. This recommendation by the committee becomes redundant because already the minister of finance in accordance with the Budget Act has already provided for  -

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I respect hon. Rose Akol but I find her statement violating the constitution and other laws of Uganda and I beg to read Article 152 on taxation: 

(1) “No taxes shall be imposed except under the authority of an Act of Parliament. 

(2)Where a law enacted under clause 1 of this article confers power on any person or authority to waiver or vary a tax imposed by that law, that person or authority shall report to Parliament periodically on the exercise of those powers, as shall be determined by law.

    4) Parliament shall make laws to establish tax tribunal for the purpose of settling tax disputes.”
    5) 
The constitution is categorical, we give the minister power but she has to come to Parliament to seek our objection or approval. Is hon. Akol in order to think that the power granted to the minister is absolute and therefore Parliament has no power to question. Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members I am not in her mind I do not know what she is thinking.

MS AKOL: Thank you Madam Speaker for your wise ruling. Let me help the colleague here. The Budget Act 2001 is a Private Members Bill.

MS AKELLO: I am a member of the budget committee to which hon. Rose Akol is a member as well. By our Rules of Procedure all the proceedings of the committee are supposed to be agreed upon by all the members of the committee. I am wondering whether it is procedurally right for hon. Rose to bring discussions on the Floor of the House instead of actually attending a committee meetings and forwarding it before a committee.

THE SPEAKER: Is she a member of the budget committee?

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker when I stood up I said that I was standing in my capacity as a member of the finance committee because it took decisions on some these issues that the budget committee is bringing although I am a member of both, anyway. So I am speaking in my capacity as a member of the finance committee.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member you cannot, you should have filed a minority report. But honourable members this is your report.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to state that in this Parliament I have never served on the budget committee. 

Madam Speaker we all agree that the authority given to the minister to grant tax exemptions has in one way or the other been abused in the past. 

However I also want to state that the committee’s recommendation that Shs 13.6 billion be reallocated from vote 008 to another vote is also unrealistic. Reason, tax exemptions are granted in different areas among which there is input of VAT. They are running MOUs and contracts between these companies and the ministry. You come here and say that from now onwards we are no longer appropriating money for tax expenditure that means that if you are to realise it, we have to first of all go back to the VAT Act and amend some sections under Schedule III which is zero rated supplies.

You are in a contract with a company say like BIDICO that you will pay its taxes for that period and now five years down the road you are not giving Government this money to pay these taxes. The implications are that you are at a risk of this company suing you for not delivering on your promises.
I want to state that when we were considering the Public Finance Management Bill, we oversaw this and we proposed that in future the Minister of Finance should not grant tax exemptions without approval of Parliament. Therefore, I want to appeal to you to note that what the committee is proposing is good but not suitable for the circumstances.

For now we go ahead and appropriate but when we come to amend the Public Finance Act, we clearly put it that in the future, the Minister of Finance should not grant tax exemptions without approval of Parliament.

MR MWIRU: I will start with the taxes; we can support the committee position but make a proviso not to affect the running contract. That argument raised by Musasizi has applicability in as the running contracts are concern but not the new position.

I want to talk about the presidential initiative on banana development. I want to support the committee because of two reasons.

One, we are talking about Shs 76 billion which has so far been spent. But hon. Members, you will agree with me that in this country, we have the Uganda Industrial Research Institute but it was affected because of the informalisation of the state that this project did not go to the Uganda Industrial 
Research Institute was given to an individual. This is a person who had patented the products into her own names. The land has got problems and I would only – if this Parliament is inclined in not agreeing with the committee observation that if we are to pass the money, if it is going under the Uganda Industrial Research Institute, but short of that there is no value for money for the Shs 76 billion. 

The Auditor-General has a lot of reports about the management of that money. The way the project was actually conceived, there was no feasibility study and so, we are actually in afishing expeditioninthis entire project. I thank you so much.

5.47
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report. However, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson on 3.1.2 on the Presidential Imitative on Banana Industrial Development. Well as I agree with the committee that we should not appropriate money because this venture is private in terms of context, I would like to get clarification as to why the committee recommends that the money amounting to Shs 9 billion be stayed until the land title and patent have been transferred. Supposing – and this does not have a time line – supposing this transfer of the land title and patent  is done during this financial year, what will happen.

Two, don’t we think that there are other areas that will deserve to have this money other than leaving it pending here because I do not think it is right to appropriate in anticipation. I think it is right to appropriate but it is right to appropriate and appropriate conclusively other than doing it in anticipation. For that matter, if you defer the appropriation, simply withdraw all the funds and let us allocate these funds to other deserving areas.

Three, in respect to the waivers and tax deferments, I have been looking at the agreement that were entered and I have this to say in my opinion. Despite the fact that Article 91 (2) empowers the minister to vary taxes and particularly Article 2 specifies that it should be done within an Act of Parliament. I have been looking at most of these agreements and exemption letters and I have not seen any of them refer to any law or Act made by this House. 

May I know under what law were these deferments and variances made by the minister? If not, I would also like to say – as member were expressing fear that you will be affecting the agreements that are currently running. Not every agreement that is made on behalf of Government is legal and binding apart from only those that are made within the law. 

Therefore, those which are made and are running, for us to have clarity, the minister must come clear and tell us under what framework of law they were done –(Member timed out_)

5.49
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In fact, I want to start from where hon. Mulimba ended. Nobody should lie to you that the power to exempt lies with the minister but Parliament. If the minister has been doing it, then he or she has been doping it illegally. All of you know that recently when we were working on the law here, there was a schedule for IncomeTax, Schedule 1 which shows who are exempted from Income Tax. Schedule 1 in I think VAT will show the organisations that are exempt. If the minister felt it necessary that there are some institutions that qualify for exemptions, they would have brought them under the tax schedules. So whoever is talking about agreements existing, is making a mistake – (Interruption)

MR LWANGA: Thank you hon. Member for giving way. Now I am really surprised that the law is there and we are debating like there is no law. The minister is empowered under the Budget Act to exempt and report. 

I remember that at the budget speech, she laid the papers on the Table regarding the various exemptions. If you read Section 15 on the report of the exemption of tax and with your permission, Madam Speaker if I may, “A person or an authority to waive off a tax under Article 152 (2) of the Constitution shall make periodic reports to Parliament which shall done on or before the 30th September and the 31st Day of December and the 30th Day of June in each financial year. 
A report made under sub-section 1 shall include inter-alia:

    a) the organisation of persons exempt from tax; 
    b) the reason for exemption; 
    c) the amount of tax foregone by Government and; 
    d) the benefit from the exemption.”  So, there is a law.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have discovered that my brother whom I was trusting is not doing well. (Laughter) What it means – no, I am going to explain. Assuming that the institution like Aga Khan or the UNDP is exempt, what it is saying is that you must come and account for all the money that was supposed to be paid by these institutions to the House and that is what the law means. They are first exempted but you must account for what should have been paid and you come and lay it on the Table. This is what I wanted to tell you my brother and we are aware of that.

The reason as to why we are raising this is that it is very dangerous for the Ministry of Finance to do things contrary to the law. You read the Constitution – the only person supposed to exempt taxes is Parliament and that is why when we are doing it we pass an Act – what are those? Income Tax and VAT and you will get the people.

On that – that is why the running agreements of BIDCO are in conflict and we have never authorised them here; then those ones are wrong contracts and must really be dealt with immediately.

MR EKANYA: Information. Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I have here with me a copy of the BIDCO agreement. The agreement elapsed and I want to read Article 5, Section 7, “Government shall pay VAT on the product of the project of oil companies envisaged under the project from the first year of the project activity ending after a period of 11 years from the year of handing over 26,000 hectares of land. Companies shall refund subject to Article 3(3), VAT paid by Government with simple interest of 5 percent per annum over a period of eight years by eight instalments including the accrued interest starting the 12th year, from the year of handing over.” This agreement was signed in 1997 and if you count 12 years, we should now expect money from BIDCO. But instead, people want us to continue giving BIDCO.

THE SPEAKER: Clarification from the Minister for Works.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, if I have listened well to my colleague –(Interjections)- (Laughter)- the ears are not yours. He has stated that from the time of handing over 20,000 hectares – 6,000 hectares of land – (Interjections)- 26,000 hectares of land – can he please tell us when the handing over was so that we can calculate properly whether 11 years have elapsed. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I do not want us to bring mathematics here and what we should deal with is the principle. What hon. Ekanya has raised is a principle. Now I want to make one thing clear here. On taxes, it is done and I want to thank the committee.I made a mistake because as I was getting up, I saw people rising to ask, what are these exemptions under the tax law? That is why I got up in anger and forgot to thank the committee. You have made a very good report.

The point I want to raise is on bananas. You do not even need to defer approval on that. That is a huge pit where money is getting finished with no value. I want to plead with my brother hon. Magyezi that we are not against you or Bushenyi but this lady and her team are just taking away billions.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker. I would like to confine myself to Vote 008 in the Budget Committee report; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in respect to Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust. The committee chairperson has read that the committee noted that in financial year 2012/2013, Parliament appropriated funds to NPART for only six months. I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson on the status of NPART now.
One of the reasons why we extended funding to NPART for six months was to ensure that the properties or assets remain in the custody of the skeleton staff, so if you do not provide finance to NPART, in whose custody will these assets go? Is there an interim arrangement or what is the status now?

Yes, six months elapsed so what is the situation now? In whose hands are the assets of NPART in? So I suggest that we give them money and another six months and then we see. (Interjections) Okay, let the chairperson clarify to us on the current status then maybe we can be able to take a decision.
Secondly Rt hon. Speaker -(Interruption)

MR KAJARA: Rt hon. Speaker and honourable members, the NPART Bill which is supposed to provide for the winding up of non-performing assets is before Cabinet and the Shs 250 million that was provided at the time was to enable activities of NPART to continue until the final winding up of the Act.

The position now is that this law has not yet been repealed. There are still activities, which the NPART staff have to carry out. We have a portfolio of over Shs 80 billion, which if not properly handled, can lead to extinction. We have over 400 court cases; litigation with a lot of money that would accrue if we do not have staff to handle this matter up to its final conclusion.

Our plea to honourable members and Madam Speaker is that we allow this Shs 250 million so that we wind up the Act officially have a successor because we are providing for the manner in which these properties will be handled after the winding up of these activities. And if this 250 million is given to us for another six months, we should be able to wind up peacefully so that we safeguard this big portfolio of Government. I thank you.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much. In addition to that, we are looking at Shs 250 million but if Government loses these cases, we will pay in trillions. We would rather give these people another six months to allow that smooth transition so that we can save Government a lot of money.

The other is the presidential initiative; PIBID. It is true that this project might have issues but as I talk now, this project is in production and it is supposed to be launched by His Excellency the President on 7th October. This project has undertaken obligations; people are supplying it, others are working and all these activities need payment. If you stay this money, what will happen to these obligations? The same applies to NPART. Government will end up paying a lot of costs.

MR MAGYEZI: Colleagues, I have some information. I think in the case of the PIBID project, we need to distinguish the management challenges from the investment of the project. Yes, I know that colleagues have a problem with this lady called Dr Muranga but let us look at transfer of land, transfer of title, negotiation of patents vis-à-vis a project of investment worth Shs 70 billion already invested. Really Madam Speaker, with the staff already there, with the linkages with the farmers in terms of supply of bananas and so forth and the project already underway for launching by the President, my appeal is let us go ahead and appropriate.

6.02
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Rt hon. Speaker, I have an issue on Vote 153; Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority where the committee is actually recommending that Shs 1.9 billion be reallocated from Vote 008 to Vote 153 to enable PPDA develop its own home in partnership with the Uganda Road Fund.

I understand that PPDA is an agency, which is under the Ministry of Finance and Uganda Road Fund is also under Ministry of Finance. I do not know whether it is really important and relevant for the two agencies to develop their own home and yet we know that actually, the ministry has space. Is it priority for these two agencies to develop their own home when we have space in the Ministry of Finance?

Madam Speaker, we have challenges where we have some departments and agencies wanting to duplicate offices and wanting to also sink money without any meaningful relevance. I would suggest that it would be unrealistic for the reallocation to go to these agencies without getting clear clarification as to how Uganda Road Fund is going to partner with PPDA. I would like the chairperson to clarify this to the House.

6.05
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will not take much of Parliament’s time to make this comment because my colleagues have mentioned something about it.

Regarding  NPART. I think as you have said,Madam Speaker, one of the gaps that there are between Parliament and the Executive is the feedback mechanism so that when we make resolutions of this House, there should be seriousness on the part of the executive to come back and update the House on how far these resolutions have made been made. (Applause)

Now that we have a new Prime Minister I hope is that he will take seriously the resolutions of this House. Look at NPART we made a resolution and suggested that this should be wound up and the minister has very important information but a whole year, 12 months, we have not been updated that there is need to have a Bill to wind up the process smoothly and then you find Parliament moving very fast; there are staff of NPART; they are there working but Parliament you can imagine today we were about to make a decision to close this organisation to deny them money when actually the problem is to do with the ministry. So, I hope the Prime Minister will take the resolutions of Parliament very seriously and if there is any update that Parliament needs, then we get this feedback because of we do not get this feedback, we might make decisions which we should not have probably taken and that is the point I wanted to make. 

But I am happy that the minister has been able to come here and tell us- I hope the six months we have given you, you will take them seriously. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just to say congratulations to the Rt hon. Prime Minister. I will proceed with an observation in the committee report. I have heard a lot of passion expressed by my colleagues on the presidential initiative. I have also heard that the President is going to launch this initiative and that we have been sending over Shs 76 billion.

Madam Speaker, this is one of the things the Committee on Public Accounts looked at and we scrutinised this project, especially I think it was value for money. Whatever the President is going to launch, he needs to be well advised and I hope that nobody in this House is going to go away thinking that the rest of the country or the rest of the members do not want this project launched.

The truth that we established from PAC is that there are already products of this project and there are things that are being packaged, but for their investment of Shs 76 billion, this patents are not going out with the name of this country, that is the problem, they are going out –(Interjections)– hold on honourable minister- I am giving the House information, by the time of the audit we queried the patent, in what names are these products going out? Not in the names of Uganda,not in the names of tax payers; so, yes, we will launch it, we will add money, but you know that even if one passed on this afternoon, God forbid, I do not want anybody to die, the product, the patents will be inherited by their great grandchildren, and not by this country, unless you go to court and begin a court process. (Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: I thank my sister for taking the information. Two issues need to be looked at. The products have been incubated over time. They are now at a stage of patenting them, as you know the word. That therefore tells you there is some serious research work being done. The concern, therefore, is the framework does not allow the country to own it. So, why don’t we sort that out instead of starving the project and nipping it in the bud at the point of take off?

THE SPEAKER: Can someone explain to us why it has taken long to get the patent? Who is responsible for getting the patent?

MR ODOI: A point of information. I should appreciate the hon. Alaso for graciously giving way. Colleagues, in respect to PIBID, you had a private scientist, doing private scientific research. The country Uganda thought this research was important and it was in design with development of science and technology and decided to fund that scientific research. Therefore, if the patents have to be secured, they can only be secured in the names of the private person –(Interjections)- the Republic of Uganda is not doing scientific research, it is a private person.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek your indulgence to understand one thing. By the time the scientist came up, we had Uganda National Research Institute –(Applause)– (Interjections) I am speaking from a point of knowledge, after steering a committee of PAC when Professor Muranga appeared before the committee.

The Auditor-General raised many issues and one of them was a private business; the country is funding a private business; she proceeded to have the product in her own names. Now she has been selling, I think you have been seeing what is taking place. So, what goes to Uganda as we continue asking Parliament to appropriate money for her personal work?

Two, when actually you are the owner of this technology - you cannot even do it yourself and that is why actually when the project was being started, there was no feasibility study on this. The Auditor-General is raising a lot of issues that in the event the money appropriated for this project has been used not following the plan, so, what is our position? What are we seeking from this House? We have no problem with this professor. But what we are only saying is that where you invest Shs 76 billion, for your information, the cost of a road from Mbale to Soroti is Shs 7 billion. So, I just want you to know that you have given more than a road to this single Ugandan.

Maybe, Madam Speaker, I would propose that if actually we took an opportunity not to look as if we are - because this now seems to be like some form of blackmail, that we are failing to appropriate money  to science simply because we have a problem with an individual which is not what we are saying. Where you put Shs 76 billion, there must be returns of more than that.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Mwiru. Let me complete my submission, Madam Speaker. That is the problem. You have a situation where Parliament willingly puts Shs 76 billion and you have a situation where the scientist has products in the market in her name. Somebody needs to advise this country and advise us also. What then is the value? What do we own out of that Shs 76 billion investment? It will be very bad of us who have scrutinised the project to keep quiet.

So, my plea is that whatever you do tonight, whether you want to still give the Shs 9 billion, I want to support the position of the committee that it would be prudent, first, for us to streamline the ownership of the products of this initiative.

Hon. Fox Odoi has clarified that this is support to an individual scientist, which is okay, but how much can a country go putting support to an individual initiative yet you do not own the outcome of the initiative. We need to ask ourselves the hard questions because the project is personalised. When it came to the question of scrutiny, it was even extremely hard to get the leadership of the project to explain the way they are using the Shs 76 billion. It reached where PAC had to just not work with the junior officers. It is that attitude of a personal project.

So, please advise the President, maybe he can –(Interruption)
MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the hon. Alice Alaso for that gesture. Some districts in Uganda operate at an annual budget of even Shs. 10 billion. So, Shs 76 billion can finance more than seven districts in Uganda. So, why should we starve over 10 districts and we advance only one individual as if there is a special treatment in the way that individual pays taxes to this country? Why don’t we appropriate that money to the districts so that we can have districts run smoothly?

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The honourable member from Busongora has alleged that Shs 76 billion can finance seven districts. The honourable is not a scientist. Madam Speaker, science is very expensive and I can confirm that by any standards, it is common knowledge that the honourable member from Busongora is not a scientist and his constituency is producing matooke –(Laughter)

Madam Speaker, therefore, is the honourable member in order to give accountability on an issue in which he is not a professional?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I don’t know why there are suggestions that anyone who is not a scientist should not talk about this matter. I think we are wasting time. Let us go to the Committee Stage and other issues will be corrected from there. 

Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the Bill – oh! The chairperson of the committee has to make some responses. Okay, go on.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, most of the contributions received on the Floor were around I think two critical issues – PIBID and the tax waivers and also NPART. 

Let me start with the PIBID. We scrutinised the report of the finance committee and noted their concerns. If fact, their concerns were deeper than the concerns that have been raised by the Budget Committee. Government has been investing money in this project for many years before I even joined Parliament, and it has not been clear when this would come to an end because the project has not produced a strategic plan. So, it is not clear if we allocated Shs 9 billion – because last year we allocated Shs 25bilion; this year we are allocating Shs 9 billion – whether next year they will come for Shs 20 billion or Shs 5billion simply because there is no strategic plan. 

Those were the concerns about this project. But we also do not know – because appropriating money is done for the production of public goods and services. In this regard, it is not clear on how to account for this money and issues of that nature have already been raised. So, we had to bring out these issues so that is very clear as we proceed with this project. That is why we propose that let us keep the money in the Consolidate Fund and on resolution of the problem of ownership and patent, that money can be realised by Government through a supplementary expenditure if they so wish.
The questions raised on PPDA and the Road Fund, I want to say that we picked this from the Finance Committee report. There is an understanding between these two agencies with the Road Fund having the resources to construct a building and PPDA having the land whose payments are yet to be finalised and after which the two organisations will do a kind of joint venture to construct a building so that both can get off renting office space. We thought that is a wise move because that is the way to go.

On the issue of tax expenditure – and I am calling it ‘tax expenditure’ because there has been confusion with some people calling it tax exemptions. But these are agencies that would ideally be required to pay tax. I will give an example; company X producing milk and company Y also producing milk but both are required to pay VAT and Income Tax. What is being done is for government to choose one company and say they will underwrite its tax obligations in the sense that when that company incurs taxes, government pays.

But the committee was wondering where fairness was in this arrangement. The discrimination violates the principles of non-discrimination. (Applause) How would the other company compete with the one that is receiving favours from government? That is the question we are raising. What are the criteria used? You know Article 152 is very clear –(Interruption)

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I found it necessary to raise a point of order in respect of what the honourable member is saying. I recall very well that during the time of the budget, there were papers presented regarding these exemptions. From the way we are proceeding, it looks like the chairman of the committee did not look at those papers. 

Two, there is no list of companies that we can look at. So, is the chairperson of the committee in order to go lamenting without necessarily showing us the list of these companies. He is talking about agencies but these could be embassies that are entitled to VAT exemptions and so on. So, really are you in order? You are taking over the powers of the minister. Are you in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do received information from the minister and I have noted that on two or three occasions the same companies have received exemptions in each quota; that is what the chairman is asking. What is the criterion for giving those companies repeated exemptions and others don’t get anything? That is what they are asking; it is not that he doesn’t know.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, our rules are very clear and towards the end, I think they have said that if you have an interest, declare it. Is hon. Tim Lwanga who has an interest in BIDCO and has not declared it procedurally right to continue disturbing us? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether he has an interest; I am not aware that he has interests. Please conclude. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I should inform the House that the way this system works is that the Ministry of Finance at the beginning of the financial year raises a request for appropriation for this money to pay for taxes for these agencies and if Parliament, in their wisdom, chooses to appropriate, we appropriate. But we can choose not to appropriate; then at the end of the year, they come back and account and say that this is how much we have paid. But the issue we are raising was the issue of the provision in the law that allows this arrangement to continue because Article 152 presupposes that there is an Act of Parliament under which the Executive is proceeding. The committee questioned under what clause or section of the law you are proceeding. There was none because there has got to be an Act. 

I used to work with UYA and I recall very well the Investment Act had a provision allowing for tax holidays. This provision was repealed subsequently in 1997 and has never been replaced. So, in the absence of that provision, the Income Tax Act, these exemptions that you see are expressly granted and there is a schedule indicating these organisations will benefit from this VAT exemption. So, the exemptions that we are talking about here are not clearly supported by law. If we want to proceed, we may if we want –(Interjections)- anyway, I will leave that to you.

The status of the NPART; this is something that has been going on even during the days when –
THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, you are all members of the finance committee and you are engaging the House on your report. But he is not in trouble, he knows -(Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give the chairperson of the Budget Committee is that I was trying to download our Hansards and I found that the issue of NPART has come every year and they are always very intelligent; they say in six months we shall make it. This issue started in 2005; I recall they even brought a Cabinet paper on a pink form somewhere. I remember hon. Omach was our vice chairperson and he knows about it. From 2005 they would say, “Give us six months, we are finishing it, the Bill is before Cabinet.” If PPP came recently and passed through Cabinet, the Anti-Homosexuality Bill, the Public Order Management took a short time, how can the law about winding up NPART take 10 years? 

So, the information I am giving my chairman is that six months cannot be accepted at any time. If we close now, we know where the assets we are talking about are; the lawyers in the Attorney-General’s Chambers will handle and the assets can be held. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR EKANYA: This is supplementary information. Madam Speaker, you know the NPART Act it says Government can come to Parliament to seek for a resolution to extend. To the best of my knowledge, they have done that for more than five years and when you are bringing the law to extend, you list the liabilities but since this Parliament, have you ever heard of a request from the Ministry of Finance requesting this House to extend the life of NPART? It is not that we are against it but we are just saying do your job neatly, you don’t come to ask for six months during the budget process. The Act said you seek a resolution of Parliament to extend the life but you have never done that.

MR LUGOLOOBI: In conclusion, Madam Speaker, regarding NPART, we followed the history and the resolution of Parliament and we thought that we would not be far from the previous resolution of Parliament on this matter. I rest my case. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I put the question that the question be put.
(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2014

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 1, agreed to.
Clause 2

MR EKANYA: I request that we stay clause 2 because it has the total where we shall make some adjustments. 

Clause 3 

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, even if there were to be some adjustments they would not affect the final figure on clause 2 because they are proposing to transfer from one vote to the other but – (Interjections - it will not affect the total here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The minister is saying that the total remains the same; it is moving from one area to another.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, if we move some of the money from this Bill, statutory expenditure means that this total is affected.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, to supplement that, really, we do not have bad intentions on the banana project. What we agreed with the official from ministry of finance is that this money stays on Consolidated Fund and then once the title is processed which they said within two weeks will be done, they can bring the money and then bring a supplementary. That was the consensus.

So, we are not passing it here. The figure is changing -(Interjections)- we are not passing the Shs 9 billion appropriated.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, the law allows us to pass a supplementary budget. If we are going to pass monies which the Auditor-General is going to grant a warrant, and that means finance must spend it, if we have an issue of money we have deferred, we remove it first, if the money is necessary, they will make a supplementary.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, that is what we agreed upon. So, that means, we are making less than Shs 9 billion from this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: let us defer that one and move to clause 3.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, in the event that Shs 9 billion proposed for the PIBID is not appropriated, then there is no way it can be put in the Consolidated Fund. You can only get it to be expended through a supplementary and we are saying that a supplementary should be for activities which are not foreseen. (Laughter)

So, we cannot now start saying that we leave this to be handled under supplementary. So, we would rather have it appropriated than just leave it without being appropriated.

MS AKOL: Madam Chair, I just wanted to give a caution here; that on 1st July, we passed a vote-on-account, and we appropriated one third of the Shs 9 billion. This applies also to all those other expenditures the committee is reallocating. So, when we are reallocating here, we should have in mind the fact that we passed one third and for that matter, for example, the Shs 9 billion already has Shs 6 billion, not Shs 9 billion.

Thank you. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, I will provide information here; we took good care of that and the Shs 9 billion became Shs 6,030,000,000.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I want to thank the chairman, if they have released a third it is fine. The budget again what we said is an estimate. It is unfortunate we may have to change our law so that we deal with the budget, pass it before it is implemented. If the committee has decided like that, it is fine. Nobody should assume that if you give third on an account, it means the whole balance should be given. No.

And that is why, clause 2 should be stood over because figures are going to change which will affect clause 2, the 13 trillion will be affected and for that matter, I would propose we go to the next clause so that we are able to finish appropriation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, let us move to clause 3; I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4 agreed to.

Schedule

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, thank you very much. Under the schedule, we have Vote 008.

MR LUGOLOOBI: There is a schedule on development expenditure and this is where most of the amendments are coming. I do not know if by passing the question you are about to raise - it would affect the development expenditure schedule. I do not know.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we go item by item?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Item by item we might take a whole day.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, can you raise just those areas where you have a problem so that we deal with them?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, the proposed amendment is on page 5, Vote 008, Ministry of Finance, amend by reducing the figure under Vote 008, by Shs 19,706,000,000. The new figure should now read Shs 194,395,814,000 and the justification is that these are reductions from the tax expenditure provision which the committee did not recommend to approve and the reallocation of the NPART funds and the PIBID allocation of Shs 6,030,000,000 as explained earlier -(Interjections)- I thought I read one by one –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Read all of them and we shall take a vote on them.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Vote 018 Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, we are recommending to amend by adding to the figure Shs 3 billion and the new figure should now read Shs 41,971,350,000 and the justification is that some of the funds saved from vote 008 and it is proposed to be reallocated to facilitate urgent rehabilitation of juvenile remand homes across the country.
Vote 141 Uganda Revenue Authority, amend by adding to the figure Shs 3,100,000,000 and the new figure in column two should read Shs 44,099,345,000. The justification is that this is for enhancing revenue collection and administration.

Vote 153 PPDA amend by adding to the figure Shs 1,900,000,000. The new figure in column two should read Shs 2,301,000,000. The justification is, this will enable the authority build its own home in partnership with the Uganda Road Fund.

Now there is an amendment on the total development budget on page 34 of the Bill. Upon consultation, we confirmed that it has not been the practice to provide this total and the justification is that, it is always the practice to appropriate by vote. You will note that we do not have a total for recurrent expenditure and therefore proving for a total of development should not arise. So, we propose to delete that row including the total development budget.

Now on the total recurrent and development, we propose to amend the figure given of Shs 13,219,300,493,000 to amend that to 13,207,320,493,000. The justification is to adjust for the reduction of the Shs 6 billion under Vote 008: Ministry of Finance on the PIBID project which we propose not to be appropriated plus the money that has been moved to statutory expenditure as below.
Vote 107: Uganda AIDS Commission, amend by adding Shs 1,500,000,000 to the statutory expenditure of this commission. The figure in Volume 2 should now read for the Uganda AIDS Commission Shs 6,820,159,000 and the justification is that the commission is highly underfunded and yet it is critical in the fight against the AIDS epidemic. 

Vote 108 which is also statutory, amend by adding Shs 4,180,000,000 to the statutory expenditure of the authority and the new figure should read Shs 15,864,000,759,000 and the justification is to provide for the APRM budget shortfall to produce the APRM Country Self-Assessment Report on Governance, the preparation and printing of the NDP-II and the wage shortfall for political staff. 
The new figure for statutory expenditure for the Financial Year 2014/15 is therefore Shs 2,622,674,064,000. I beg to move.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I beg to differ with the position of the committee. In the schedule, we have a typo on page 28 under development expenditure Vote 001. It is the first one and is repeated. So under the Office of President, the first one should be deleted which is Shs 6,187,814. It was a typo and that should be deleted. 

We have come a long way since we started this process and it has been a win-win situation and we have been with the committee. All the various committees made proposals and we have been able to give explanations and it is our prayer that when we now reach this level of supply, we shall also take a win-win situation. 

The investor confidence in this country, I can say, is second to none. The Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, has been intervening in areas where we are having the non-resource taxes contributed by Government after appropriation by Parliament. Yes you are right about the Ministry of Finance having the authority to exempt and it is only when Parliament has given by Act and this is the Appropriation Act. So the investor confidence is important. 

We have a number of running contracts with a number of these investors. Most of these had investments of over US$50 million; they have created employment of over 3,000 people and they have been contributing in various ways. So our prayer with the committee was that we allow, under the understanding that we have these people to expire so that we do not go into litigation because of breach of contract with the various bodies. We gave the details to them and the Memorandum of Understanding with these people. So, we are praying that for this year, we allow this to continue without having to remove this Shs 13 billion to be reallocated.

Some of the areas where we are proposing to relocate, we have tried our level best given the resources available to give to the ministries, departments and agencies. The requests from the ministries, departments and agencies has been in excess of Shs 3 trillion that we could not accommodate within the available resources. Now some of these that the committee is requesting that they be given additional funding, we had gone through the various committees and that was the best that we could give.

In the case of PIBID, we had requested and the committee had accepted that we would first of all ensure that we move quickly on the issue of getting the title in the name of Government, and then we have this appropriated and if there are things that we would like that they do not be expended until the title is available, we as Government have accepted this commitment and we would move in that direction. The issue of patenting should also follow suit.

On the case of NPART, we would like to apologise on behalf of Government that this particular proposal - the winding up has been in Cabinet for quite a long time and we do agree with Members of Parliament but it is our conviction that we will bring this expeditiously and even when the Bill has been passed.

There are a number of litigations that are in the courts of law as has already been explained; there are over 400 of these and definitely this will take some time to have them totally dealt with. The amount of money that we are requesting for is small but in the principle, Parliament is right to raise these issues. 

So, it is my humble request that as we have moved in a win-win situation that we also complete this in a win-win situation. We did not differ from the supply that was done last Thursday the 25th of this month. So this is the prayer of Government and we request that members pass this schedule as given. I beg to move.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, hon. Omach is right that we have had a win-win situation but in certain cases, there has been dishonesty because one of the commitments we made and we really thank you, Madam Chairperson - In the past we used to pass expenditure then handle the taxes later but because of your good initiative, you changed this. That process has still not been conclusive so one of the commitments the minister of finance agreed to is that immediately after the budget, Parliament is going to start on the aspect of revenue before the expenditure, which comes in April. So we made concessions and Government also made concessions on taxes on seeds and so forth. 

But why we say there has been dishonesty is, now you are receiving letters from the President. The only area where we agreed because of an oversight was on excise duty because the government had brought two Bills: one repealing and a new one. So there was an oversight and we agreed with Ministry of Finance that the Bill should be returned on the issue of commencement date and excise duty. We are however surprised that issues that we did not agree to have been brought back. That is the bad faith on your side. If you want good faith, tell us. Be naked and we move together. So, Madam Chairperson, these are very critical areas. 

The third one is on taxes. Colleagues, you remember that we are always known in public as having the power of appropriation and this is the power. Last year Ministry of Finance was given Shs 32 billion to use as tax expenditure. When the Minister of Finance was reading the budget, she had only used Shs 15 billion and she did not declare what happened to the rest. Even when we were passing a supplementary, the Minister of Finance did not give us the source of revenue as a saving from the tax expenditure Parliament advanced to them. So what did they do with the Shs 17 billion? It is here that we gave them Shs 32 billion and they spent only Shs 15 billion. This year, they wanted Shs 54 billion –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and thank you, hon. Ekanya for being generous. I just wanted to seek clarification from my good brother and usually you can open more doors with the word “please” than with keys. I heard the government side apologising to the Chair and to this House and I heard the Minister of Finance saying a win-win for the first time. Hon. Ekanya, I know you are shadowing finance. Give us the hope of a win-win. How do we use this power that you are telling us we have and which we must use very well to have a win-win?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. To answer my good brother, hon. Oboth, Ministry of Finance needed Shs 51 billion. So we said have it on Vote-on-Account. We went through the list of the Shs 51 billion and only removed Shs 13 billion. Colleagues, that is a good win-win. It is the keys. We said, have it. Out of Shs 51 billion, we only lowered by Shs 13 billion, which means we allowed them to have Shs 38 billion exceeding what they had last year. Hon. Omach, what more love do you want from these humble Members of Parliament?

As I conclude, the government wants us to pass tax on salt, kerosene and other agricultural inputs and this House agreed and we moved agricultural machines from zero to exempt. So we really made concessions. You remember I sat down here as if I was collapsing regarding salt. On paraffin I was almost being sacked and a colleague from that side said, “Ekanya you betrayed us.” I might pay a heavy price with the voters in the village but for purposes of win-win.

So hon. Omach, just accept. You want my mother to pay tax on salt and kerosene but you do not want Aya - Madam Chairperson, you took us to your hotel in Kamuli. Did you get any exemption? Colleagues, Aya Hotel got exemptions during CHOGM. The owner of GM Hotel collapsed and died because he got exemptions and had loans. He had not completed his hotel by the time the exemption was closed but Aya has been having extensions year in, year out. This is part of the money where we have said, “Please, Aya be like Madam Chairperson, GM Hotel and all of us.” That man of GM Hotel was an NRM man and a good friend of the President but he dropped dead. Hon. Omach, concede.

MR MULIMBA: Thank you very much. Madam Chairperson, in as much as the minister is making a request and is appealing to the committee to agree with him, I want to plead with you to guide us on some of these issues, which are technical and which also require that we respect the Auditor-General and also the committees of this House. I am aware that we have audit queries under PIBID and if you look at the objection of members to appropriate, they are not objecting to the project per se. They are only objecting to the principles as detailed in the procedure.

Madam Chairperson, I want to link this to when we passed the Anti-Homosexuality law. We were taken to court, which ruled by not condemning Parliament for passing that law but only saying that we omitted certain procedures and the court gave us the option to come back and put our house right. In a similar vein under PIBID, the committee is saying yes, this project is good but because we have queries in relation to ownership, go back and put your house in order such that we appropriate and avoid audit queries.

I want to plead with members in this House, let us have respect for the Auditor-General because we have a whole committee. The Auditor-General is under this Parliament and he is our watch dog. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister designate has just been pledging to ensure transparency and accountability under his government and that must be the way to go.

Madam Speaker, I want to strongly support and I urge members to support the fact that where we have an audit query as this House, which relies on the Auditor-General to conduct our business under accountability committees, I think it will be a very big insult on that effort to go ahead and appropriate when we are actually dealing with those queries. 

The other, Madam Chair, our appropriation must be premised on budget performance. It is budget performance which informs how much we should appropriate to particular votes. It will be extremely irregular for this House to appropriate monies to departments and agencies which were given money and never utilised it all, and now we want to give them more than what they utilised.

In the report of Ministry of Finance which was laid here like hon. Ekanya has said, out of monies which were given to Ministry of Finance for purposes of taxes, they only spent Shs 15 billion out of Shs 32 billion. Now, they come seeking for Shs 51 billion, what would be the criteria of Parliament now to appropriate more than what they spent and yet we are saying other bodies and agencies are going hungry? 

I think we need to have logic and also premise our appropriation on rationality. It is not a question of just saying we vote, we allocate. No. let this be premised on logic on the budget performance.

And I want to urge that we deal with these technicalities – the fact that there is an audit query on the other one, the fact that budget performance on the one of tax payment is concerned then we can proceed with the rest. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chair. There are four issues I am concerned with. I think it would be important to inform the honourable minister of finance that we are extremely supportive of this budget process and every sector we are talking about belongs to us as Ugandans. So, there is no bad faith what so ever in what we are doing.

Madam Chair, there are issues to do with tax exemption that the Ministry of Finance is required to do to convince this House to appreciate how or of what benefit the tax exemptions are. And unfortunately, in a very ad hoc manner, the honourable ministers will stand on the Floor here and say something and go away. They were advised, they were required, for instance, to do an assessment of the tax exemptions to the sectors, they were required to do that so that we know whether we will continue, whether jobs are being generated, whether the sector is growing, they have not done that. It was also required of this sector by the Auditor-General to clarify to Ugandans the criteria used to exempt; how do you get the exemption, if it is outside the provisions of the income tax, if it is those that are not specifically put in the law?

Madam Chair, there are instances where you find - hon. Ekanya has just talked about them; you find for example that you have a Ugandan struggling and closing business because he cannot survive and then you have in the same sector a business man who is exempted and so, you ask yourself, why would you not help Sembule and why do you have – I think it is Steel Rolling- You have tax ten year holidays and we are asking them, give us the criteria used. 

So, for honourable minister to expect that this Parliament should turn the other side is not fair. Why should the Auditor-General raise this? And I want it to be emphatic, the issue of the Shs 32 billion and spending only Shs 15 billion; the Auditor-General advised and this is what he said, “The management should review this because this is a matter either of over budgeting or financial indiscipline.”

Now, from that Auditor-General’s advice of over-budgeting, you want to move it to Shs 51 billion. Really, are we being serious as a House? 

Madam Chair, I want to support the position of the committee because I think those adjustments are realistic, going by the experience this country has on tax exemptions. In any case, we only see the minister here, when he wants to get the exemptions, the money put aside. When we ask for criteria, for the impact, they never bring it to this House.

Thank you, Madam Chair.

MR BIRAARO: Thank you, Madam. I have got only two small issues about PIBID. The minister said that he is undertaking to transfer the title into the name of government. I have got the history and background of that place. PIBID came into the place which was called District Farm Institute of Bushenyi Local Government (DFIB). Now, what I want clarified is, is the title going to be transferred from Bushenyi District Local Government or from an individual and when will it go there. That is what I want clarified.

Number two, as Parliament, I find that we have a problem because we have already set a precedent of in the past years, giving money to PIBID up to the tune of more than Shs 70 billion. Now, when it is reaching its conclusion, we are becoming stuck to give the Shs 9 billion to conclude it.

So, I want us to reason with that logic because the project generally is meant for the benefit of the community much as it would be private.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, if you go in this ministry, returning money to Treasury for taxes is on alarming side. Today, in PAC, we had the Ministry of Local Government which transferred to Treasury Shs 16.7 billion on gross tax account.

In Senegal, there was a French company which was dealing in mining; it was paying three percent, 2.8 percent as loyalty, then NGOs said, “These people are cheating us. You must pay loyalty 15 percent”. This company went and told government, “If we are paying 15 percent we are packing and going.” The people insisted, let them park and go away. They reached somewhere and came back and said, “Okay, let us make it eight percent; let us make it 10 per cent.”

When these NGOs insisted and said 15 percent, the same people who were threatening came back. 
This applies here; when the minister tells us that the investor X is about to run away because of taxes, those are lies. We have given them exemptions life for life, they have been around. I know there are some colleagues here who have interest. One of the colleagues we know who has an interest in AYA when they are talking about exemption of taxes, you will see him jumping up in air wanting to defend up to the end because he has an interest in AYA and these are the people you must watch in this House. You must watch them and they have the biggest mouths because the Speaker always gives them an opportunity to talk and these are the people we must deal with, those with a conflict of interest.

Madam Chair, the committee has even been so lenient. If we gave finance Shs 32 billion and they spent Shs 15 billion, now you are telling them we have added you Shs 40 billion, and they are going to spend Shs 20 billion! This is really bad budgeting on our side because we should have given them the Shs 15 billion they spent because their capacity is Shs 15 billion, or even less, if you add, for inflation, maybe two percent, to Shs 17 billion but the Committee on Budget generously went overboard and gave them almost Shs 40 billion from Shs 15 billion.

This is very bad. But because our committee did a good job, we can allow you on that to pass it over.
Madam Chair, taxes, taxes can either make or kill a person. In the competitive world – and I liked the chairman of the Budget Committee when he said that one is given and one is left. We have constructed hotels but you will see one hotel being exempted but you, you are not. And you might have borrowed money that can eventually lead you into being declared bankrupt and the hotel will go. But the so-called investors, who came here with only a briefcase, received exemptions and will be one of the biggest investors in Uganda. Why not also local investors?

So, on this issue of taxes, I want to plead with all Members of Parliament to accept that the tax exemptions we are talking about are not for people like Mukula, Nandala, Mawanda or Okupa, no, they are for people with a different skin but we forget that all profits made here are externalised. If these exemptions were for local investors I would be very happy. But these are people who are going to externalise all profits. So, on taxes, don’t just give up.

On issues –(Interjections)– no, I am very much informed by my big brother and by the way, I studied these things. (Laughter) On the issue of the Presidential Initiative on Banana –(Interruptions)

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Madam Chair and thank you, my small boy, hon. Nandala-Mafabi for giving –(Interjections)– he is my small boy and he knows it.

But colleagues, I completely appreciate the issue of taxation and exemptions that many members are crying about, though justifiably so. But really, if we had not initially as a government - even when the times were very bad; when the tax collections were very low – allowed some investors to come with some incentives with the intention to create jobs for our youth – that is something you should not under look! Yes, we may miss some taxes here and there. But imagine a situation if, for example, a Coca-Cola plant wasn’t in Uganda; if we didn’t have BIDCO; how about the hotel industry that was given incentives around CHOGM time, how many job opportunities would we have lost. Please let us all look at the constituencies where we come from. For heaven’s sake when you look at the youth that are jobless – these companies you are talking about, many of them are big employers – (Interruptions)

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, the Minister of State for Trade, who I have respect for, is informing us that there is impartiality in respect to the treatment of investors in this economy; but is also aware that one of the issues under contention is about government meeting obligations for corporation tax for Sameer Agricultural Products Ltd. Further he is also aware that we have other players in the industrial sector. More or over Sameer Agricultural Products Ltd assumed the infrastructure of former Diary Corporation, enjoyed a tax holiday while the other players who are also local in the names of, for example, Jesa, Rainbow and others have not enjoyed the same treatment. 

Is the minister, therefore, in order to mislead, in an attempt to defend the very dear sector which he should be jealously defending – that there is equal treatment of al investors be they local or foreign?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the minister is not in order because while members agree that we need incentives for investors, the question is why different treatment for different investors? That is what people are asking.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I again have been going through the law and I don’t know why BIDCO wants to be exempted –(Interruptions)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I just want to remind the hon. Dr Mutende, through the Chair, that the Government of Uganda made exemptions and subsidies and loan guarantee to a group or a company called AGOA of almost Shs 25 billion. So, would he like to tell us how many jobs we now have in this economy? (Laughter) Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, may be to add to that, who is going to give us an account of all the jobs created by the investors in this country? Anyway, honourable members, I put the question –
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, seedlings for agriculture are exempt. Agriculture equipment are either zero rated or exempt. If you don’t make a profit, you don’t pay income tax. So, what are these taxes? There must be something wrong or a deal between Ministry of Finance and BIDCO, which we don’t understand because all agricultural inputs are zero rated or exempt.
I want to make it clear that if we allow this preferential treatment to take root we will be destroying the country’s economy, and the moment we destroy the economy, we will be creating a bad precedent in the country.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be amended as proposed by the committee.
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us go to clause 2.

Schedule, as amended

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the schedule as amended stand part of the Bill.
(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, as amended, agreed.

The Title, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of 13,207,320,493,000 – no, that is the amendment - do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put ad agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are they not together? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be amended with a statutory expenditure for the financial year 204/15 for the sum of Shs 2,622,674,064,000.
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, you normally read this Appropriation Bill through with the Bill - you read the total budget figure less what has been deducted because our total budget is Shs 15 trillion. So, we have to read less what has been deducted so that it forms a record which includes statutory. Isn’t that the normal procedure? Yes, it is very important, colleagues. I know what I am saying –(Interjections)– I am right; even statutory, Madam Chairperson, you know it; it is read because it forms part of the total budget of 15 trillion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But I have read it; you were not listening. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Chairperson, with due respect to what is going on, I gave notice that I would be moving a motion but I have not got any response from you since I filed the motion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you know we prepare for this House by 11.00 a.m. in the morning; I got your papers at 2.30 p.m. and I did not have time to read them; so, I have no comment. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
7.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
7.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2014” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
7.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2014
7.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2014” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion. 
(Question put and agreed to)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: “THE APPROPRIATION ACT, 2014”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause)

Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work done but this debate should wake up the government because it appears that once they get what they want from here, they go and move on with their life and wait to come back next year. For instance, I had forgotten of something called NPART because the last time we gave the six months was I think in the Seventh Parliament. I don’t remember; so I last heard about NPART in the Seventh Parliament but for all that time, there has been no effort to close, I think that should galvanise the government.

Then on the PIBID, if the land belongs to the local government as hon. Biraaro says, really how can it take the central government long to take over that land? So, hon. Prime Minister, I think in order to give them this other money, please work on the land, which can be in a month because you are the government and now you have got the power. (Laughter)

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the House for eventually passing this Bill today. It has taken us quite a long time. We would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Now that we have the Public Finance Bill at the committee stage, this Bill will help us a very long way in resolving a number of issues pertaining to the budget process and I am happy that we have agreed with members that after the passing of that Public Finance Bill, we should be in position to handle the issues of revenue first so that when we are appropriating, we know how much money that can be supplied to meet the expenditure. So, we would like to thank members for this.

Now in regard to the revenue bills that have been returned to the House by His Excellency the President, we of course are aware that the expenditure side went over by about Shs 100 billion and we need resources to ensure that this is met because as the President indicated, the revenue performance in the first two months was short by about Shs 58 billion and yet these resources that were not passed - the revenue totals is about Shs 68 billion which we need to support the budget that we have just passed. So, we appeal that when this is brought back by the committee, we are able to understand this so that in the management of the budget, we do not go into cutting or suppressing what we have passed under various votes. Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Omach. Could we have the last word from the senior minister of finance on this matter? 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I really want to thank your Office for supporting we, the members of Parliament; all what we have seen here is the work of the Parliamentary Commission. 

Yesterday we heard from hon. Margaret Komuhangi that we have children who are disabled who are in remand homes. These children do not have toilets and some of them are blind. You can imagine the life they lead; you are blind, there is no toilet and there are no cooking facilities. So, I want to request that the reports of the committees that conduct field visits should be synchronised and very serious issues should inform the budget because these kids did not decide to be blind or lame with disease.  They cannot cook but do not have cooking facilities and have no toilets. How do they live in the remand homes?

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, that is why hon. Margaret convinced us and we moved that little money from Ministry of Finance so that few remand homes can be rehabilitated and I hope hon. Maria Kiwanuka – today I am able, tomorrow I can be disabled and any of us can produce a disabled kid. May I request that next financial year, and the President even said it the other day, let us make it a priority that all remand homes where these children are rehabilitated and complemented.

Thank you very much.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I thank you because today I think we have done more than we have ever done before. We have ended up with a brand new Prime Minister sitting before us, we have passed a very important Bill, which has gone now to authorise the government to spend and I want to suggest that the new Bill which is coming, which hon. Omach has just talked about, we should never compromise the power of Parliament to appropriate, that is very important because you have seen the huddle we go through.

That is where we are going and you know very well there have been attempts to come up with an omnibus – if it is to be an omnibus, let us be mindful of the role of Parliament. That is very important.
The second thing, Madam Speaker, I want to know where we are going to converge from now, because we have done more than we have ever done and I want to congratulate ourselves. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I am sure the minister appreciates your work. Let us invite her to tell us where to go.
7.33
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of my colleague to thank the whole House for the dedication and the support you have shown us throughout the protracting budget process. It is indeed true that government consists of the Executive, Parliament and Judiciary but I think today we have moved together. 

We have had our disagreements, we have had our areas where we have agreed but we must always move together, because the budget is about taxes and the expenditures. On taxes, I will just say, Madam Speaker, that government tax revenue is actually national fundraising. Every shilling that is raised goes back to the government, to the people; it is entrusted to the Ministry of Finance on your behalf, we spend to zero at the end of every financial year.

So, let us not talk about taxes, let us talk about fundraising for the national priority we then proceed to appropriate money according to your priorities.

My colleague, the shadow minister, thank you very much for highlighting the plight of the disabled children. We have issues like that every day: the disabled children, the marginalised children who are not in school, the old people who have nothing to live on. These are the problems we tackled everyday on your behalf and we hope we are doing our best with the very limited purse.

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, there is only one person who has ever managed to feed 5,000 people with two fish and five loaves of bread and He is not due back any time soon. But in His absence we are doing our best. (Laughter) and I think as we have moved together as Government, I think Members of Parliament will also see in the coming weeks that truly we are one Government. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, where is the next venue for next assembly for this committee of the whole House? (Laughter)

MRS KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, maybe we will have something for the new Prime Minister but for my humble self and my colleagues, we had our party when you gave us your time and listened to the budget. I will now hand over to the Leader of Government Business. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work done today. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.31 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 1 October 2014 at 2.00p.m.)
