

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 7 September 2021

Parliament met at 2.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I have Members who have requested to raise urgent matters and I will be allowing that. 

I have been advised to inform you that the times are such that we need to be physically fit. Therefore, we need to join the Zoom drills as conducted by our own trainer in Parliament here, Mr Bob Ssebugwawo. Those activities take place on Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays between 7.00 a.m. and 8.00 a.m.; it is one hour each day. An hour each morning is good for you and I to stay fit to face the challenges we are facing concerning for example, the long sittings and up and down travels. A fit body will be able to deal with those things. 

As part of its commitment to continuous improvement in the performance of the Legislature, the Parliamentary Commission has organised a two-day orientation seminar for committee chairpersons and their deputies at Golf Course Hotel, Kampala, on Friday 10th and Saturday, 11th September, starting from 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m., each day. This orientation will tackle matters pertinent to the management and operations as well as the corporate governance of committees. All chairpersons and their deputies are required to attend and participate in this orientation. 

On a sombre note, I have learnt of the demise of the Archbishop of the Orthodox Church Uganda, His Eminence, Jonah Lwanga, who passed on in Athens, Greece, where he was reportedly rushed due to illness. Archbishop Lwanga was a colossus of a spiritual leader, who was unequivocal on issues of human rights and democracy. The nation has lost a great son and a father. We condole with the Orthodox community. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo called me last evening to give me a brief on the passing of His Eminence.  

Death has also occurred of Prof. Dr John Joseph Otim, popularly known as J. J. Otim, former presidential advisor, former Minister for Agriculture in the Obote Government and also the former President of the Uganda Agricultural Council. He passed on 4 September from Lacor Hospital in Gulu. 

Honourable members, in honour of these two and those that we may and those we may not know, let us rise and observe a moment of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will cause an alteration on the Order Paper to accommodate a very important motion from the Ministry of Education and Sports, in relation to the Mountain of the Moon University, which is a highly motivated matter. I hope that the way we have dealt with the many universities we created in this country, the debate is not that elaborate but we will try to accommodate institutions coming from various regions in order to handle the issue of access to university education, especially when it comes to public universities. 

If Members agree, I will cause this alteration and make it item No. 1, to allow the minister go to continue with what he is doing.

I have also been informed, and I am glad the Frontbench is here, that there is an on-going Government review; they are reviewing their performance and other matters. This will take three days. I spoke to the Prime Minister and she said that she will be liaising with the ministers to decide on which ministers will be here and those to stay in the review exercise. I am happy that you are here. Let us do business. 

Can we start with the urgent matters? Please make them brief so we can quickly go to the Order Paper. Like I have just said, there are urgent matters to be dealt with on the Order Paper and so, your comments on the urgent matters should be brief. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on Rule 9 of our Rules of Procedure relating to the sitting arrangements. For the benefit of those who do not have the Rules of Procedure, the rules say that the Prime Minister and the Members of Parliament from the ruling party have to sit on the right hand side of the Speaker. The left hand side has to be left to those opposed to that Government. The same rules go on to state that the Speaker has to make an arrangement for the Independent members of Parliament.

The reason I am raising a procedural issue, Mr Speaker, is because you can wake up one day when the NRM has occupied both sides of the House. Today, you can clearly see that the NRM Members of Parliament are seated on our side yet we are fewer, so they are squeezing us - (Laughter) – which is a total violation of this rule. 

I consulted Counsel Asuman Basalirwa because these are law matters and he told me that in these rules, the Speaker only deals with matters that are provided for. The Speaker’s hands are tied on those that are not provided for and that the Speaker cannot facilitate an invasion from the NRM to our side. 

The procedural issue I am raising is whether we can conduct business in total violation of Rule 9, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the essence of Rule 9 is, to the extent possible, accommodate all Members of Parliament, who have made themselves available for the proceedings of that particular day. Leverage is given to the Speaker to handle issues of sitting arrangement. 

In the past, when we had a two-sided House, the Members on the right would always be those in Government while the ones on the left would always be the ones in the Opposition. 

The structure of our Parliament is such that we have this unique presence of men and women in uniform, who you cannot sit anywhere else because they have no sides. We have Independent Members of Parliament, who are more in number than the biggest Opposition in Parliament - if I am not mistaken; we have this mix. So, to the extent possible, the Speaker is supposed to make the House facilitated enough to accommodate Members to sit.

In the recent past, there has been an arrangement between the Opposition and the Speaker to see how the Independent Members could be accommodated; I think those have been straightened in the rules and, so, the sitting issues have been resolved.

Now, clearly, if you are on the NRM side and you are sitting on my left, in the past, the sanctions would be very severe - it used to be called “crossing the Floor”. 

However, we have gone beyond that now - we have a more moderate language to describe that. I understand we have not been sitting in this Chamber but in the tents and, so, you may have forgotten which side you should sit. (Laughter)

The side on my right is for the Government and that means NRM and those who are associated with it. The side on my left is for the Opposition and the Independent Members and, usually, we reserve the middle column for our men and women in uniform - members of the UPDF in this Parliament.

As long as when you stand from this side, you will speak the language that hon. Ssemujju will like to hear, it is okay. (Laughter) If you are NRM but you choose to sit on this side, speak their language. (Laughter) Next item.

2.36
MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I represent Nakawa East Constituency and I am the Shadow Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Planning. I stand on a matter of urgent public importance.

Last Sunday, 5 September 2021, a four-storeyed reinforced concrete building along Kisenyi Road collapsed, killing seven people; four women and three men. It is alleged that a one Ssetongo Haruna, a young tycoon in the city, owns the building. 

Mr Speaker, the remaining buildings were visually seen to have very serious structural cracks. This has created fear within the neighbourhood because, any time, they may collapse and cause further harm to the community.

On 9 January 2020, a building collapsed and killed six people in Kansanga. Similarly, on 11 May 2021, another building collapsed in the neighbourhood of Kansanga-Lukuli-Nanganda, killing 15 people and injuring many. On 16 March 2021, another building called Fido Dido collapsed and two bodies were retrieved from the construction debris. 

THE SPEAKER: So, what do you want us to do?

MR BALIMWEZO: Mr Speaker, we would like to know from the Minister in charge of Kampala City the mitigation measures they have put in place to make sure that this unsound remaining structure does not create further havoc within the area.

Secondly, we want to know from the minister - because many buildings have been collapsing within the area and we have claimed lives - what measures have they put in place to make sure that there are no further collapses of buildings?

Lastly, under torts law, there is a provision that negligence is a crime. We are aware that the National Building Review Board helped to put in place the Building Crime Division under the DPP’s office. What has been done to the culprits that have basically caused the death of these innocent Ugandans? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Works and Transport?

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, it is true that we have lost people and property, as described and enumerated by my honourable colleague. In the Ministry of Works and Transport, which is responsible for all the infrastructure in the country, we have the National Building Review Board, as indicated by my colleague. When I heard about this recent development, which is extremely regrettable, I immediately committed this board and the teams responsible for investigation to quickly come up with an answer to what happened and, if need be, proceed with investigations and bring the culprits to book.

Mr Speaker, I can promise this honourable House that if I am given a day or two, from today, I will come with a comprehensive report of what happened and all the interventions that we have undertaken in that direction, particularly, on this development and others that have happened in the recent past.

2.42
MS MANJERI KYEBAKUTIKA (NUP, Woman Representative, Jinja City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about insecurity. We are all aware that there is insecurity in some parts of this country, with threats from the “pangamen” commonly known as bijambiya people. They have a tendency of circulating letters to areas that they intend to attack. Whenever these letters are circulated, they make a follow up and make sure that their mission comes to pass.

In Jinja City, some areas have been affected and these letters are circulating in areas such as Bugembe, Budondo, Mafubira and Wanyange. 

I also want to bring it to your attention that on 29 August 2021, Mr Amos Kitamirike and Norah Nakitto were attacked by these “pangamen”. As I speak, they are admitted and nursing wounds at a certain hospital in Jinja, which I cannot disclose for security purposes. 

Mr Speaker, my humble request is that the Minister of Security should offer immediate intervention so that my people in Jinja City are protected from those heartless people. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Frontbench from the Government side. The learned Attorney-General -

2.44
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, the issue of insecurity in the different parts of the country has been addressed. Currently, the ministers are on the ground trying to figure out that; something is being done. 

Unfortunately, at this time, we are not at liberty to divulge everything that has been done because investigations are ongoing. Maybe, I would like to say that we should allow the Police to carry out its activities without interference from concerned citizens. We also pray and hope –(Interruption) 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the Government side has a leader called the “Leader of Government Business”. This Parliament, through the Committee on Appointments, also approved many persons to occupy and serve in different sectors. The same Parliament has never approved hon. Kiwanuka Kiryowa either as Leader of Government Business or the Minister of Security.

If he holds any of these two portfolios, he should tell Parliament; “Today, I am also acting as Minister of Security or Leader of Government Business.” 

The procedural issue I am raising is: Without the Government side disclosing to us who is leading them today – have we now adopted a new procedure that when you call the Minister of Security, anyone can shoot up and say “I am answering”? That is the procedural issue I am raising. 

THE SPEAKER: Certainly, not just anyone. Otherwise, you would have stood up yourself. It has to be somebody from the Frontbench. 

Honourable members, this is the time when parts of the country or some people in this country are being hurt or affected by some situation that needs urgent responses and we use this method to deal with that. There is a Government and they know how they do their business. Otherwise, it is not up to me to find out in what capacity you are standing. I know the learned Attorney-General is a minister in the Government and what I expect from that minister should be useful information. 

Therefore, if you stand up to speak on behalf of the Government, give useful information that restores calm and gives hope to the people, whose matters have been raised as urgent matters. In other words, if you do not have any good information for whatever portfolio you hold, do not stand up. In fact, it is usually the Government Chief Whip who gathers this information for those who are not here, and gives it to them. However, the problem with that is that it crowds the Order Paper of the next day. Otherwise, ministers should be here to give “Responses to Urgent Matters”, and any issue that will be deferred. And this is not helpful because these are urgent matters.

Learned Attorney-General, would you like to give us good information about this matter? 

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. For Jinja City, the matter has been taken up and we are going to come back to the House with a clear response on the specific item. We shall definitely reach out to the Leader of the Opposition to get more details on the specifics of that matter.

Mr Speaker, a full report on the security situation in the country is being worked on and will be presented to this House at the earliest.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I like the issue of the comprehensive report for the whole country but I do not like the issue of coming back to Jinja - just deal with it. We want the Member of Parliament to start smiling and say, “My matter has been handled.” You do not have to come back to the House on that. Thank you.

2.49
MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance in regard to the inconsistent power supply in Mateete. 

For the last four days, my area has been in a total blackout. Considering the insecurity in this area and as you are all aware, Ssembabule is part of Greater Masaka, where those anonymous letters have been thrown all over. The community is very scared. It is very dark and it makes the community face challenges during the night. 

The businesspeople have suffered; businesses have stalled and there are a lot of losses. It is also a loss to the Government, when people are not tapping on the power.

Mr Speaker, I call upon the line minister to ensure that Ugandans get fairness as far as getting electricity at homes is concerned. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Ssembabule has an issue and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is here. Why do we have power blackouts in Ssembabule and what are you going to do about it?

2.50
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Namugga for raising this issue because sometimes, it happens throughout the country. What I will have to find out is the cause of this problem. Sometimes, it comes from an interruption in the distribution network. I will come back and explain to her. In case the matter is not handled, I know she will be able to get back to me.

Sometimes, we face these challenges of disturbances and it cannot be just one cause; the problem can be the transformer or the distribution network. I will get in touch with her and make sure that we sort out this problem. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, will you do everything possible to ensure that power returns in Ssembabule?

MS NANKABIRWA: Yes, Mr Speaker but I work with technical people.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but you will do everything possible.

MS NANKABIRWA: I will do everything possible within my means, Mr Speaker, to ensure that the problem is rectified.

2.51
MS FORTUNATE NANTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance concerning the insecurity at Kasensero Landing Site. There is no deployment of security at the landing site. This has led to vandalism of the boat engines, theft of fish and fishing equipment like nets. 

In August, we lost a young man called Kizito, who was killed. His body was dumped and just found this month. Therefore, my prayer is that the Minister of Security should go to the ground, assess the situation and ensure deployment of security immediately so that we can save the lives of our people and their property. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Security. (Hon. Tayebwa rose_) I thought that it was the Attorney-General handling security matters. (Laughter)  

2.52
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Mr Speaker, I am going to inform the Minister of Security. He will assess and take the appropriate action and we shall be in touch with the colleague. Thank you –(Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, thank you for the indulgence. I take in good faith the promise by the Government Chief Whip to have the minister come here and advise the House on the matter of security that the honourable member has complained about. 

Last week, we had a Member from Buvuma Islands raising the same security concern on the islands. We seem to be getting dotted responses about security on the lakes. In fact, hers was that in Buvuma, everyone had taken security matters in their own hands and you would not know who is in charge in the islands. 

Wouldn’t it be okay procedurally that these dotted responses from Government stop and we comprehensively receive a report about what is happening in the country, on the lakes and generally on issues of insecurity reported by the Members? 

The Member from Jinja raised a matter and the response is supposed to be general. Hers was a complaint about deployment and absence of any form of security despite the reported wave and sense of insecurity in the area. 

Would it be okay to get a definite date for the country to listen to the state of security instead of having a promise for a future date we do not know yet? 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I thought I heard the Attorney General say just that; they are to distinguish the issue of Jinja and the general security situation in the country. The Attorney General promised he will come with a comprehensive statement to deal with all the other different aspects and brief the House. 

If it comes as a ministerial statement, we will be able to have a debate on it. I heard him say that and I have no reason to doubt what the learned Attorney General said. 

2.55
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the morning of 5 September 2021, the people at Elegu – for the information of this House, Elegu is at the border with South Sudan where we receive very many international people crossing over – were woken up with heavy waters flowing from River Onyama that had burst its banks. As such, the place flooded. 

I spoke to the LCI chairperson of the area today. It has come down but they are worried of more flooding from tonight onwards because of the heavy rains that are in the greater Gulu and Amuru because of River Aswa. When these places flood, the children are in the cold; they have nowhere to sleep. 

My prayer is to the Ministry of Works and Transport. This has been an ongoing disaster for long and it has a lot to do with the Ministry of Works. What has been done so far to ensure that the channels are opened properly so that we can avoid these floods? This is something which is already known. 

Second is to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to plan for those who are already displaced because there are people who are already temporarily displaced. Their homes and houses have been flooded. 

My prayers are to those two ministries to urgently reach out to the people of Elegu because there is a lot of anxiety and fear. We do not want to reach a point where people will die. So far no one has died and we do not want to get to that point. I beg to move. 

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Francis Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I will deploy my teams from Gulu sub-region to go and look at what the situation entails immediately after this. They will give me feedback and I will communicate either to the House or directly to the leadership of the area. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The problem of water in Elegu has been there for so many years. The matter has been brought to this Parliament every time water floods at Elegu. 

I remember last year, the Minister of Works sent a team at Elegu. They did the feasibility studies and they promised to start working immediately so that the problem does not occur again. There came a time when they kept quiet and up to now, people do not know what is happening. 

My clarification is, honourable minister, it is very important to be very serious and take the matter on humanitarian grounds. The people of Elegu are not getting an easy life because of flooding every year at around this particular time. 

What are you going to do in following up where the Ministry of Works stopped last year? That is the clarification I wanted. 

MR ECWERU: Let us put it this way. Honourable members, on Friday I have a working visit to Gulu. I had scheduled to be in the Gulu subregion to do some works. Now that this development has happened, while I am going to direct my technical teams to go quickly and make an assessment, I will also endeavour, on Friday while in the subregion, to personally go and do support supervision for what can be done by the ministry. That is a commitment to this House. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The humanitarian aspect on the people who have been affected –(Interjection) Yes, you are still very conversant with those issues. 

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, it is true I am the Minister of Disaster Preparedness emeritus. Usually what we do when a situation like this happens is, we know the first challenge that befalls the victims is humanitarian. 

I would like to commit to share this with my colleagues from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to do three things. One, see if the children can be helped with some food; see if the mothers and children can be helped with household items like blankets and nets so that they do not get pneumonia and related challenges and any other humanitarian intervention. 

I will commit also to communicate to my colleagues in the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness immediately after this. 

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand a point of procedure, rule 30(7). In 2019, I brought a petition here concerning the failure of Government to compensate the people of Kagarama Town Council where the road of Ntungamo-Rukungiri passes. 

I was promised a response by the minister and on several occasions, I came here, again, under rule 30. The minister kept on promising. Since the Minister of Works is here, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to get his commitment again that he will respond to that issue of the people of Kagarama Town Council?

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, it would not be procedurally right –(Laughter)– because this is a new minister in charge of the sector. He is not aware of the events that happened in that sector in 2019 and so, it would be unfair to subject him to that kind of situation. It would not be properly done. Next time you do that, honourable member. (Laughter) 

3.03
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County North, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the drought and hailstorms. During the first rains this season, there was hardly enough rainfall in my area. As a result, most of the crops withered, to the extent that farmers started struggling to get seeds for replanting in the second rainy season.

However, on Saturday, 4 September 2021, after farmers had already planted their crops and some had started flowering, there came a very heavy hailstorm, which destroyed those crops and crops in almost an entire subcounty got wiped out. In another incident, crops in Labwodong and Atut parishes, in Kuywe Subcounty, all got destroyed.

The worst crop that got affected was sim-sim. They had started flowering but unfortunately, those crops got destroyed by the hailstorm.

My prayer to Government is for it to take an immediate step, according to whatever responses they have in place, to rescue those farmers because we are predicting a lot of famine as well. People are even hungry and suffering because of that.

The Department of Meteorology is predicting that the rains are going to continue until maybe late November or early December. So, within this short period of time, if seeds could be availed to them, they can still plant, so that they can recover those that got spoilt.

Finally, in your communication, you talked about the demise of the hon. Prof. Dr J.J Otim. Dr Otim hails from Agago North County in Kalongo. The tentative date for the burial is Saturday, 11 September, 2021. Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Frontbench, what do you have to say about the issue of Agago?

3.06
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will request the Member of Parliament to get in touch with the disaster committee at the district headquarters – there is that committee – to help them write a report about what happened. They should write to the Office of Prime Minister and give copies to the offices concerned to facilitate follow up.

About the issue of seeds, when you write, we will see how to connect you to the Government office where seeds could be got. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we now go to the Order Paper, please? 

MOTION SEEKING A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON UNIVERSITY AS A PUBLIC UNIVERSITY

MR SILWANY: Procedure, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have not seen any procedural matter arising here. Let us deal with business, please. Okay, let us have a procedural matter from the hon. Silwany.

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. The last time the Minister of Education and Sports came to this Parliament, he had proposals on a number of such universities. 

We have the issue of Busoga University, whose motion to make it a public university too, we have been demanding from Government several times, to be brought to this Parliament. When he came here the other time, we proposed that he goes and returns with a comprehensive report on the Mountains of the Moon University, Busoga University and all the other such universities. 

However, today, the minister has come with a motion on only one university – Mountains of the Moon. The people of Busoga are watching me seated in this Parliament. It will be very sad if I do not raise this matter, on behalf of the people of Busoga.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for this Parliament to order the minister to go back and return with a single motion on such universities, including Busoga University to help us comprehensively handle this matter once and for all?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Speaker processes and prepares Order Papers premised on business that is ready for handling by Parliament. I am not going shopping. (Applause) If a document is not ready, there is no way I can produce it in this Parliament for us to debate it. (Applause)

However, honourable minister, you have heard statements to the effect that you made promises on the Floor here. Better live up to your word. Instead of coming piece meal, the sentiment is that you should bring together all those things that you listed in the past for us to handle them.

I got a phone call yesterday that this one was ready and should be put on the Order Paper. However, by the time I saw the motion, I had already published the Order Paper. That is why I amended it to allow it. I received this motion and I have not received any other motion. That is why it is on the Order Paper.

Proceed, honourable minister.

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that very wise ruling. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that there is a procedure we follow before we bring a motion like this to Parliament. For Busoga University, the process is still on-going and I will be coming back, when the procedure is complete, to present that motion to Parliament.

This motion is seeking a resolution of Parliament for the establishment of Mountains of the Moon University as a public university –(Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the issue that was raised by hon. Silwany relates to the fact that the matter of Busoga University was here earlier than the one of Mountains of the Moon University –(Interjections)- yes. Therefore, the procedural point I raise is why the minister says they are still preparing the motion for Busoga University and that the one of the Mountains of the Moon University is ready. Right from the 10th Parliament, we have been discussing this issue of Busoga University. How come this is overlapping the other? What is the problem?

That is what you need to discuss. Otherwise, I beseech Members to reject the motion.

THE SPEAKER: I actually thought you rose on a procedural matter but after listening carefully, I did not hear any procedural matter being raised. (Laughter) So, it leaves me without anything to say about that. I will not comment. Honourable minister, please, deal with the motion. 

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The motion I am moving is to seek a resolution of Parliament on the establishment of Mountains of the Moon University as a public university.
Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Members for Sheema, Fort Portal, Kyegegwa, Amuru and Dokolo District. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

DR MUYINGO: Mr Speaker, I am moving this motion under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“Whereas the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, under Objective 18 of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, obligates the State to take appropriate measures to afford every citizen equal opportunity to attain the highest educational standard possible;

AND WHEREAS Article 30 of the Constitution makes provision for the right to education for all Ugandans; 

WHEREAS Mountains of the Moon, a not-for-profit community university established in Fort Portal to serve Bundibugyo, Kabarole, Kamwenge, Kasese, Kyegegwa, Kyenjojo, Ntoroko districts and beyond has, from inception to date, faced a number of challenges including lack of a sustainability mechanism for the university, lack of funding mechanism to support the various university activities and high operational expenses which do not match the internally-generated revenue by the university, among others;

NOTING that Section 22(1) of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 empowers the Minister of Education and Sports to establish a public university by a statutory instrument on the recommendation of the National Council for Higher Education and by a resolution of Parliament;

COGNISANT that the National Council for Higher Education has recommended to the Minister of Education and Sports the establishment of the Mountains of the Moon University in Fort Portal as a public university;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that Mountains of the Moon University be established as a public university in Uganda.” 

I beg to move.    

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Would you like to speak to your motion or that is the speech? 

DR MUYINGO: Mr Speaker, the establishment of the Mountains of the Moon University as a public university is quite in line with the directive by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda to take over Mountains of the Moon University and Kabale University as public universities. Accordingly, Cabinet, under Minute No. 440 (CT 2020) approved the takeover of the Mountains of Moon University as a public university. 

Also, the establishment of Mountains of the Moon University will help the Government to increase access to higher education in the region. This is in line with the National Development Plan III, which projects that for Uganda to achieve economic take off, it needs a university growth enrolment ratio of 40 per cent in the relevant disciplines, mostly sciences, which Mountains of the Moon University will be concentrating on. 

This university will enable the Government to subsidise and support basic infrastructure development and staff pay, hence lowering the cost of higher education. The university will benefit a large catchment population in the districts of Bundibugyo, Kabarole, Kamwenge, Kasese, Kyegegwa, Kyenjojo, Ntoroko and beyond. 

The Mountains of the Moon University will, in line with the National Strategic Direction in NDP III, focus on agriculture, tourism, environmental conservation geared towards promoting agro-processing, value addition and marketing, tourism service, management and innovation for sustainable land use, water resources, forest and wetlands respectively. 

Finally, the establishment of Mountains of the Moon University as a public university will help to address the issue of regional imbalance and equity since there is no university in that part of Uganda. This will address the issue of inequitable distribution of higher education institutions. I submit, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate –

DR MUYINGO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Certificate of Financial Implications on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the record capture the Certificate of Financial Implications. The motion that I propose for your debate is for Mountains of the Moon University to be a public university. That is the motion for your debate. I see hon. Butime rising.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Col (Rtd). Tom Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, let me make it very clear that, should a motion come tomorrow or after to establish Busoga University as a public university, I will support it. (Applause) 

Mountains of the Moon University was founded in 2005. This is a not-for-profit university and we agreed - when we were founding it - that should anything happen, the property - the buildings and the funds of the university - will go to a charity. Most important, however, is to meet the knowledge need of the people of Uganda, Rwenzori Region inclusive. 

This university held its first graduation in 2008. We have, so far, had 12 graduations and the people of Uganda have benefitted from the graduates of that university. Today, we have more than 2,500 students. The President directed, in 2015, that this university be taken over by the Government and the university started working towards that.

The charter of Mountains of the Moon University was issued in 2017. So, this private university has a charter. Once you are granted a charter, you can access the students’ loan scheme, you can offer Master Degrees and et cetera. 

What does this university offer? It offers agriculture, environmental sciences, informatics and computing, business management, health sciences, tourism, education, public administration and many other important courses for our country. 

Mountains of the Moon University has 360 acres of land - the university’s campus, at Lake Saka, sits on 160 acres of land with a title. We also have 200 acres at Kyambogo, where we ought to do agriculture and farming.

We have 16 PhDs; these are the people teaching at the university. In 2019, the Government of Uganda established a transition taskforce by the Ministry of Education and Sports, headed by Prof. Achanga, from the National Council for Higher Education.

The purpose of this taskforce is to transit, develop and move the university from a private university to a public university for two years, from 2019 to 2021. By now, this university should have been a public university. However, we have not been panicking; have been keeping cool and we know that we shall get there.

The university collaborates with other universities. First, we collaborate with our universities in Uganda; Makerere University, Makerere University Business School (MUBS), Busitema University, Kyambogo University, Gulu University and Mbarara University. We also collaborate with the Ghent University (UGent) in Belgium, Chokeside in Germany, Beijing University and other universities in the world. 

Why are we asking for this university to be taken over by the Government? Mr Speaker, there is no public university in that region, as Dr Muyingo, the Minister of State for Higher Education has just said. We need this university in that region. We want university education for the sons and daughters of that area, plus all other students from Uganda.

Nobody is saying that the students going to be admitted at the Mountains of the Moon University must necessarily come or will only be coming from the Rwenzori Region. No; they will be coming from all over the country. I would love to see a student from Amudat doing public health. I would also love to see a student from Gulu or Bugiri offering Business Administration and other courses.

We would like to access scholarships, infrastructure, university financing, and more students to come to the university, lecturers and better salaries for the university staff. Of course, introduction of modern technology at the university, funding for research and the Government loan scheme.

Mr Speaker, I am the Chairman of the Governing Council of this university (Applause). I request Members of this House that they will make history by approving this resolution. This will be the first university to be converted into a public university by the 11th Parliament. I am quite sure that this is going to happen today.

Of course, there is no conflict of interest because as soon as the university becomes a public university, my chairmanship ceases. Therefore, there is no conflict of interest. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause) 

3.27
MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): I rise to support the motion on the basis that I am one of the people that interacted with this university two years ago, while I was working with local government.

This university manifests the Triple Helix model of Innovation that brings in the interaction between the community, the industry and the Government. I saw first-hand, when the university organised a Rwenzori Investment Expo that brought together over 2,000 local and international investors that were able to display what the Rwenzori Region has.

It is on this basis, Mr Speaker, that I witnessed the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between this university and German investors to build a five-star-hotel that will be used to train our people in the tourism and hospitality sector. His Excellency even witnessed the signing of that MOU.

In my view, honourable colleagues, this university is bringing to this country innovations that other universities may have to learn from. I beg to submit. Thank you.

3.29
PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Independent, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this motion for three reasons. The first is equitable distribution of scarce resources. We all know that human needs are insatiable. The greater Rwenzori Region has many needs and I believe that this is one of the priority human needs.

We all know that in Africa, the state is the major producer and distributor of scarce resources. Therefore, the greater Rwenzori Region, coming to the state to request to be given a public university, is consistent with equitable distribution of resources.

The second reason I support this motion is because I have had an opportunity to look at the policies of the Mountains of the Moon University. When you look at the governing manual, the human resource manual, the academic policy and death policy, you see a high level of preparedness of this university to become a public university.

The third and last reason I support this motion is the academic strength of the university. We all know that in Uganda and the whole of Africa, there is a scarcity or shortage of high-level trained personnel.

However, when you look at the staffing of the Mountains of the Moon University, the number of PhDs and other academic staff with master’s degrees, you will see a high level of preparedness for this university to be a public university. 

This university comes with a number of benefits, not only for Ugandans but even for the Rwenzori Region. You are going to have employment opportunities. We are going to see increased demand and the purchasing power of the people brought by this university because people will be able to sell their goods in this university.

Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I strongly support this motion and I request all Members of this House to support this motion without any fear or favour. Thank you very much. 

3.32
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support this motion. The justification that the honourable minister has just given is wrong. Every year, there are students that sit Senior Six and complete other levels of education. Therefore, the justification for starting a university should be for the creation of space for those who are graduating. 

The minister has said that, that region must also have a university. For God’s sake, this is not supposed to be a tribal institution. The justification should be the figures. For example, every year, we have many students graduating and there is no space to accommodate them. He can come to a National Assembly to say that they want to establish a university for these reasons. 

However, to say that you want to start a university in Tooro – You even listed the districts that are supposed to benefit. I have relatives that have gone to Gulu University. My colleagues, who are very agitated about Busoga University; hon. Basalirwa and hon. Silwany, studied in Makerere. There is even no guarantee that people who will go to that university are necessarily from those areas. 

Hon. Muyingo, my advice is that next time you come with such a beautiful motion, please, do not make it look ugly by giving tribal reasons as if we are creating kingdoms. Mr Speaker, it is a crime to tribalise education. These days, children even go to Kenya to study. Mr Speaker, I support this motion –(Interruption) 

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give my honourable colleague is that our region is not tribal. The Rwenzori Region is composed of many tribes and we are a cosmopolitan region, including Indians and Europeans. In that region, we do not know anything to do with tribe. We only know knowledge and wisdom. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much for that information. I think you are now inviting an apology from the mover of the motion. 

Mr Speaker, I have personally visited Mountains of the Moon University. One of the last assignments I did before I left the media was to visit eminent Ugandans who had served and retired peacefully. I visited Prof. Edward Rugumayo and spent the day with him. He actually drove me to that university and used his contacts, which he created when he was a diplomat, to look for books and aid for that university. 

I, therefore, support that university but I will not sit before I say this, Mr Speaker. There is something unique about the founders of that university. Prof. Edward Rugumayo was appointed an Ambassador and he declined saying, “you cannot exile me in old age.” He refused to go to France again. 

Col Tom Butime was appointed Minister for Karamoja and that is why, in his talk, he said that they should bring everybody to this university. He did not want to be a tribal minister. I commend those people. He actually declined the appointment. There are others who will celebrate every appointment, even when it is to belittle them. There is something unique about the founders of this university. 

Mr Speaker, I support the motion. (Laughter)

3.37 
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also support the motion on condition that even other regions that have demanded for their universities to be taken over by Government also be considered, specifically Busoga Region.

Whenever these regions get their universities, it reduces the over concentration of students, especially in Kampala, where we used to only know Makerere University. We have Gulu University, Busitema University and Mbarara University. Why shouldn’t Mountains of the Moon University be made a public university? It is going to serve Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, with those reasons, I also stand and support the takeover of Mountains of the Moon University by the Government. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, usually, where there is agreement on a particular matter, we do not have to take too much time because there is other pending business. Can I have somebody opposed to this motion as presented?

3.39 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My old friend, hon. Butime, is very scared and I can see things that - 

THE SPEAKER: No, he is not. I know him. 

MR MPUUGA: Let him rest assured that the cause is noble and we would like to be part of it.  

Mr Speaker, I listened to the honourable minister explaining the criterion for establishing a public university namely: the minister, by statutory instrument; National Council for Higher Education and a resolution of Parliament. That criterion for me has very serious gaps. In future, we need to evolve a policy other than who can establish this. If that is not revisited and we have a clear policy on how a public university is established, we will have a problem. 

I remember the debate on Busoga University in the 10th Parliament hit a snag when there was a conversation about whether the application should not be taken to the Committee on Education and Sports to first evaluate the issues in the university. This is because we had petitions in the House from students complaining about their status - They had been denied employment because the university was running and its establishment was questionable. 

In future - Mr Speaker, these are bipartisan motions. All of us can discuss the pros and cons and move to the centre and do public good. Future ministers should come out with a clear policy of how public universities are established and even the takeover should also be properly defined. 

Tomorrow, before you know it, somebody is going to ask that their secondary school become a university. Like hon. Ssemujju said, any region believing that they are being marginalised could say that they want a university. How about a Government policy on establishing a secondary school per sub-county? Up to now, this has never materialised. What stops a private person struggling with a secondary school from applying to Government to make it a public school and rest their troubles with the Government?

We ask that in future, we have a clear policy; whether we would have regional universities and we define the regions clearly to avoid debate that tends to ignore public good because we are here for public good. 

Therefore, I am here to support the minister’s motion and ask that in future, we have an input from the Committee on Education and Sports at some stage and report to Parliament so that we can move on the same page. Then, we would be able to support something that is properly justified. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. (Dr Batuwa rose_) On what matter do you rise?

3.42
DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja): I rise on rule 61 of the Rules of Procedure. Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity – 

THE SPEAKER: Do you rise on procedure or?

DR BATUWA: Mr Speaker, I rise to propose an amendment to the motion, under rule 61(12), to include Busoga University. 
Mr Speaker, Busoga University was the very first private university to be established in -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let me just guide you. You saw them laying a certificate of financial implication and by now, I am sure you are aware of Article 93 of the Constitution and its limitation to private Member’s attempts at making amendments or making proposals that impose a charge on the Consolidated Fund.

Now if you are aware of those things, I think you can now reconsider the amendment you are about to propose because it will hit that small problem.

Honorable members, I think let us not divert from the issue at hand. I attended the inaugural fundraising meeting of Busoga University in Iganga and I think it was in 2015. 

If you go to the list of people who contributed, you will realise that I am one of those who gave a substantial amount of money to support the university. The debate we have had about Busoga University, you know, was like the one we had in respect of the branch of Gulu University in Kitgum and one in Moroto - they both hit a snag.

Now once all those things are clarified, there will be absolutely no reason why a motion should not be brought to this House for Busoga University to be taken over by Government. We all know the issues. 
Yes, my placement does not allow me to start participating in debate but we all know the issues surrounding Busoga – they are not political; they are not tribal, they are technical issues that need to be sorted out, just like they had a charter - the way honourable minister Butime has outlined how far they have gone with Mountains of the Moon University. 

So let us clarify those things; sort them out with the Ministry of Education and Sports and have another motion on Busoga University and adopt it. Wouldn’t that be a better procedure than making it look like if this does not happen this cannot happen? For me that would be my position towards this.

So I am going to put the question to the motion - and if the honourable member has taken my guidance, I would be glad because the temptations of moving away from being polite might start creeping in. (Laughter)

DR BATUWA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I now put the question to this motion - yes honourable member, on what matter do you rise?

MR BUSINGE: I rise on a point of procedure. Whereas I support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to make Mountains of the Moon University a public university, I have remained wondering whether it is procedurally right to reduce this debate to a matter that only concerns Mountains of the Moon and Busoga universities yet many other regions, including Bunyoro, where I come from, are anxious of having a public university –(Interjection)- yes because it is now becoming an issue of Busoga versus the Rwenzori sub-region yet there are some of us who are also burning in there wishing to see all the regions get balanced as far as university education is concerned.

Therefore, as we support the motion for the Mountains of the Moon University to become a public university, I implore the Minister to commit himself that the entire country will be looked at in totality in terms of university education. Not that those who make more demand get better because the Government is there to balance all of us. I would love to hear that commitment from the Minister.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The procedural matter you have raised, I am actually wondering whether Masindi borders an international boundary because that issue could hardly have come under procedure but you were able to do it the Tororo way –(Laughter)– the Busia way - which is also acceptable. I am sure the Minister has taken note. 

It is not the first time I have heard about the demand for a university in Bunyoro, it is just the processes that should take place for that to be done. 

If you had raised it - and I would have loved it - in the spirit of, “let us do this one, next should be this one” and that would be the spirit in which to handle this so that we see if we can have public universities all over the country to assist our students who want to access university education.

Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion that Mountains of the Moon University be taken over as a public university.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON BUILDING A MORE RESILIENT SECTOR: LESSONS LEARNT FROM A SOCIAL ECONOMIC IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON THE TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY SECTOR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this report was presented by the chairperson of the committee and my recommendation was that we look at it because it raises some quite substantial issues for the decision of the House. 

You have had more than two weeks to look at this document. I had already proposed the question for debate and debate starts now, each Member taking as much time as they need but limited to the overall time allotted to this particular debate.
 
3.50
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have one thing I would like to ask the Minister of Finance and it relates to a matter in that report regarding the charging or taxation of textiles based on the weight and not value.

When I worked with Customs, textile was charged based on the value. I wonder how the Ministry of Finance decided to change this practice thereby resorting to weight.

Mr Speaker, there are textiles, which are light but of higher value. That is why even the in international standards, taxation is based on value. In this House, we have the hon. Kateshumbwa who was even the Chairperson of the International Customs Union. He has been able to give this information to the Minister of Finance. However, I got defeated when I learnt of the Minister’s decision to begin taxing textiles on the basis of their weight as opposed to their value. 

Mr Speaker, you all know how heavy jeans are yet they might not be having the same value as that of polyester or nylon. 

Therefore, if you charge a tax based on the weight then you are going to disorganise investors by overtaxing them and this can subsequently affect the sector. 

I would really want to know what the reasons that Minister of Finance based on to change what is known internationally. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.52
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report that they came up with, as a committee. My major interest is in the tourism sector. In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is prudent that the tourism sector development keeps in line with the NDP III because tourism remains one of the priority sectors for the socio-economic transformation.

The tourism sector set out five programmes in the NDP III: 

    1. To promote domestic and inbound tourism; 
    2. To increase the stock and quality of tourism infrastructure; 
    3. To develop, conserve and diversify tourism products, including cultural tourism, wildlife and natural resources;
    4. To develop a pool of skilled personnel along the tourism valued chain, and; 
    5. To enhance regulations, coordination and management of tourism.

This necessitates that we package a during- and post-Covid-19 package that is well spelt out and that is looking at the protection and management of the tourism resources that will protect jobs, sustain self-employment and support companies’ liquidity and operations.

Mr Speaker, it is at this point that I would like to implore the Government and the Prime Minister as Leader of Government Business that on the national Covid-19 taskforce, they should co-opt the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities so that they can bring in their mind on influencing Covid-19 decisions for this country so that we protect the basic sector that brings its very good package to the national economy.

We would like to see these taskforce decisions addressing capacity gaps and infrastructure issues, quality assurance, virtual visits to our national parks and any other tourism products and diversification of products for tourism. May we have someone from the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to sit on the national COVID-19 taskforce to cause decisions to be mindful of the tourism sector? Thank you.

3.55
MR DICKSON KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the chairperson of the committee and the team for the great work they did. The report is very extensive but I would like to address myself to some of the factors that are actually affecting our trade and bring to the attention of House the fact that since we joined the East African Community in 2005, we adopted the common external tariff. At that time, the tariff had a three-band structure that was consistent with our level of production and manufacturing.

Mr Speaker, that tariff structure has remained until now. There have been promises by the Government, together with the partner states, to review the common external tariff to reflect the current realities on the ground. 

There are items we had in that structure that were intermediate: inputs into industries. Now, because of the growth of the industries, the situation has changed. I want to appeal to the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that, that review has taken long and it is affecting the growth of our industries and bringing bad competition in the region.

Many years ago, we used to import from the region products, which we are now producing. As a result of that, it has not gone well with our neighbours. We must have strong negotiators to look for the markets. We are crowding ourselves within the region, for a market that is not expanding. 

The African Continental Free Trade area came up and as a country, we need to position ourselves to be able to expand our territories in terms of trade. We would like to know from the Government the efforts that are being taken to make sure that we see our products beyond the borders of East Africa.

I commend the team for the work they have done and I would like to appeal to the Government on matters of negotiation because trade is a new war in the world. We need to be strategic and protect our markets. We do not see that urgency. Our trade volumes are reducing and the balance of trade is widening. As a country, we need a strategy. I submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.58
MS MARY BEGUMISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on the issue of tourism and COVID-19, in relation to our clients. In the tourism sector where I work, our clients have been inconvenienced for the one-and-a-half hours they take at the airport. Can we know how the ministry is going to help our clients? They are complaining heavily - somebody who has travelled probably from Canada or USA and they made to wait at the airport. 

They also suggest that they be found at their hotels, whose addresses the Government has, so that we do not inconvenience somebody who took the two jabs – is fully vaccinated - and has been probably on the plane for eight hours and now made to wait in the queue to be tested again. Can we know from the ministry how our clients, especially the international tourists, can be urgently helped? I thank you.

4.00
MR JOEL SSENYONYI (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I, too, will restrict myself to tourism, especially because it is Uganda’s highest foreign exchange earner.

Tourism contributes upwards of 7.75 per cent to our country’s GDP. When it comes to employment, 6.7 per cent of the jobs in this country are tethered to tourism. That means there is a lot of potential there. My worry is that we are not investing as much as we should. If we were, these figures would be way higher. There are things that we can do to prop up tourism. For example, can we build infrastructure? 

Mr Speaker, when you go to some of the game parks in this country, the roads are in a pathetic state. About two years ago, there was a minister who said, “No, do not worry about the bad roads. It is part of the adventure for the foreign tourists when they come here.” I found that preposterous because they spend six hours on the roads - pushing the cars and all that. They may go elsewhere, where things are a lot better. If we invest there, we will be inviting these people.

Mr Speaker, our wildlife, adventure and cultural experiences exceed many of those countries’. It is absurd that many people out there think that our good neighbour, Rwanda, has a higher population of Mountain Gorillas than Uganda. As a matter of fact, they do not even have a third of the Mountain Gorillas we have here. The reason is because those good neighbours are investing in advertising. As a country, we are not doing much. 

I read somewhere - and I hope this does not offend anybody - that doing business without advertising is like a man who winks at a lady in the dark. Regardless of what you do, nobody appreciates it. We have a lot of potential here. Can we invest in advertising? 

Finally, Mr Speaker, one of the other things I think we can do is giving incentives to local investors in tourism. We do these things for foreign investors; we give them tax waivers and so on but I do not know why we do not do that for our local investors. Otherwise, the product is ours here. I will give an example as I wrap up. 

I have a friend called Amos Wekesa; he is one of the big tourism players. He told me that for the last almost two years, when business has been low, he has had to keep open. He is paying workers and he still has to pay PAYE, NSSF and all these other costs. He said that once we make it a bit easier for them, the tourism industry will not die. If we keep loading it heavily on them, it will die. Yet, it is one of the great ones we have. I, therefore, hope that Government can put into consideration these issues. Thank you. 

4.03
DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Jinja is, maybe, the first tourist spot because of the Source of the River Nile. 

I bring to the attention of this House the concerns of hotel owners in Jinja in regard to the report of the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry. The hoteliers say that while they have invested a lot of money in ensuring the COVID-19 Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) are observed, they wonder why the Government limits them from holding workshops and seminars. 

I remember, as we were emerging out of the lockdown, the President mentioned that the Prime Minister would, from time to time, give alteration to some of these guidelines. 

Mr Speaker, the view of the hoteliers is that since they have invested a lot and they can manage, perhaps guidelines that limit numbers that could be allowed to attend seminars and workshops can be set, rather than denying them the opportunity of doing this completely. I see this positively because they will make money and the Government can collect more tax from them. 

They also spoke about vaccination - hoteliers being given priority during this vaccination effort. The world has opened gates to tourism. People have started moving out, going to various countries to tour. When a hotel posts on its website that all its workers are vaccinated, it would convince a tourist. There is a sense of confidence it will give to a tourist and he or she will be attracted to the hotels here in Uganda. 

Last but not least, I am speaking to those people in the taxi business; the 14-seater commuter taxis. The capacity they carry was reduced to 50 per cent; from 14 passengers to seven. However, the service tax they pay was not reduced. I wish the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development makes mention of that. 

When you look at the structuring of the seats in a taxi, there are five rows. If you are to do social distancing, it will require a passenger to sit in either corner. If that is done, a taxi will carry nine passengers and not seven, as released from the guidelines that the President gave us. 

Since the Prime Minister was given the authority to alter some of these guidelines from time to time, I wish she addresses herself on that guideline and allows taxis to carry nine passengers such that they optimise that space. Otherwise, when you tell them to carry seven, there will be two rows that will have one passenger. To optimise, so that they can get something reasonable out of the activity, let them be allowed to carry nine passengers and it will still be done safely. I beg to submit. 

4.07
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (FDC, Aringa North County, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the report. My submission is going to cover two areas of trade and industry. 

Under trade, my concern is about the cost of money for investment. We made a mistake as a country, when we decided to privatise all our banks. You can never develop without a cheap source of money. This was observed clearly by the committee. 

Currently, there is an effort by the Government to capitalise Uganda Development Bank (UBD) but the pace is very slow. When you look at UBD itself, it does not bear nationalistic characteristics. It is based in Kampala and not in any other district. This means traders in other areas cannot easily access UDB. 

I would like to appeal to the Government to look at this as a critical investment point such that we supply more money to capitalise UDB and try to spread it in the various districts. 

Secondly, accessibility of money, by every level of a businessman or businesswoman is not easy. It appears to be more selective. Those who have lower levels of operations do not access this money. Yet, these are the categories of people who have been hit hard by COVID-19. I appeal to Government to try to revisit this to ensure that the operations of UDB favour everybody. 

On industry, the committee emphasised the issue of import substitution. Our investment policy seems to favour foreign investors more than our local investors and many times, some of these foreign investors have their operations based on investment climate. If situations change, it means they can move to countries where investment conditions are favourable.
 
Therefore, I would like to appeal to the Government to consistently and gradually empower our local investors such that in situations like COVID-19, where every country was locked down, people depended on their internal advantages and capacities. This should teach us a lesson that if we are to move forward, we depend on our local investors.

Many times, when foreign investors come, we try to favour them on very many other aspects because we think we can get a lot of taxes –(Member timed out.)

4.10
MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern Region): Mr Speaker, I rise as a proponent of the motion. The report is extensive in its analysis of the challenges of youth business but a bit silent on a couple of other issues. 

When you look at parts II, III, and IV on page 13 of the report themed “difficulty in servicing loans”, the report indicates that there is a significant rise in the number of non-performing loans in the trade and commerce sector. There was a quarter average increase in these non-performing loans from five percent, in the quarter of July to September 2019 to 7.4 per cent, in the quarter of January-March 2020 it was eight per cent and in the quarter of January-March 2021. 

These periods were characterised by business interruptions owing to the lock down. On account of these revelations, the plight of youth businesses that accessed revolving empowerment loans from Government before COVID-19 hit should also be taken into account.

A case in point is the Youth Livelihood Programme, which is ideally meant to stimulate youth businesses. As you may be aware, Mr Speaker, this empowerment fund is revolving in nature and demands repayment from these young people.

However, the death of these youth businesses that received this start-up capital from Government is on account of the enormous pressure on the youth businesses to pay back. In some instances, these young people have been arrested, despite the fact that there have been interruptions.

I would request that there should be considerations of restructuring and renegotiating terms of these empowerment revolving funds accessed before COVID-19 interruptions, to at least guarantee business survival. 

This should be prioritised for both the youths - We even have the women who are special interest groups that are receiving this support. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we have the honourable lady there, please? The masks do not help much with identification.

4.13
MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you very much –

THE SPEAKER: Member for Butambala.

MS AISHA KABANDA: It is okay and thank you very much for the compliment that my mask matches with the skirt. Thank you. (Laughter) I join colleagues to thank members of the committee for the report. I have only noted two areas of concern, in my opinion. 

One, they noted and observed that whereas Government said that loans should be rescheduled, commercial banks actually rescheduled loans but the interest rates skyrocketed and it became very difficult. 

They did not provide a solution in their report to that because the interest rates have continuously gone high. The loans have more than doubled and people are losing property. I wonder what would have happened if, for example, Government suggested that the commercial banks forfeit only interest, not the principle, for that time. If bars, restaurants and every other business closed, what would be wrong for commercial banks to lose their profit for only that time? I regret that there is no solution to the problem.

Secondly, I do not know what is happening with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because at this time, while we cry out for funding and are looking forward to increasing money, the Central Bank has instead come up with a regulation to raise commercial deposits of commercial banks from Shs 25 billion to Shs 500 billion. For credit institutions, it is from Shs 1 billion to Shs 50 billon and for microfinance institutions from Shs 500 million to Shs 10 billion.

All that is intended to reduce money in circulation as a way of controlling inflation. As we control inflation, we are going to reduce money in circulation and make it very difficult for people to borrow. This will make money expensive to our people.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, on the plight of teachers, the teachers are out of Emyooga by design. They have been reminded that they should go to the Shs 20 billion fund that has been allotted to them. However, the conditions are so stringent. 

A teacher must be in a registered school but we know there are very many schools that are not registered. A teacher must be registered by the ministry. We know there are teachers who are not registered by the ministry. A teacher must be in a SACCO that is subscribed -

To conclude this matter, I only mean to say that the conditions to access the Shs 20 billion are so stringent for our teachers and yet they have also been excluded from Emyooga. I expected the report from the sectoral committee to come out with a solution to address the plight of our teachers. I thank you.

4.17
MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I commend the work of the committee and I notice one of the places that were visited was Mbale Main Market in Mbale City. Most of the fresh foods that supply the city come from farmers who come from the hills. They bring their foods down to the main market.

The sad thing is that COVID-19 has revealed many things. Besides them accessing the market, everything that they were bringing in went to waste because there was no market. That reveals that there is an urgent need to establish a cooler where fresh foods and vegetables can be stored in that big market so that farmers will not be at a loss. 

They are farming and the money they are using is borrowed through loans. At the end of the day, they are operating at a loss and most of them are on the run because the financial institutions cannot lose out. All they need is their money which the farmers borrowed.

Whereas I commend the work of the committee, this should also be looked into so that, that system is put in place where when the farmers bring in their goods, they can keep them so that they slowly look for market and do not lose out. I submit.

4.19
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the chairperson and committee for the comprehensive report that they presented.

I come from a border district and in fact, at the border, we do not involve ourselves in smuggling but we facilitate trade. We facilitate demand and supply.

COVID-19 has really been a very big problem to us, not only in the country but also at the border. The border community gate in Malaba - a gate that supplies foodstuffs to Kenya – was closed from the time all borders were closed. Fortunately enough, borders have been opened but that community gate remains closed.

I would like to find out from the Government as to when this gate will be opened because all the fresh foods that go to Kenya do not pass through the main gate; they use the community gate. We are losing a lot and that should be responded to.

Secondly, a lot has been said about textiles. Hon. Kateshumbwa, who is well informed and has been a manager in respect to taxation, has said something about this. However, we must also add our voice that whereas we are working on import substitution, which is a key aspect in form of growing our economy, we should also be cognisant of the fact that our capacity now is not yet very good to sustain not only the local demand but also the external demand that originates from here.

You are aware that South Sudan picks textiles from here. Democratic Republic of Congo picks textiles from here. Aware that transport costs also went up - A 20-foot container from China to the port of Mombasa or Dar es Salaam goes for US$ 6000 to US$ 7000. This used to be far less than this.

So, when you hear our traders complaining of the tax component, it is really something that should be taken into consideration as we build our capacity. The industries that we have here should be able to reach their capacity and meet the market demands of this country.

Mr Speaker, many have talked about the incentives given to investors. The investors come and get tax holidays. I think it is important for us to come up with a threshold for our local investors; what they can afford. If it is $50,000, let us also give them the opportunity to benefit from those tax incentives. 

Mr Speaker, the beverage industry is now suffering. We have investors who are picking duty free beverages competing with those who are picking beverages with high taxes. So, when goods are supplied on the market, the prices are in disparity and the foreign investors are taking the market because of the incentives they enjoy.

So, let us be fair to our traders; build their capacity by giving them incentives, which are affordable. As we increase our support in terms of revenue, we should also create employment for our people. Thank you. 

4.23
MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairman and his team for presenting this report.  

My comment will only relate to trade. Uganda has really made progress in terms of improving her balance of trade. Not long ago, our balance of trade was in negative compared to that of all our neighbours. However, we now have a positive balance of trade with Kenya, South Sudan, Rwanda and all our other neighbours.

However, we have a big challenge. Much as 15 per cent of our exports go to South Sudan and 10 per cent to Kenya, we seem to be having a crisis of instability. That is affecting this country in a very big way. In 2019, our total exports was $3 billion and we have started making progress. 

The President normally inspires the nation to think big beyond our domestic market because we cannot progress with what we have in Uganda. We need to establish and grow the intra-African trade, which at the moment is only at 20 per cent.  Most of our exports are outside Africa.

My question, therefore, to the Government is: what are we doing, in terms of aligning our strategic defence to promote trade within East Africa, just as a way of starting? It is because as you can see, our borders with Rwanda are closed up. At the moment, we have a crisis. 

Recently, at Elegu Border, more than 200 trucks were parked and they could go into Sudan. So, it is going to be very difficult - no matter what we do in terms of manufacturing and growing, if we do not bring about regional peace and stability, we are not going to make progress. 

Secondly, we have our representatives at the African Union. And we always talk about the AU protocol to promote intra-African trade. There are challenges with the immigration, tariffs at the borders, transport and so forth. So, as a country, we need to ask Government again what it is going to do at the AU to promote intra-African trade to make Uganda’s export grow bigger. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I now have the Member for Kwania County? 

4.26
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. I am going to address myself to the areas of industry and trade, specifically on the leather tanning industry.   

From the report of the committee, it is evident that we, first of all, do not have a comprehensive policy to guide business around hides and skins, leather and leather products. 

The report also indicates that that Government has not paid much attention to support this sector; it has left it to individual companies to fend for themselves yet this area affects farmers throughout the country. Initially, we used to have a huge business in hides and skins but it has collapsed.
 
After slaughtering the cattle, there is apparently no market for the hides and skins and so, farmers end up just throwing them away. The management of the effects of the wastes from the tannery factories is quite expensive. 

Therefore, I would like to call upon Government to come in and work with these companies to put up tanning plants to help manage the wastes from the factories.

At one point in time, we had wanted the country – and this was pronounced by His Excellency, the President - to stop importing shoes and waist belts. Today, the Chinese plastic sandals are all over the country yet we are throwing hides and skins away. Government should invest in tanning so we can begin to manufacture shoes, waist belts and bags from within the country,

I also call upon the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Government as a whole to review their support to the leather and tanning sectors. This will enable farmers to benefit from their animals right from the beef, bones, horns to the skins. Thank you. 

4.29
MR ABUBAKER KAWALYA (NUP, Rubaga North Division, Kampala): I start by appreciating the work that was done by the committee. As the Shadow Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority Affairs, I would like to point out that there are quite a number of challenges that traders in Kampala are going through at the moment. As I speak, I have received complaints from the Kampala City Traders’ Association over a number of concerns and one of them is the issue of taxes; both from URA and the Kampala Capital City Authority. For example, as a result of COVID-19, property owners have not been getting any money from their tenants but KCCA is still demanding Property Tax from them. 

When they conducted meetings with the Ministry of Kampala Capital City together with some officials from, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the ministries promised to work on that issue. However, up to now, the property owners in Kampala have not received any response from those ministries. 

Another challenge is about the increasing taxes to be paid, namely Rental Tax, Property Tax and trading license. Remember shops have been closed. Actually, there was a demonstration in Kampala the whole of last week whereupon traders closed their shops as a result of such challenges. 

Another issue is the plight of private schools in Uganda but most especially in Kampala Capital City. 

As we discuss this report at the moment, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development came out clearly to say that there is no intention by the Government to help private schools. However, Ugandans remember that Gen. Museveni, the President of Uganda, promised to secure the future of Ugandans.

Our children have not gone to school for the last two years and that means schools are not getting anything from the parents. However, these schools have loans that have accumulated and we expected the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come out clearly and give us a way forward on how we are going to help these schools.

Lastly, on the transport sector, we all know that Kampala holds the largest percentage of the GDP of this country. Kampala contributes over 70 per cent to the GDP. In the process of the lockdown, we experienced a scenario where the Government made plans on how they were going to send off our brothers in the transport sector, most especially those managing taxis and the boda bodas.

We witnessed a signing of a certain agreement between the Government of Uganda and the company called Metu. There is a lot of tension among the taxi drivers and the boda boda cyclists on how they are going to proceed. I have not seen any single official from the Government coming out to tell the nation how they are going to secure the jobs of the Ugandans, not forgetting that in this term of office, Ugandans are waiting to see how the Government is going to secure their future.

I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

4.34
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Karim Masaba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My remarks will be majorly going to the tourism sector. I would like to thank the honourable member for his good report, though it was shallow on some few recommendations. 

To begin with, I heard the minister talking about digital tourism but he did not give it much light. This is something I expected the report to capture and address more because we have been having very many challenges in the tourism sector. Therefore, if we are to go online, we need to put more emphasis on this area.

I do not know why there is still a ban on Facebook because this is the biggest social media site in the entire universe, with over 2.7 billion users. I believe this is something, which could help our economy to grow. We also have people dealing in e-commerce and doing business online. Personally, I survived in Canada for three years while dealing in online business and I know how good this online business can be. I call upon the Government to try and revise these policies.

The other issue, which I believe was not captured in this report, concerns one of the factors, which must have affected our tourism sector and this was election violence. This might look to be minor but people perceived Uganda as a war zone during the elections because of what was happening. If this was captured then, perhaps, in the next elections, we could revise how we do things. 

For example, I had colleagues who, during the winter the other side, wanted to come and participate in my election but whatever was going on, on social media discouraged them. Therefore, it had a huge hindrance on the tourism sector as well.

Another issue that has been affecting our tourism sector is the human-wildlife conflict, where people are killing the wildlife and the animals are eating people. This has existed for a while and I heard the Government, in 2019, talking about something to do with an electric fence around Queen Elizabeth National Park, which was supposed to be about 40km long to protect people from encroaching on the wildlife and the other way round.

Therefore, I request the Government to give us more information on that project and how far they have reached or, if they changed their plan, they should update this House.

Lastly is about the COVID-19 relief package. The tourism sector was not very much highlighted or given priority. This is something that I think the Government or Parliament should always look at when we are passing these supplementaries to help people. It is not just for the tourism sector but also the traders because now we are talking about tourism and trade. Many traders did not access the relief funds and we have a handful who got huge sums of money, yet, many of the traders down in Kikuubo never accessed these funds. The process was monotonous and not many of them could afford the Shs 100 million thresholds they put in.

People wanted to borrow as much as Shs 20-50 million so that their business could survive but they were not rescued. Many people have closed businesses and I think this is something that we should reconsider. I beg to submit. Thank you.

4.38
MS ROSE OBIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to congratulate the committee for the work well done. Thank you.

However, in the West Nile, we have a place called Ajai Game Reserve, which is known for the White Rhino species. This place has now remained for monkeys and a few guinea fowls. It is imperative upon the Government that we restock the White Rhinos. 

Apart from the two I see at Uganda Wildlife Education Centre, I would think that we need to take White Rhinos there because it was a big tourist attraction.

Secondly, I would like to talk about the border markets. When you look at Elegu, Ariwara and Oraba, these would help to market a lot of our produce. Our traders suffer a great deal, including corporal punishment when they cross to South Sudan.  It would be good if we could develop these markets so that we sell our fruits and other goods that are perishable as traders move to South Sudan. I beg to move. Thank you.

4.40
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the quick intervention in collecting data on what that is affecting the plight of our business community.

As you are aware, the effects of COVID-19 worldwide have affected our ways and sources of revenue. However, there are also those who have benefitted, especially those who have adjusted and are now able to make more money. As you can see, all of us here are putting on these temporary masks: people are making money.

Unfortunately, the nature of our economy - we have different categories. We have the lowest traders - these are the traders who survive on capital ranging from Shs 50,000 to Shs 200,000. They just buy greens, vegetables and carry on their heads and market for that day.

Some of these categories have collapsed because raising Shs 200,000 is not something easy for them. These are the majority of the traders we have. 

Many of them, especially women, who have children abandoned by the men – it is very easy for the men to run away from these problems and leave the women. There is real suffering, when you go to that lower level. 

Mr Speaker, there is another category called the small and medium enterprises that access loans. They stake their assets to make money. Unfortunately, for these small and medium enterprises, the banks only smile at them when they want them. However, when there are problems of this nature that are beyond control, there is no heart to know that they were good customers that can talk to the bank so that they see how to get out of the problem. 

This crisis needs timely intervention from the Government. When we were talking about a bail-out – the other time, when we discussed Emyooga, a lot of billions of shillings was mobilised to see that money reaches the lower communities. What if we get this money – the big guys in tourism shared the money. 

Mr Speaker, I pray that we get resources into The Microfinance Support Centre so that the small and medium enterprises, which are dying out because of the loans and interests, access cheaper loans and survive. 

4.43
MS MIDIUS NATUKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will talk about the small traders, like he said. As you are aware, during this lockdown, and the COVID-19 crisis, most affected small traders included the youth; those operating boda bodas, taxi operators, salon operators. Most of these people are young.

Like the previous speaker said, accessibility to empowerment programmes like the Youth Livelihood Programme is also becoming a challenge. Most of them have resorted to seeking employment abroad in the Middle East. This is where most of our young people are. If they wish to go, I would implore the Government to negotiate for better deals for the young people that want to work abroad.

In July this year, we saw the Government of Kenya negotiate with the UK Government, where they agreed to find jobs for the nurses and doctors. Can’t our Government also get better employment opportunities for the young people who wish to go and work abroad? 

There is another issue in Queen Elizabeth National Park. The Government promised to fence off Queen Elizabeth National Park, which also stretches to my district in Rukungiri. The animals in Queen Elizabeth National Park are attacking people and there is no compensation at all. Therefore, I implore the Government to give us an update on how far they have gone with fencing off the national park. I thank you. 

4.45
DR NICHOLAS KAMARA (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. I would like to say that COVID-19 has affected trade and tourism. It has affected the people of Kabale and Kigezi in a special way. 

Before the pandemic, we used to have tourists and trade between Uganda and Rwanda. Of course, the trade and tourism in Uganda has gone down but we have been affected in a special way, in that the border between Rwanda and Uganda is closed.

Mr Speaker, people have become very desperate. They cross into Rwanda to trade. We have so far lost four people that have been shot in Rwanda; there is Alex Ndyarimana, a 41-year-old man, who was shot in Rwanda in May 2019. There was Alex Nyesiga, from Kamwezi in Rukiga and he was also shot in Rwanda. Recently, two weeks ago another one was shot. 

We know there have been four tripartite meetings but it is as if that topic has been closed. We do not know when the border is going to be reopened. We have Members of Parliament in the East African Legislative Assembly, a Minister in charge of East Africa Community Affairs and many people who can represent us but everyone is quiet, yet the people of Kabale are suffering due to the closure of the border. 

We used to sell Irish potatoes to Rwanda. When tourists would come to Kabale, they would also cross to Rwanda. Now, instead of a tourist coming to Kabale, he or she goes to another place. When a tourist wants to go to Rwanda, he or she would also book to come to Kabale. We have been affected in the areas of tourism and trade because there is border closure. 

I would like to urge the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for East African Community Affairs, the Members of Parliament in the East African Legislative Assembly and the Committee on East African Community Affairs to come to the rescue of the people in Kabale. Otherwise, the question on everyone’s lips in Kabale is: When is the border going to be reopened? I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That is a highly emotive issue coming from Kabale. Honourable members, I have another motion which is critically important. I was hoping that you would agree with me to roll up this very important debate. The committee did a good job and the debate is progressing very well. 

Let us roll up this one and then we deal with the reallocation of funds from the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) to the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. We had referred this matter to the Committee on Budget and it was a substantive motion. I am told there is some urgency to it. If you could help me so that we roll up this particular debate –(A Member rose_) - when the Speaker is speaking, normally Members sit. Otherwise, it looks like that is a very abnormal situation. 

Honourable members, you could help me so that we can roll up this debate, in which case, I will deal with the shadow minister and then have about three ministers. The chairperson will not now speak. I still have about four people to roll up the debate; the shadow minister and the Leader of the Opposition. Please help me so that we roll up this and then we see how to progress with the next motion. 

The chairperson of the Committee on Budget says we have to complete the next motion, which is item four, today. Is he here? They said we should complete this today. Please help me so that we can accommodate this. I have to stop here. 

Honourable members, please bear with me. The debate is progressing very well. I am even enjoying it myself. The man from Mbale wants to speak but now he cannot do so because time has run out. Who is the shadow minister for trade? (Hon. Mwijukye rose_) You are a member of the committee and you know that the rules also bind the shadow ministers.

4.51
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. It is common knowledge that tourism has been the leading foreign exchange earner for this country -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I need you to be brief.

MR NAMBESHE: Very brief, indeed.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR NAMBESHE: But with the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic, it has inflicted a lot of harm on this sector and the reason is because of over dependence on international tourists. 

The ministry ought to shift its focus to promotion of domestic tourists. Like the proposal in the report, we should establish regional aerodromes like Kenya that has so many of them and many domestic flights, which are affordable. The issues or the challenges of infrastructure ought to be looked into seriously.

Mr Speaker, I would like to salute the committee for borrowing a leaf - they made serious comparisons and contrasts with Kenya. During the pandemic, Kenya set up a credit guarantee scheme to ensure easy access to credit by small and medium enterprises, which was lacking. If the stimulus package also considered other vulnerable groups like teachers in private schools; they are really suffering and I saw it in the report. That was spot on.

Other categories of vulnerable groups included health workers who perform a critical role. Most of them have been affected by the virus and a number of them have died. They ought to have been considered as a vulnerable group. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will go to the ministers. Please take the order in which you will proceed starting with the Right Honourable.

4.54
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, I have the ministers here who are going to respond to the Members’ issues that have been raised. Before they come in, there were issues that were raised for the Prime Minister to respond to.

There was an issue on tourism by hon. Kabahenda. I would like to inform her that tourism is on the COVID-19 Taskforce. In case of anything, you can go to them and I know those people are handling most of the issues. In case there is something that has been left out, contact the minister and I think it will be handled.

The Minister of Health has also been given two weeks not to disrupt anything in as far as the people at the airport are concerned. After the two weeks, the taskforce will come up with a solution and of course, you will be informed.

The doctor also talked about the guidelines to be revised by the Prime Minister. Since the guidelines apply to everybody in the country, not only in Jinja, maybe she is still studying the situation; so, she cannot only revise for that town alone. Let us keep waiting. When the time is appropriate, maybe they will be revised.

About the border gates, the President is handling this issue. Yesterday, he briefed us and today he was supposed to talk with some of his colleagues in the neighbouring countries. Therefore, when they come to terms, he will inform us and of course, we shall come and inform Parliament about the opening of the border gates. The ministers who are here will answer the rest –(Interruption) 

MR AOGON: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter that we are talking about is international in nature and of course, when we are debating, we do so with care. 

However, it is taking Government years just to have Parliament know what is happening between Uganda and her neighbours somewhere. Why do you take so long to talk about these matters? You only come when a Member raises an issue –(Interjection)– because they are international, they are deciding to hide. We would love Government to explain to us why they take so long to brief Ugandans on sensitive matters of this nature. Thank you. 

MS NAKADAMA: Mr Speaker, this issue was raised in Cabinet not because we had somebody in Parliament raising it. It was brought to Cabinet and we were handling it, except that we did not inform you that Cabinet was handling it. It also came up when we were in Parliament. In addition, these are matters concerning different countries. They cannot be handled the way we handle our internal matters so we need to give it time so that we come with a solution. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I now have the ministers starting with Finance?

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join the rest of the colleagues to thank the committee for the wonderful report. I must say, I also enjoyed the debate.

Mr Speaker, hon. Okupa raised an issue on customs duty on importation of textiles. I would like to report that we have had a number of engagements with the affected stakeholders and sooner than later, we shall come up with a position which we have taken and which is favourable to us and the stakeholders –(Interjection)

Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I would like to beg that my colleague bears with me to use the minutes I have been given. Hon. Onzima raises an issue on the cost of money and the distribution channels by the Uganda Development Bank. Yes, it is true UDB gives cheap capital and it is Kampala based. I would like to report to the House that UDB has mobile arrangements whereby we go up country to handle our clients who are based in the countryside. 

Mr Speaker, the issue raised by hon. Aisha Kabanda on the minimum cash reserve is a monetary issue which the Bank of Uganda is implementing and it is intended to mitigate the risk of the bank in order to remain prudent and sound. 

Mr Speaker, there was an issue raised by the shadow Minister for Kampala on charging taxes when businesses are not earning and have closed. This is a matter I need to investigate further and I can engage with him because as far as I know, taxes are normally a function of income and therefore, I am wondering why people continue paying taxes when they are not earning.

Lastly, on support to SMEs, we recently passed Shs 200 billion to support Small and Medium Enterprises and we are currently working out guidelines with the Central Bank and the participating banks. I am sure this will mitigate the challenges, which our youth and other small entrepreneurs are facing.

Mr Speaker, I also want to note that this House, in 2019, under me, as the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, passed the Enforcement Code Act. In this Act, we provided for priority areas for investment and how both the foreign and the local investors can access incentives. The investment incentives available are both provided for in this Act, which we passed and in the relevant tax laws. 

I would like to implore Members to refer to these Acts in order to know what is available for the local and foreign investors. I say this because it is not true that we are only favouring foreign investors. Every investor has what is available for him or her. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Trade? 

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the Chairperson of the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for the report presented. This is his first time to chair a committee, as a sector, which the committee oversees, I must say that we are feeling the pressure but we are very happy that we are working with the Chairperson and Members of the committee. (Applause)

There are quite a number of questions but in the interest of time, and as you have requested, I will just attempt to answer a few of them. 

The first came from hon. Kateshumba. He asked about access to the market. Mr Speaker, we now have accessed a number of markets not only in the continent but even internationally. For example, we are Members of the AGOA and under this American market, Uganda has been given a duty free quarter of 6,400 items. We are members of COMESA and the East African Community as you know. But also under the guidance of His Excellency, the President, we have now assented to the African Free Trade Area market. Therefore, we can access the whole continent. 

What we have observed is that there are few traders and few Ugandans, who know what is happening in these markets. We are doing two things: we have developed a very strong education and communication strategy, to make sure all Ugandans know that these markets are available and what they demand.

However, Mr Speaker, I would like to mention that for us to access these markets, we must increase production. I am confident that with efforts that Government has put in place - Operation Wealth Creation, the Parish Model, among others - we will be able to increase production. When production is increased, we must have standards of the products to put in the market; we must add value.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request that at an appropriate time, you give us time to come to elaborate and share with the House, colleagues as people’s representatives our industrialisation strategy, the big agenda to develop our country from where we are now, to a modern economy. We have a policy in place and I think if we shared, we can have inputs from you to help us really push this agenda of industrialisation. We want to educate people and to communicate what we have in these markets.

There was an issue on the cost. In addition to reducing other costs of doing business - transport, the fight against corruption, making sure that we have a one stop centre so that when our investors come, they invest here and have their businesses registered in a few days - we have also put money, as the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said in UDB. 

However, the question has been and as the committee observed, how will somebody in Karamoja or Kabale access this UDB money? UDB is working out a policy and a strategy, to make sure we work with other institutions and access this money.

As you recall, those of you who were in the 10th Parliament, in addition, to the She 400 billion put in UDB, we also increased money to the Microfinance Support Centre. That if you cannot access money under UDB, you can access money from the Microfinance Support Centre; going down to the emyooga money and now, to the Parish Model.

Somebody raised an issue on import and export substitutions. As the NRM Government, our vision is to have everything we are using here in Uganda, produced here in Uganda. That is what we mean by import substitution. It is not only to produce what we use here but also to produce enough to export outside the country. Until we do that, that is when we will actually bridge the gap between the balance of payment: how much we are importing vis-à-vis how much we are exporting.

As we come to present this paper on industrialisation, we will be able to demonstrate our vision, agenda and have input from you, the views that we can actually come up with in order to have a proper import substitution and export promotion –(Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the minister is talking about import substitution. Indeed, the country has been mobilised to produce so that we can save foreign exchange. 

However, you are aware that several times, we have grown a lot of maize and lost market so much that the farmers got discouraged. Right now, we have a crisis in Busoga. Can the Government, apart from mobilising the country to grow more and implement the policy of import substitution, also, develop a way of absorbing any excess production? Whenever, we have a harvest, we have a crisis and farmers have continued to turn to us, as leaders, asking us what is it that the Government is going to do now that you have given us maize seeds? 

They have planted maize and fortunately enough, there has been a bit of rain and they are going to get good harvest of maize as we did the other year. When we ask you where can we take the maize? You are also as stuck as those villagers. Can we be told that the Government is now strategically developing a policy in handling excess production? Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, hon. Ogwal. You have asked a question and you have attempted to answer it. We are really working out to address that issue. For example, on the issue of sugar in Busoga, the strategy is to have a processing plant that produces industrial sugar because the amount of money you get from industrial sugar is actually more than the money you get from the sugar itself. Therefore, we have a strategy and I think the strategy is industrialisation. 

Second last, there is an issue –(Interruption) 

MS BETTY AOL: Mr Speaker, there is a scenario where our people produce rice yet we have a lot of rice coming from Tanzania. Sometimes, because we have not helped our people much, the quality of rice which comes from Tanzania or from Pakistan cannot compete with our quality. How do you handle that? How can you help our people better? They remain with their rice in the stores and people prefer to buy Tanzanian rice. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the debate is becoming very interesting and there are fundamental issues being asked. 

I would request that we probably have a separate debate on these trade issues - on issues of industrialisation - so that the Members can ask questions, we answer them and we, together, build consensus on how to move forward. 

That question that the hon. “America Online” has asked needs a whole paper. I can make a statement on that - with your permission - at another time. 

There was an issue of the border; the main gate and the community gate. I come from the border. I have participated in this cross-border trade. I would like to assure the Member who asked that we will handle this particular issue. The main gate is open. The community gate is going to be handled. 

Somebody talked about and emphasised the point of peace and security as the anchor for trade and economic growth. I agree with the Member that without peace and security, you cannot have robust trade or economic growth. So, all our efforts should focus on maintaining peace and security. 

I am glad that all of us know the role that the NRM Government, led by His Excellency the President, is playing not only in Uganda but in the region. 

On the policy on leather, it will be coming –(Interjection) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you do not access the microphone before I have allowed you. Please, sit. 

MR BAHATI: We really cannot underscore the importance of e-commerce. We have seen what we have learnt - and I agree with the Member that we need to work on the strategy of lowering the cost of internet to aid us in e-commerce. You have seen how we have been helped by companies like Jumia and others. 

The ministry of ICT is coming here with a strategy on how we are going to lower the cost of internet. 

I would like to end by thanking the industrialists. When we were faced with this pandemic, some of the companies diverted their manufacturing lines to focus on essentials - to produce the goods that we needed to fight Covid-19. For example, the sanitisers as well as the masks we are putting on have been produced by our local indigenous manufacturers. I would like to thank them for the contribution they have made during this time. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.15
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Many of us have travelled outside Uganda and returned at Entebbe International Airport, exhausted after transiting through many countries. This applies to tourists too. 

I wouldn’t like people arriving, including tourists, being subjected to long sitting and waiting for a test. Everything possible will be done so that if a test has to be taken at all, then that person can be released and the results can follow. That is what I would propose to the national committee and that matter has already been discussed by the Prime Minister here. In two weeks, there will be an answer to that particular concern. 

I associate myself with the proposal of the committee. This committee was very kind to us, as a ministry, when we went before them. I thank them for their professionalism and the way they handle people. Thank you, Mr Chairman. (Applause)

On the levy of $10 from the Uganda Tourism Board Act (CAP 333), I associate myself and I agree with this proposal. I will have to negotiate, again, with the committee. They are proposing 70 per cent to be deposited with Post Bank Uganda, some 20 per cent to Uganda Tourism Board and 10 per cent to URA. I think that is a little unkind to Uganda Tourism Board but we will renegotiate and see whether we can have a bigger percentage than 20 per cent. That is subject to discussion and persuasion. 

On the question of fencing – the issue of human-wildlife conflict is a concerning one to all of us. Some work has been done at Queen Elizabeth National Park. If you are travelling from Lake Katwe, Katungulu going to Kasese, you can see the electric wire on your right. 

If you go to Oyam District, in Murchison Falls, a lot has also been done. That has given some relief to our people. 

Fortunately, the Government took a loan and some of that money will be used to erect another electric fence in the areas which have got the human-wildlife conflict. It is a matter of time. We will improve and make sure that this conflict is minimised – not necessarily eradicated but minimised. 

In the 2019 Uganda Wildlife Act, the regulations are fortunately ready now and, therefore, we shall start to compensate cases which will have been proven and where UWA will be liable. We will be able to compensate our people whose crops and lives will have been adversely affected. 

On Ajai Wildlife Reserve, on the White Rhino, we intend to translocate the rhinos into that area plus Kidepo. It is a matter of time and we shall have translocated rhinos from Luweero to Kidepo and Ajai. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Mr Chairperson, your report has been praised and I would like you to just request the House to adopt it.

5.21
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Mpaka Mwine): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I make the request, I would like to thank the Speaker of Parliament and Parliament for the support that we were given as a committee throughout this process. (Applause)

I would also like to thank honourable members and staff of the committee. Some people referred to this report as a report of the chairperson. Just to avoid problems, I would like to request honourable members who are present to stand up for recognition. This is a report of the whole Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. I also thank Members of the 11th Parliament. We kindly request you to adopt our report. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the question that I now put for your decision is for adoption of the report of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on building a more resilient sector: lessons learnt from a socio-economic impact assessment of the COVID-19 pandemic on the tourism, trade and industry sector. That is the motion for your decision. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the time is as it states. I am also advised that there is a function, where we are going to receive our medallists. Something has been arranged for them and I am supposed to attend. 

The matter that is coming next is quite substantial, replete with a minority report and that is going to take quite a bit of time and I need it fresh, when Members can debate it. 

On the next motion there; if the presenter of the motion can promise me – Well, it is actually running late. Honourable members, you will forgive me because there is the motion on item five, which we could have accommodated. It is “Motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to reverse the directive requiring local governments to remit all local revenues to the Consolidated Fund”. This is another substantive motion. I think it was proposed and adopted and there are issues with it. That has been the situation but I do not know when these changes are going to be made. So, it is not a very small motion.

Therefore, I am going to propose that we pause today’s matters here. Tomorrow, we will start with item five, we will spend time and finish it and then we deal with the other motions. Matters might come up, which we also need to handle.

Tomorrow, we should finish what is on the Order Paper. Honourable members, in the circumstances - I do not know if I have not been briefed whether you are invited; at least I have been invited for this dinner. If you are not invited, I will represent you effectively and I will report tomorrow what I have been able to do on your behalf. (Laughter) 

House adjourned to tomorrow, 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.25 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 8 September 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 



     
