Monday, 15 September 2014

Parliament met at 10.20 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. When we passed the Bill - was it the Finance Bill or the Excise Duty Bill - there was an issue of commencement date, which we were not able to handle but we might have time to find a process of going back to that when it is properly done. The issue is when we made those alterations in the taxes, we did not pronounce ourselves on the commencement date, which would affect what has already transpired in the past. 

I looked at the provisional collection of laws and it does not make provision for actualising or legalising what transpires before the Act comes into place, which means there would be need to refund the monies that have already been collected, which would not be beneficial to the government, to us and the people because the people from whom the taxes have already been collected will not benefit from it. It will instead be other people benefiting from it. So we will find an appropriate way of handling this at a later stage.

Honourable members, today 15 September, Parliament of Uganda joins the international community to observe the International Day of Democracy. This international day provides a special opportunity for parliamentarians around the world to engage citizens, particularly young people, in discussions about Parliament and democracy.

The theme for this year is, “Engaging youth on democracy.” I believe that this theme will resonate with many people. The youth must be at the centre of efforts to build democracy and at the forefront of movement for change.

As we commemorate this day, we must listen to the increasing demand for an end to corruption, we must create more jobs and promote and protect justice and fair share of political power inclusive of dialogue.

Honourable members, we must appreciate that democracies are not born overnight nor built in a year or by housing one or two elections. They require sustained and painstaking work yet once begun, there can be no going back. Therefore, in observing this year’s International Day of Democracy, let us use all our creativity to advance this mission and let us work to bring democracy, education to all and in particular to our youth.

For that matter, a motion is going to be moved in commemoration of that and we will have a debate on that motion straight away. Thank you very much.
 
MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO OBSERVE THE INTERNATIONAL DAY OF DEMOCRACY, 2014

10.21
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to observe the International Day of Democracy under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament (2012). The seconder of this motion is hon. John Mulimba.

“WHEREAS Uganda is a member of the Inter-Parliamentary Union and;

WHEREAS the Inter-Parliamentary Union is promoting the International Day of Democracy through its member parliaments in 162 countries around the world and close to 100 parliaments have organised activities for the international day in previous years;

APPRECIATING that democracy is a universally cherished value based on the freely expressed way of people to determine their own destiny;

RECALLING that the United Nations General Assembly in resolution A/62/7 of 2007 encouraged governments to strengthen national programs devoted to the promotion and consolidation of democracy and further resolved that 15th September of each year should be observed as the International Day of Democracy;

NOTING that the political objective under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy in our Constitution is to the effect that the state shall be based on democratic principles, which empower and encourage the active participation of all citizens at all levels in their own government;

AWARE that the International Day of Democracy will be celebrated on 15th September as it has been every year since 2008 and this year’s international day provides a special opportunity for parliaments around the world to engage citizens, particularly young people, in discussions about parliaments and democracy;

FURTHER AWARE that this year’s theme, ‘Engaging youth on democracy’ highlights the challenges and opportunities for young people to engage in democratic processes;

CONSIDERING that persons between the ages of 15 and 25 constitute a fifth of the world’s population and in many developing countries, the proportion is even higher with the majority of young people today living in low and middle income countries;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:
    1. It takes cognisance of the theme of the International Day of Democracy and urges Government to engage the youth in the democratic development of their nation.
    2. It expresses its collective appreciation to the Inter-Parliamentary Union for promoting worldwide parliamentary dialogue and cooperation among peoples and for the firm establishment of representative democracy and further for annually organising the arrangements of the International Day of Democracy across the globe.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by the honourable member for Samia Bugwe North, honourable member for Butambala, honourable member for Tororo and honourable member for Kasilo. The motion is properly before the House. Honourable member, would you like to speak to your motion?

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today is indeed a very special day in the political processes, not only of Uganda or Africa but the entire world. Democracy has been defined by a multitude of academicians, politicians and those who love and add to the history of knowledge. However, one particular definition has kept alive and we will never like to forget the words of the historical man, Abraham Lincoln when he clearly stated that democracy is: “A Government for the people, by the people and for the people”. 

These words always remind us that as a people of the globe, governance processes are not about individuals, a set of a given grouping or nation, but about the interest of all; not the interests of some. 

Now, in our contest in Uganda, we recall our history, that we have had so far nine presidents and the challenge has been clear that since our independence, we have not seen a peaceful transition from one leader to another; that has eluded us as a country. What has been happening is that we kill each other, we see bloodshed; we have a regime and more from one regime to another. That has characterised our political history and has involved a lot of bloodshed and loss of lives and limbs. 

Democracy would be the cure of such a historical challenge to our country where the citizens elect their leaders; they should have confidence in the elections process and this process happens not just as a periodic symbol of democracy but as a real act of democracy where the citizens participate in elections with confidence that indeed their chosen leader will lead them. 

Now, we have heard on different occasions that about 72 percent of the registered voters in the previous election did not show up. That in itself reveals a lot in terms of what the citizens believe of their lack of confidence in our electoral process today. I know we have been working and praying on the intended constitutional and electoral amendments. How we wish, and I believe many Ugandans out there wish that we would have an electoral arrangement where we have elections carried out by an electoral commission that is trusted and supported by the entire nation. 

This is so critical because then people wouldn’t have to begin thinking of resorting to violence to chase government out of power. That would be a departure. But that is not possible when the same electoral commission is largely established by a one-sided process. It is like going for a football match, and one side chooses the referee, the linesmen and the match managers and then we think that we shall have a free and fair game. 

Mr Speaker, if Uganda as a country together resolves that indeed we can have an election process that we believe in, and have our people confident in the electoral laws then there would be no fear for resorting to violence. That should never happen again. We have suffered for it and it took us back many years backward. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, there is a common adage that you cannot give what you do not have. We believe that the democracy that we hope to enjoy as a nation must be the democracy that is first enjoyed within our political organisations. When an individual sets out to run within a given party or as an individual, that should be embraced because that way, the party is not only practicing democracy but it is telling the nation that we are advocates of democracy and that we do not just talk of it, but we practice it and live it. 

Therefore, when any Ugandan, or even the Rt Hon. Patrick Amama Mbabazi wants to run for presidency, I thought that in this case, the NRM party would welcome it and embrace it and say, “If there are other candidates, please come on board”. But what we saw and have heard, I do not think is an indicator of democracy within the party that we can say that it is democratic and therefore can transfer democracy at the national scene. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, democracy also refers to economic justice. Economic justice refers to so many issues; but let me address one. The young people in this country have been struggling to raise the issue of unemployment. Unemployment is such a challenge that right now, we estimate that 83 percent are affected in our country. That certainly undermines democracy because when you have a large percentage of the young people hardly respecting government programmes – because they think they have been abandoned. They have no reason whatsoever to owe any allegiance or commitment to the government. 

So, as we go through our democratic process and progress as a nation, we should also think about the critical issues that affect the young people because the theme today is about democracy and the youth. When we talk about HIV, inadequacies in our education system, and unemployment, we must think, how do these relate with democracy in our country? And certainly there is a strong connection as the foundation of the principles of our country and our values and therefore I believe and pray that government, parliamentarians, and the nation at large holds and cherishes the values and principles of our country that strengthen and enable the young people not only to participate in the democratic processes of our country, but also to enjoy the developmental programs, enjoy the aspirations, the dreams that they have always had so that they do not remain just citizens at the periphery on the way to achieving them, but cardinal and central citizens of our country. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion that Parliament takes cognisance of the theme of International Day of Democracy and we urge Government to engage the youth in the democratic development of their nation. Further, we express collective appreciation to the Inter-Parliamentary Union for promoting worldwide dialogue and cooperation among peoples for the firm establishment of representative democracy.

Mr Speaker, statistics available show that globally, the proportion of the youth is over 50 percent and particularly, in developing countries, Uganda being one of those, it is well above 50. Space has been created for the involvement of the youth in the democratic participation and in the democratic governance of our society. A number of provisions in the Constitutions give room to the youth to participate.

However, in Uganda, we need to look at our trajectory and see where we began from. We need to look at our starting point as a nation. You know that at the time of independence, Uganda had about – I am told – six million people. The percentage of the youth then could not have been as it is now. 

When the NRM took power and during the making of the 1995 Constitution, a number of provisions were made to entrench the participation of the youth in both political and the social management of society. But we still have a challenge to the extent that in some areas, we either have contradictions or we have curtailed the involvement of the youth even as we create room for their participation.

I want to address myself to the provisions of the Constitution under Article 102, which curtails the young people in this nation from participating in elective democracy for the highest office of the land; the office of the president. Look at Article 102 (2)(b). Whereas, we define the youth as people between the ages of 18 and 35 in the Constitution, it requires one to be above the age of 35 years to participate as a presidential candidate. And in the case of chairpersons of local governments, there is also an impediment. There is still a requirement that for anybody to participate in elective politics for the office of the chairperson of LC V, one has to be well over 35 years.

Mr Speaker, I want to urge this House that now that we are passing this resolution to deepen and further the integration of the young people in democratic participation, there is need to amend those provisions in the Local Government Act to allow the young men participate in taking the leadership of the district. It is unfair for the requirement to stop at 35 years. Otherwise, does it mean that whereas the Constitution permits Members of Parliament to be people of above only 18 years – the local government, cannot allow somebody of 35 years and below to take part? Does it mean that when one qualifies to be a Member of Parliament, they cannot qualify to be a district chairperson?

But even when you look at the law relating to the election of the Lord Mayor, which is a much higher office, the age stipulated is far lower than the one stated for a chairperson of a district local government.

So, Mr Speaker, since we have room to deal with a number of constitutional amendments, now that we are going to approve this motion; now that we need to open for the youth and young people in this country to participate and engage in democratic management, there is need for us to find space to amend the provisions of the Constitution that hinder the youth from participating in the elective politics at the various leadership levels. We should even be thinking of the provisions relating to the elections of the youth to Parliament. This is important because while we all know that the youth are now the majority, the issue of affirmative action must have a beginning and an end. We should be focusing on trying to allow these members who represent the youth to also participate in the adult suffrage elections.

Mr Speaker, I strongly believe that the involvement of the young people in the management of the social, political and economic affairs of this nation, will further the development of this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion is for a resolution of Parliament to observe the International Day of Democracy in 2014 and it urges Parliament to resolve as follows: That it takes cognisance of the theme of the International Day of Democracy and urge Government to engage the youth in the democratic development of their nation; two, it expresses its collective appreciation to the Inter-Parliamentary Union for promoting worldwide parliamentary dialogue and cooperation among the peoples and for the firm establishment of representative democracy; and further for annually organising the arrangement of the International Day of Democracy across the globe. That is the motion for your debate, which opens now.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I thank you. The hon. Gerald Karuhanga tried to define democracy and a lot of people quote the former USA President, Mr Abraham Lincoln. But I get the practical definition of this term from the former Governor of New York, Michael who said that democracy differs in brief definitions, but that in essence, democracy is only meaningful if those in the mainstream can speak for the voiceless and the voiceless can be heard.

We can define this term in academic terms – I had the benefit of studying democracy while I was doing my first degree. But to bring it home, I want to say that it is difficult to build a democracy unless people learn to be tolerant; unless people can accommodate; and unless people are ready to listen to views that they fundamentally hate. That is for me, the maximum of democracy and human rights has been and will continue to like a man who said “I hate to hear what you say but I will die to ensure that you speak what I hate to hear.” And as you may know, a lot of people cannot live by that. They want to always be praised. And for them, democracy is only meaningful when they emerge winners. Those of you who ever lived in Makerere’s former Northcote Hall – I am happy never to have lived there – residents there used to say, “We either win or the others lose.”

So, for as long as that is the spirit of democracy, there will never be any meaning to the definition of this term, democracy. 

It also means that there will never be democracy unless people want to have it in their homes. And there will never be democracy unless people have it in their political parties. Most political parties in Uganda are vertically and horizontally challenged – including the one I belong to. I have listened to very undemocratic opinions by the members of the Democratic Party. But I also have listened to many intolerant views by members of the FDC and of late, I have had something to – Members of known Parliament go to a conference and make a resolution of a sole candidature and thereafter you come back to cry in the evening that there is no democracy? That is scandalous in another world. I would like to task you on any single day – and somebody who is the head of state to also say – I mean as Henry Truman said, “The buck stops with me.” It means that when you are a leader, you are supposed to stop undemocratic tendencies even if they favour you. 

My friend and good personality, honourable Amama Mbabazi, has been a victim. What is wrong with an individual saying that “I want to stand for the Presidency?” Even if you express that, there are people who wish he should be. How can NRM claim to be a democratic party when it can gag a prime minister and Secretary-General of that party because of a mere wish to contest? Another date it will be you, honourable Speaker, saying you want to stand as president; it will happen to you. They will say we cannot hear it, therefore if we want to speak and live for democracy, let us bring it home. Let it reign where it most matters. 

The other element I want to speak about concerns the youths and democracy - I have spent a lifetime since I left school and since I was a young man working with the youth and inculcating values of democracy with young people and I have been fighting dictatorship. We have been fighting a group of men and women who for so many years told the country that there is something called individual merit and those parties were bad. That they were the source of problems of this country; later on we were with you, Mr Speaker, by that time in the trenches and I thank you for having been a contributor at that desk level, to destroy the propaganda that parties were bad. By that time, we were on the same page. But men and women today are there who are now benefiting from that effort; they now belong to a party called NRM which in essence was not a party. Also young people are challenged. 

Today when you speak to many young people in this country - one day I was at a rally in Kasubi during the “Walk to work” campaign and there was this young man with a placard; “I am fed up of life, if anything can happen, God come for me.” 

After the rally, I had an interaction with this young man and this is his story; this is a young boy who got a second upper in political science and had spent five years without a job. He had read all papers and applied for every job, then he asked me; bwana Muwanga, what can a young man do? If I am supposed to study, I studied; I applied for a job – and he was without a job for five years. For me democracy means nothing if I don’t have a job and for me a job is about putting food and bread on the dining table. He had nothing to leave home for. He said as leaders go out of your way, but now I heard the way people are engaging young people is in crime prevention. They are making them jump up and down, how high? Crime prevention; they are teaching them how to shoot the range and how to shoot people. That is not the best way to engage young people in a democracy. Let us live at home. 

I have heard patriotic clubs in secondary schools and tertiary institutions funded on taxpayers’ money. These patriotic clubs in another democratic setting would have been very useful but all they preach to them is a one party propaganda; “Hate these parties they are criminals, they are bad, they are terrible. Hate FDC, DP, even NRM members who don’t support the president.” 

If that is what we tell young people, then our patriotic clubs are lost for good and our prayers will always be; if we are going to have a democracy in this country, let it start home. Then we have a party whose chairman and presidential candidate is freely voted for and others are given an opportunity to contest. But it started the other day when Ruhinda Maguru tried to be president, people said including the Secretary General he is here; he was among the very people who were blocking Ruhinda Maguru. So as long as we practice such things, they will come to hurt us. By that time, it was a Ruhinda Maguru; today it is a Patrick Amama Mbabazi. The next time it will be you Mr Oulanyah the Speaker of this Parliament. The other day it will be General Moses Ali unless we are going to die without any ambitions. 

Therefore let democracy ring home. Let us not use our privileged positions at any time to block any one even if we think he doesn’t matter a lot. If we practice those small things the next time they will hurt us. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

10.51
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the member who has proposed the motion and I feel that as women, we appreciate the prevalence of democracy. I believe that a person who has taken some lessons in democracy - even in Britain, the women started to vote just in 1924. So you find that denial of democracy denies inclusiveness and we believe that democracy is paramount for a country. But in democracy, we don’t only mean contesting elections, but a democracy must mean that people have something to do. 

Democracy implies social, political and economic liberty. Are people ready to do what they want in case it does not break the law? So leaving that involvement you find that democratic countries can enhance international relationships. You find that other countries where democracies have not prevailed; it is really hindering their progress, international relationships, and hindering people’s progress. 

So I feel that the mover of this motion has done it at the right time. The rights of people when we talk of democracy, a person must be free. The youth should be free, but I would also like to say that they should enjoy their democracy when they are also leaving others to enjoy theirs. I am a person who is very passionate about youth and I will concur with the MP for Samia Bugwe North when he said that the youth inclusiveness; the liberties of the youth to be on the table of making decisions and of being voted like on the LC V. I think is a very good thing. 

Further still, democracy promotes the freedom to express one’s ability, ones will and the liberty of hope. When people expect elections, I think I will inform my friend from Butambala, when there is a democracy, you don’t show your expectations before time when there is an elected leader. For example in Uganda, you will know that after five years, you will contest. So you don’t just ban your charcoal stove before time. That is the goodness of a democracy because you will regulate the times when we are to go for elective politics and the time when we are supposed to work. So I feel that if you also have those intentions, do it at the right time. Democracies can promote interactions, global unity, and that is why you find that we have also countries which are in unions because there is democracy and that is why those which are not democratic are not encompassed in that union. So I feel that the mover of the motion has done it at the right time, but my concern is that people should not only be free when they don’t have what to do. You don’t only have a right to elect you should also have a right to job opportunities; you should have a right to contest and to promote law and order. I thank you.

10.56
MS CHRISTINE ABIA BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you so much, Mr speaker. When I look at democracy in our country and the involvement of the young people, the first thing that comes to my mind is whether our young people are capable of participating, engaging and sustaining democracy in our country. Why do I say that? For example, if our young people are to participate in elective democracy, do we have the financial ability to do so? Because what is happening in our country right now is that without money, decision and your choice - look at a situation where a young man wants to run, for example, in your constituency. The question that he will be asking, “What is the strength of the Speaker in financial terms?” “How many sub-counties are here in this constituency?” “How many youth groups are here?” “How many women groups are here?” and the sustainability of the “Kitu kidogo” syndrome. Now you ask, “I am a young graduate and I have this ambition. Will it be possible for me to activate myself to engage in a democratic process, for example, the elections?” So, how do we help the young people to engage in democracy without necessarily putting money at the forefront of democracy, at the forefront of politics and in anything that we do? 

Hon. Gerald Karuhanga was talking about unemployment. The age segment six to 21 in a country is supposed to be the time frame for education. At six to 21, you are supposed to be in school but what is happening in this country? From six to about 30, people are not in school but they are just out there. Look at the unbelievable school dropout rates. 

In Uganda here, you do not talk about young people but vandalised young people because their worlds are vulnerable. We do not have faith in our young people anymore. The President is on the record saying that arts courses are useless. How many graduates come out of colleges with degrees in arts? Is that to say that they are useless? Therefore, what are the strategies for you as Government to see that these young people who have done these arts courses have a livelihood strategy? If democracy is majority rule, it should also imply that the resources of this country should go to the majority who are the young people. Is that the case? Obviously, not. How do you involve young people in a democratic process when they are on empty stomachs? 

We need to be sustainable and that is why, Mr Speaker, this government and country is using young people as mercenaries when elections come. They don them in yellow t-shirts, blue t-shirts, red t-shirts and they run day in day out for a full month missing a whole month in school hours and we cannot celebrate this. We cannot say that we will be a democratic country. What is the meaning of democracy in our country? Is it just that we should vote for one person? 

I want to ask my friend to actually develop a concept note about internal democracy in our parties as far as the young people are concerned. Mr Speaker, in my own party, the FDC, my president called and sat me down and said that, “You cannot go to the Pan-African Parliament because you are still a young girl.” I asked myself, “Mr President Sir, what do you mean that I am still young?” I stopped being young ages ago and it was on record that, “You know Christine, you still have a long future.” And now my friend, hon. Amama Mbabazi, the Prime Minister, was being scathed and why? Because it was alleged that he has an ambition. 

Now if at the Prime Minister’s age, his ambitions are being gagged, what about me? The only thing that they will be telling me is that I am so young and I have a future. That is not correct. What happens in the developed world now is that most of the CEOs of very serious corporates are between the age bracket of 28 to 40. Why? This is the age when they maximise their abilities and between 18 to 35, you are dreaming. When you dream in your youthful days, you are giving a definition of how your old age and adult life will be like. 

Unfortunately now, our young people have been reduced to a state of hopelessness and I do not think there are Ugandans who go out there with pride that we have a calibre of young people who will take over this country because it seems that the older generation wants to sit there because there seems to be no exit strategy for them. If our young people were to be taken seriously and if we think as a country, we will be able to compete in this region, the first and most immediate thing to do is a deliberate investment strategy in our young people. 

I do not know how many drop outs are in your constituency, Mr Speaker, but in my own district of Arua, it is a heart breaking situation and that is why these lives are “vandalised” by alcohol and drugs; that is why the young people are a serious target segment for criminal activity. Why would a young man who has reported that I would rather die – why would you let him go into terrorist activities? This is because this is a life that has been vandalised and there is no hope. 

So, I think that we pray so that the young people should be involved and we must look at our own attitude as the older people towards the young people and two, to secure their livelihoods, three, to ensure that there is collective responsibility in upholding and investing in the young people. I thank you.

10.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Dr James Mutende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the mover of the motion. Certainly, it is timely and of course, we all agree that the current NRM Government is the one that has spearheaded the youth movement more than any other government in the past and this is on record.

But mine is a comment mainly on one issue that the mover for the motion raised. That he was concerned that in the last series of elections in Uganda, the voter turn up has been very low and he in fact said 40 percent abstained from voting. I just want to inform the member that we all have a tendency around here to gauge ourselves against countries like the US, the UK and others in terms of measuring our democracy. 

Let me give you a bit of history on the American elections. In fact, it is on record that the highest ever voter turn up was 81.2 percent and this was for Abraham Lincoln way back in 1860. If you go to the others, in 1924, there was a man who came on called Calvin Coolidge who had only 48.9 percent turn up. In other words, over 50 percent did not vote at all. The current President, Barrack Obama, in 2008 had only 57 percent turn up which is less than ours. Even in the 2012 elections, he had about 57.6 percent which shows that just about 42 percent did not turn up. 

So, I think that when we measure democracy on just voter turn up and then we begin gauging our own democracy and saying that we are not doing so well, it is a sweeping statement. Voting in any election in the world and particularly in a free democracy and you can comfortably say that about Uganda is a purely voluntary process. You get up and go and vote but if you choose to stay at home, it does not necessarily mean that you do not want democracy to prevail or that you hate elections. You simply have decided not to go and vote and in any case, you achieved the turn-up. If you do not go and vote, it means possibly you believe that after all, even if I do not go and vote, my party is popular enough – or you will simply say, I do not mind whichever way it goes. We are in a democracy and once elections come and they go through, which ever leader comes, we shall go with that. I want to give the mover of the motion that bit of information. I thank you very much.

10.05
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First I would like to thank the Inter-Parliamentary Union for making sure that every year we have activities on the 15th September to mark issues of democracy and I would like to thank my colleague for moving the motion.

In line with this year’s theme, “Engaging the youth on democracy”, the situation in Uganda today is simply unacceptable. First of all, we are aware that the demographic structure of our population is such that the pyramid is so wide at the base. It is too wide; the young population constitute the majority of the entire national population and yet as my colleague earlier said, most of the focus is not actually planning for the young group.

Mr Speaker, we are all utterly concerned about the level of unemployment of the youth especially where every organisation is talking about a certain number of years as a minimum for experience. Where does somebody get experience from? You have the knowledge but every organisation is talking about three or five years’ experience. So these youth run the risk of perpetually being unemployed because there is nowhere to get the experience from.

Mr Speaker, life is being made difficult. Some time last week, we argued here about certain proposals in the national budget, which would otherwise complicate the already complicated unemployment situation in regard to taxes.

Mr Speaker, we forewarned Government that proceeding with certain unacceptable taxes would simply complicate the unemployment problem that we already have and there is serious concern. Talk about democracy and everybody’s mind rings to electioneering. 

My colleague from Iganga did say that you have to state your ambitions at the right time. One would wonder when she started expressing her ambition but the fact of the matter is that in our current political situation, immediately after swearing in at whatever level; LCV chairman or the MP, the ambitions for the next election are already expressed. So while we are seated here, honourable colleague from Iganga, people are busy moving in Iganga. They started moving long ago trying to grab your seats. Do not condemn them because that is now the practice. 

We are concerned that the youth by and large are actually misled. They are being used mainly for political experience. You know this tokenism of carrying cash, commercialised politics of carrying sacks. Because they think youth believe in seeing the exact thing at a particular time, sacks of cash surface to confuse them.

Mr Speaker, I think it is not proper for us to engage our youth in that way. We must have meaningful programmes that can enable them to make their own money rather than duping them with sacks of cash. Commercialised politics in Uganda has simply undone our democracy.

Colleagues, issues of cash in electioneering have become very troublesome to the extent that you go to the constituency and even if you have very beautiful ideas, they will ask you, and so what? That question, so what is referring to what are you leaving behind? Can you check your pocket? That is what they mean. “Okay you have spoken very well, so what?”

It is very damaging and we must guard against commercialisation of politics. It is not just about the youth only, even internally here honourable colleagues it is unfortunate. Members alluded to the fact that yes everybody can have an ambition. Whoever expresses an ambition for a particular office should not be treated as an enemy. You should not, in your constituency, start looking at those who are aspiring for your position as your foes. 

To the contrary, if you really cherish democracy, encourage as many and if somebody has expressed ambition, that is your friend and colleague. If you are the MP at a function, please be courteous and introduce that person to the gathering if there is such an opportunity. Introduce somebody who has expressed ambition. It happens and some of us do that.

Why would one start castigating another person from within your party who is simply expressing ambition? Even in situations where some people are just perceived to be expressing ambition, they are vilified, they are haunted and then you start seeing cash flying everywhere that please, this is a one man project, here is Shs 4 million each, go to the sub-counties and popularise one candidate. It is very unfortunate.

We enacted a Public Order Management Act here and if you are beating a certain drum that please the ears of the powers that be, the Act does not apply but if you are beating drums that do not serve the interests of the powers that be, the Act is very sharp.

I can assure you that at the time when we were enacting the Act, we forewarned colleagues on the other side that whereas you might think that the Act is meant to curtail or gag the Opposition, for us we are used to it. We are used to the tear gas, the beatings and the inconvenience. Time has come when some of you who may actually be on a black list to be thrown out and the Act will apply to you with heavier weight than it applies to the Opposition.

We must have balanced application of laws. This business of Kiboko squad - if you are talking about a democracy, please learn to listen to other divergent views. Why must you start using illegal militias to serve your interests? Because you do not want others to speak, you say, let us have crime prevention. Honestly speaking, this theme of engaging the youth on democracy - I do not know how our youth will benefit from this because by and large, they have been ignored and they are instead used to serve the interests of those who want to maintain their positions.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already picked some people. Looking at the time, we also have Bills to handle. I am now going to ask the Chief Opposition Whip to speak from this side and then the Prime Minister from this side.

11.14
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I beg to be protected. This arm is not due to domestic violence. It is the challenges that all housewives go through almost on a daily basis so if you do not get an accident, it is by the grace of God.

We want to thank the movers of this motion for bringing to this House an opportunity to discuss the concept of democracy and how it applies or benefits the youths social group in our country. I and the current Prime Minister of Uganda were in the Constituent Assembly and there was a genuine oneness during the process of the debate for the formulation of the new Constitution that Uganda must bury the past. The ugly past then was the violent change of government and we thought that the 1995 Constitution would be a gateway to a new era in this country and I believe we were genuine on that. But I am heartbroken; I was at the forefront fighting monolithic political systems and every element of dictatorship and militarism in our politics. But as I speak today, it looks as if my efforts brought very little fruits. Little in the sense that we have multi-partism, which is playing its role and helping to make the environment look democratic. But what we are yet to see is whether that democracy is real. I feel there is still lack of genuine democracy and this will continue as long as the government continues to control the economic sector, the politics and other social sectors of this country; there will be no democracy. 

I am amazed that history repeats itself. I was old enough to follow events during the UPC Government and the population condemned the late John Kirunda for threatening people with arrest warrants. I lived to see the Public Order Management Bill being debated on the floor of this Parliament in an attempt to resurrect Article 269 which was expunged from the Constitution. We tried to tell people that that was the weapon they will use against anybody; whether you are in opposition or government side. People did not understand our argument. 

Now, I am very happy, and I beg the Prime Minister to forgive me, but I am very happy to see his supporters being persuaded by the same policemen that we were complaining about. I am very happy about that. There is no way you could have understood our argument until it happened to you. And you are now in and out of court because of the brutality of the police. But we told you here and you could not understand it. 

I would like to tell everybody, regardless of where you are, even within your party, there is competition. But there will come a time when there are certain individuals in the party that will position themselves to own the party and will use it against others who support the same party. 

Mr Speaker, I am a testimony standing before you. I defended the image of the Uganda People’s Congress; I defended the image of the late President Obote; I defended the record of the UPC Government, but I was the first victim when multi-partism returned to Uganda. I humbly bowed out and left the party. But that is what they call freedom of association. 

So I do not see anything wrong in anybody trying to contest for any position. I do not see anything wrong for anybody to cross from one party to another. Otherwise, today, I would not be in the FDC; I would still be in UPC – including you, Mr Speaker –(Laughter)– including John Nasasira here. Hon. Omach who is sitting there in front; they were all UPC cadres and I know them –(Laughter) The Rt hon. Prime Minister and my elder brother, remained chairman of UPC and refused to join NRM; that is what it should be. Politics is vibrant when there is open competition. 

Mr Speaker, I think we owe this country an apology. For us to pretend to be pursuing constitutionalism and to pretend that Uganda is a democratic society; you moved around the country with money telling people that for the next election, there will be only one candidate for a particular post. Who on earth decreed that? The Constitution has not stated it; it is not even implied. So who are you to tell me that nobody should stand against me in Dokolo? Or that nobody should stand against the President in this country?  Or that nobody should become speaker for that matter? 

I was so depressed the other day when the shadow minister of defence circulated a list of 25 leaders who head the security sector in this country. And out of the 25, only two were not from the West. One of them was the current Army Commander, Katumba Wamala and the other one was Angina from the East; that is all. The rest were from the west from the beginning to the end except for those two. 

I am happy the democracy we are looking for is for the fair sharing of whatever limited jobs that we have. What hope are we giving to the youth? If all the top posts are going to one region; what about the other regions; what about the North? I come from the North; there are very many people who are educated in the North; there are very many people who are trained in the military in the North; there are very many policemen from the North. Why are they not occupying one of those top positions? 

There is still lack of fairness and we owe Ugandans an apology for pretending – and we should stop pretending. You should put on your military uniforms, hold your AK47 and walk around and declare this country a military state and then we will all say; that is it; that is what we have been waiting for. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

11.23
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of the motion and to state on behalf of this side of the House that we support the motion. 

I think it is important to have an international day of democracy. As was clearly spelt out by the United Nations when a resolution was passed to create this day, it is important to have such a day in order to promote and uphold the principles of democracy. And as the UN resolution said, democracy is a universal value based on the freely expressed will of the people to determine their own politics; their own economics and their own cultural systems. 

Clearly, it has been an anomaly that in Uganda we did not have it yet because Uganda has been in the leadership of championing democracy, not only in our own borders, but beyond our borders. NRM, of course has always championed democracy, not only in words but also in deed. We went to war in search of democracy. Uganda is now a democratic society. Thanks to the actions of the leadership of NRM. That is a historical fact. (Laughter) I am absolutely sure about that. And indeed as someone said these principles have been clearly captured in our Constitution. 

For example, when you look at the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, they talk about principles and it says that the state shall be based on democratic principles which empower and encourage the active participation of all citizens at all levels in their own governance. And that all the people of Uganda shall have access to leadership positions at all levels subject to the Constitution. And all political – you know this Kyankwanzi Resolution, let me state what I have stated many times before, hon. Ssekikubo. You know the Kyankwanzi resolution about sole candidature is an expression of an opinion that gathered in this meeting. They are absolutely entitled to hold that opinion as anyone else is entitled to have a different opinion. Of course this should be very clear. I have said so before and let me repeat it. (Laughter)

Anyway, all these principles are contained in our own Constitution, a Constitution that the NRM fought for and in this Constitution, we duly recognise the place of women and youth who in the past had not been recognised about their contribution to the wellbeing of our society. Therefore, I think it is right that Uganda like the rest of the world –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. You have women but the recent UN resolution – because we are talking about the UN and democracy – but they took a decision that the report tables annually to the UN on the level of compliance with the democratic principles regarding women, youth and so on should be discussed in Parliament. I want to inform you that I don’t recall, for all my years of being in this Parliament – when the Government of Uganda ever tabled any report it presented to the UN.

Therefore, the principle of ownership and transparency does not exist. Don’t you think that it is high time that the next report to be tabled in the UN should be first debated by this Parliament?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I didn’t know that we are supposed to report to the UN on the enjoyment of rights in Uganda because it is a fact that the emancipation of marginalised groups in Uganda – of women, youth and others, is not only a practice but as I was saying is very clearly enshrined in our Constitution. That is a known fact and recognised the world over that the promotion of women rights in Uganda has been one of the leading achievements of this government.

The fact that we have specified, reserved representation of women in this Parliament – I don’t think – we may have set a precedent, I don’t know if one has followed but certainly we were the first ones to do it. Now as to whether we should or we do or are required to file reports every year to the United Nations about these achievements, I don’t know about that but it is internationally recognised about what we have been able to achieve.

So, Mr Speaker, there are many things that have been said in the course of this debate. My intention is not really to respond to all of them - I don’t think it is absolutely necessary to respond, for instance, on the question raised by my sister, the hon. Cecilia Ogwal, about the need to maintain law and order. Let me just in passing, state what she knows that this democracy we are talking about can only thrive if certain conditions exist in this country. And one of those conditions is peace. We must have peace and we must have law and order if democracy is to thrive. When we come to Parliament, either as Government or even as individuals – we have had many backbenchers coming up with private members’ Bills. When we come to Parliament, we come with proposals and we debate them. I want to suggest that whenever we adopt whatever position, please let us own it collectively, the fact that you had a different opinion notwithstanding. And if you really feel very strong that there is anything that we ought to change, you have the freedom to champion – you know how to do it. For example, you can bring a private member’s motion to actually amend laws; you can do this – I didn’t know the secretary general could speak in whispers.

So, we have done whatever we could as a revolutionary organisation called NRM. We have brought Uganda to where it is. We are determined to move on. So, finally, on the youth – (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Clarification, Mr Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has to accept. If he doesn’t, you have to resume your seat. You have asked five times. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Finally, Mr Speaker –(Interjections)– no, no, I cannot fear clarifications of course - the youth in Uganda occupy a central position in the shaping of the future of this nation. Of course we who have been engaged in struggles for a long time, did so as youth. So, I want to tell the young people of today – I have been sending this message though I will not dwell on it today – you have a generational duty. Your generation has a duty to do everything possible to make Uganda a better place to live in. We have done our bit and we continue to do so. I just want to tell you to be firm and clear and everybody should know that on rights, the Constitution is very clear –(Interjections)– yes, be sure of what you want, know the direction you want to take and move on. Use the law – we have the laws because Uganda is a lawful society – please abide by the laws of Uganda but make sure you understand –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr speaker, the Prime Minister is a very brilliant person and I respect his views very much, but the way he is responding is just glossing over issues; he is giving us the philosophy of the position the youth occupy and then the women in a very casual way and yet he is the one who drives the policy in the government. He is the one who advises the President even on appointments and some of the issues which we raised - because if you are to address the concerns of the youth, we must give hope to them that there will be employment. 

The same government cannot even adequately fund agriculture where you could involve the youth. The same government knows that even after removing a woman vice-president, you never replaced her with another woman. So is it procedurally right that this Prime Minister will continue to meander? I would expect the Prime Minister to reply.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion is moved by the honourable youth representative from western Uganda. It is supported by the Member for Samia Bugwe North. There is no state or government position or opposition position; it simply states that this Parliament resolves to observe the international day of democracy.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, as you observed, I always respect my sister Cecilia and respect her views and we agree in many respects only that she didn’t come along when I suggested the way to go. She is very welcome any time. On youth, certainly, I have been addressing the question of job creation especially for the young people; I will not use this debate today to do that I will have opportunity to do address that. I simply wanted to say; please, especially the young people, my appeal to you is endeavour to equip yourself with knowledge, know what your needs are, know what you need to do in order to propel yourself forward. Have ambition to improve yourself, this is very critical and the conducive environment that this government has created in this country and is determined to consolidate will enable you to achieve your objectives at whatever level you are looking at. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, somebody said that we should not mind the turn history takes, but we should never allow history to make any turn without our participation. For you to participate, you have to be equipped, you have to be schooled and you have to be skilled. You have to know. If you don’t know your participation will be in vain. If you are not educated, your participation is most likely not going to change the cause of history. If you are not skilled, your participation is likely to be bogged down by poverty. So embrace knowledge just like the Prime Minister said. 

Honourable members, the motion is the resolution of Parliament to observe the International Day of Democracy and urges Parliament to resolve as follows: 
    1. It takes cognisance of the theme of the national day of democracy and urges government to engage the youth in the democratic development of the nation.
    2. It expresses its collective appreciation of the International-Parliamentary Union for promoting worldwide parliamentary dialogue and cooperation among peoples and for the firm establishment of representative democracy and further, for annually organising arrangements of the international day of democracy across the globe. I put a question to this motion 

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE STAMPS BILL, 2013

11.41
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamps Bill, 2013” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by the Minister of State for Finance (General Duties) and the Minister of state for Energy and Minerals (Minerals).

MR KARUHANGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Did I hear right? The Bill was called 2013?  Last week, I thought we had discussed the issue of years and causing confusion so this time probably it would – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When it is passed it will be 2014.

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The object of this Bill is to revise and repeal the Stamps Act Cap. 342 and provide for related matters. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion seeks the House to discuss the principles of the Bill. We referred this matter to the committee and the committee is going to report on this motion that the Bill entitled “The Stamps Bill, 2013” be read the second time.

11.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Kasule Ssebunya): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the Members for the previous debate about the youth and democracy. If I were to add a thing, I would say retraining is the way to go. 

This is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Stamps Bill, 2013. In accordance with rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament (2012), permit me to present to you a report of the committee on the Stamps Bill 2013. You recall the Bill was referred to the committee after being read for the first time by the minister.  I am not going to repeat the objects of Bill; the minister has said so. I will go to the observations of the committee. 

The committee in its consideration of the Bill noted the following; the stamps law was first introduced in Uganda as an ordinance in 1915 during the colonial administration and adopted as an Act when Uganda got Independence in 1962. Although it has been amended several times, the form and content of the Stamps Act remains broadly the same as of the ordinance Act enacted 69 years ago. The Stamps Act initially written in the 1915 style is replete of a language which is out dated with very long winding sentences. It has an amalgam of charging administration and other provisions in no particular order reducing efficiencies for the URA and increasing compliance costs for the taxpayers. The Stamps Act contains instrument for basic charging provisions it imposes ad valorem and specific duty rates on a large number of classes of chargeable instruments which hardly fetch revenue.  For example, some instruments are charged Shs 5,000 yet the banking charges, without considering URA costs, amount to Shs 2,000.

The Stamps Act provides for an instruments-based charge to duty rate. This means that no duty can be imposed unless an instrument (a document or other form of writing) is brought into existence.

The Act also contains haphazard exemptions and reliefs in the main body and schedules. In addition to the Act, exemptions can be found in other legislation.

It also has outmoded and centralised stamping procedures. The stamp is applied only in Kampala and consequently, all chargeable instruments must be produced to the Uganda Revenue Authority in Kampala for stamping.  The process of denoting whether Stamp Duty has been paid is still by way of the physical affixation of a stamp to the instrument.

Proposed One percent Stamp Duty on valuation reports 

Item No.8 of Schedule 2 imposes a one percent Stamp Duty on the total value of all appraisals and valuation reports.  The committee observes that whereas this may be in a bid to widen the tax base, this effort is misplaced to the extent of the following arguments: 
    a) A valuation report itself is a document of an opinion and does not necessarily relate to a transaction, which would attract Stamp Duty. Therefore , if there is any Stamp Duty to be imposed it ought to be a fixed fee just like it is for all other similar documents;
    b) The tax will have a significant effect on the cost of borrowing in the financial sector that already suffers high and soaring interest rates.
    c) No consideration whatsoever has been given to the purpose of valuation. Such could be for purposes including insurance, accounting, joint venturing, disposal, mortgaging and compensations, some of which already attract Stamp Duty whenever the transaction selected for instance; 
(i) 	in case of secured lending, a stamp Duty of 0.5 percent is imposed on the mortgaged amount under Item No. 56. 
(ii) 	There is already a one percent Stamp Duty on disposal of property on transfer under Item No.62.

Recommendations

Mr Speaker and honourable members, having made the above observations, the committee would like to make the following recommendations:
    a) Ad valorem rate on the fixed duty be abolished for the vast majority of cases, with its retention for a limited number of instruments where it would be appropriate for the revenue authority to stamp those instruments and thereby assist with audit activities;
    b) A new method of stamping by denoting payment of duty by printed machine or rubber stamp rather than, or in addition to, affixing an adhesive stamp, decentralising the authority to allow revenue regional centres to denote duty and to delegate authority to certain classes of persons to denote duty and to subsequently account to the revenue authority.
    c) The proposed one percent Stamp Duty on valuation reports should be stayed. 

Conclusion

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee recommends that the Bill be passed subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, this Bill is of 2013. By the budget statement of the minister, are there no provisional collections being conducted already under this law? If they are there, I do not see a commencement clause in this Bill. What would be the implication? 

MR SSEBUNYA: There is an instrument by the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How will that instrument be actualised in the absence of a commencement clause? I do not know but you are the chairperson.

MR SSEBUNYA: I think that there is a statement here that says that let it be passed or pronounced by Parliament – the commencement date. It reads, “An act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Stamp Duty and provide for its related matters be it enacted as Parliament as follows….” I do not know -

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, you are more schooled on this matter than, I think, most of us. The Collection Order Act gives the minister a given period and does not give the minister more than 12 months otherwise then our operation here becomes of no essence if the minister can have power to use a Provisional Collection Order for more than 12 months.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the instrument is of 2014 and it is here. But what I am saying is that what law will actualise this order when there is no commencement date.

Secondly, if there are any changes – I am just thinking through – on collections that are already being done, what happens to the date of commencement of the law and what is the implication of those collections that are already being done? This is what I said at the beginning when I was talking generally about the Bills that we have passed. Yes, chairperson.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, the instrument that we have following this Stamp Duty – as a commencement, the instrument shall come into force on 4 July, 2014. So, I think that the Provision Collection Order is working by that schedule – the initiative.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I am asking is that in this Bill, where do you get that date? 

MR SSEBUNYA:  We shall be guided by the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are the chairperson.

MR SSEBUNYA: It is not in the Bill. I have been advised that let us propose a commencement date as we are ironing out the Bill. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member for Budadiri, are you opening debate before I propose a question? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Excuse me, Mr Speaker. We have made some technical mistakes.  We are currently dealing with Bills that are under a collection order so that it can allow the minister to go and collect taxes and those are the ones we are trying to pass.

But at the same time, we are amending the main law; the Stamp Duty Act. So the reason that we are having for these technical problems is that we are trying to pass the Bills to effect the budget and at the same time- I meant the law and that is where the problem is coming from.  I had said earlier on that let us deal with those that are in the Collection Order Act so that we collect money and deal with the Stamp Duty; so that you can even be able to propose the date of commencement. Because right now, this Bill cannot commence on 1st July because it is amending- The current Bill which is in place is the one that was passed in 1962 and we are now trying to amend it. The day we amend it is the day it will come into effect and we cannot go backwards.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I went to my constituency and tried to tell voters about the proposed taxes to finance this budget. One of the things that came up was that already the mobile money transactions were having an additional charge and so they asked me, “How does it work when you people have not yet passed it as part of the amendments in Parliament? And supposing you change, will these mobile money companies give us back our money?”  I was really at a loss. 

I want to assume that what we are discussing now has a relationship with that kind of scenario and I hope that it can be clarified not only to me who did not understand but also to those who may not understand like me. 

Regarding those taxes that are already being enforced even before the amendments are passed by this House, in the event that we do not pass them as proposed by the minister, what happens? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is precisely the point I am making. Let me just bring you upfront on this issue. We have the Taxes and Duties Provisional Collection Act cap 348, which commenced on the 5 March 1963 before I was born. Now this law authorises the minister to make those provisional collections and it is an Act of Parliament. That is why you sometimes hear Ministers of Finance saying, these measures take effect from midnight tonight. Parliament has not yet pronounced itself on it but Parliament pronounced itself in this law that it can be done under the authority of this law.

Under the authority of this law, a Statutory Instrument No. 72 of 2014, as issued by the minister, and the collections under this instrument were being conducted in respect of the Excise Duty Bill, 2013; the Lotteries and Gaming Bill, 2013; the Stamps Bill, 2013 which is now before us; the Tax Procedure Code, 2014 which we are also going to be handling; the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014; the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014; the Finance Bill, 2014 which we have already handled; the Stamps Amendment of Schedules Instrument, 2014- I don’t know how this comes- the Excise Tariff (Amendment)- I think all these provisional orders are in respect of all those Bills including the one we are discussing now.

Why I raised the question was, this particular Bill has no commencement date. By the operation of this instrument, activities are already taking place under these Bills. From the date of this instrument, some provisional collections are being done. Now should we make some changes in this Bill, the implications would be that the collections that have already been done would have to be refunded. 

That is why the commencement date would be important so that whatever is already collected is protected in terms of the Consolidated Fund. So it will now apply forward, should Parliament reject any of these proposals that are already taking place. That is why it is significant and we committed those mistakes in the Finance Bill and also in the Excise Bill. We will find a way of handling that but moving forward, we should not commit the same mistake in this new Bill that we are making and that is why the commencement date should be proposed. If there are any changes on the tax measures that are already being implemented, we should not make those apply retrospectively. We should protect whatever has been collected so that we do not suffer any more losses. That is the point I was trying to make. I think it is clear.

12.00
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker for pointing out the defect. It is so fatal because it leaves the Bill open ended-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is not fatal.

MR SSEKIKUBO: But it gives wide and unlimited scope such that you never know at what time it takes effect and when it ends. Basically what I wanted to add is that whereas the object of the Bill is to revise and repeal the Stamps Act, it basically dwells on two items; the Stamp duty and add value rate. But I would like to talk about add value rate-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you debating now so that I can open the debate formally? Because we are still handling those procedural issues related to commencement. If I can open the debate then we can proceed with it. We need to clear this procedural issue then we start the debate. You are debating already. I will pick you when the time is right. Let us clear the procedural matters.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I thought they had already conceded that this commencement date is a mistake that we have to pronounce ourselves on. They have conceded that it was an oversight and I thought it would be proper that if consultations are going on then they tell us when the commencement date shall be and we can start on the debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay honourable members, why don’t we debate the principles of the Bill? The issue of commencement will be sorted out when the time comes.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You rightly stated that there is also a statutory instrument No. 71 of 2014 on the Stamps Amendment of Schedule Instrument, 2014 and this is introducing an amendment of first part 49 for collection on policy of insurance, life insurance, micro insurance, insurance performance board and clarifying on motor third party insurance for each vehicle. I did not hear the chairman of the committee tell us how we are going to harmonise these statutory instruments with the new amendment. Because I have looked at the schedule and I have not seen the schedule that is being amended. Can he also clarify on how we are going to deal with this instrument No. 71 vis-à-vis the Bill?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Parliament does not handle instruments. Parliament is going to handle the parent Acts. If there are going to be amendments, it will be that. I am just showing the instrument for purposes of guiding us on the significance of some of these laws having commencement dates but we cannot discuss the instruments.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your indulgence on whether you can have one collection order. A collection order must be gazetted and you can have a collection order for a Bill for 2013/2014 and yet these Bills are gazetted on a given date. One collection order to handle a Bill gazetted maybe December 2013 like the Stamps Duty, which was gazetted on 13 December 2013. Other Bills like Tax Procedural Codes gazetted on 14 March 2014 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the collection takes effect from the date of the instrument not the date of publication of the Bill.

MR EKANYA: Yes, but the issue is that before these Bills are gazetted, the minister issues a collection order for a non-existent Bill and that is my concern.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Bills for 2013 were they expected no collections being conducted under them until this one was issued this year. So the Bills were there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, a collection order is always for four months that is from July up to 31st October. It is a law and I do not think- I do not understand that if they have collected money, there is always a refund. If there is a refund we have been making a mistake. A collection order is the law, which is enforced at that time until the laws are passed as far as operationalising the tax proposals in the budget. So if there are people who are worried that currently the Ministry of Finance or URA are collecting taxes illegally, it is wrong-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I get your point but the point here is if you make changes in the Bill, for example, if you scrap a provision like we did with paraffin, there were already taxes being done under the authority of that law and this Bill takes effect from the 1st of July. So in effect you are saying that those collections that were done on paraffin should be refunded because the law takes effect from the 1st of July retrospectively. That is the problem we want to cure. So that when you make changes, you make them forward rather than back date those changes to the 1st of July. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, maybe it is the wording; but all the collections on paraffin which have been effected are under the law. There is no one who should get a refund on paraffin; there is a law. If we made a mistake saying that we go back and refund, I think that was an error and whoever got a refund should return the money. 

Mr Speaker, supposing we raised it, would you go and demand balance from the person who paid a lower price? No, because at that time when the person was paying that tax, there was a law. So, Mr Speaker, we are not worried. 

The only problem I see is what hon. Ekanya, my shadow minister, was raising. The stamp duty we are talking about is of 2013, the collection order is for the laws which were in the budget at that time. Like the amendment of the Income Tax, VAT, Stamp Duty, which hon. Betty mentioned, but not this Tax Procedure Code. These are not supposed to be in the Collection Order Act and if they are there, it is by mistake. 

When we amend the Excise Duty Bill, the day we pass it is the day it will come into effect because currently there is already a Stamp Duty Act. The only thing we are amending is the schedule; changing the tax rates and so forth. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, when I was reading the report, I said that the stamp estimates notwithstanding, they will have challenges in administration and collection using the old- So allow us to change it now so that we can streamline all those processes so that the revenue authority can collect money effectively without any hindrances from the old law. The main schedule is the one with the amendments and it shall come into effect on 1st July. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you see the challenge we have with the taxes and Duties Provisional Collection Act is that it does not give protection to actions taken under the authority of this law. It doesn’t; that is why it is important to have it protected by our own commencement date. 

For example, statutory instruments that are brought and require a negative vote of this Parliament; instruments start operating until Parliament says no. The implication is that whatever action is done under the authority of that Act remains protected as valid rather than those which are subject to an affirmative vote in which case they do not start working until Parliament approves it. This particular instrument starts working from the date of publication; not all actions conducted under it are not protected should Parliament say, “No”; so that gap is in the mother law and we can only protect it by a clear provision on the commencement date. 

Now, if you look at the interpretation law commencement dates are usually contained in the Bill. Where it is not contained, it is counted on the date of publication of the Act, unless the Act specifically says that this law will commence on this date. The presumption under the Interpretation Act is that immediately it is gazetted it becomes law.  So that is the challenge we are faced with and we can only cure it by pronouncing ourselves on the specific commencement date for those provisions or tax measures that are already in effect now. So we need to find time to deal with them. 

If this law was drafted in such a way that those actions are protected we would not be worried about the commencement dates. So can we open debate now and debate on the principles of the Bill? I think the key issues are going to be on the specific provisions that are in the Bill; the general principle is just like any tax law that is coming into effect. So I think the big debate is going to be on the issue of stamp duty and valuation. Do you want to debate that now or you want to go into committee stage and see what to do at that level? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker,  the main issue now is the schedule. The only problem I see in the report is that they want to reintroduce rubber stamps. There is no way you can account for rubber stamps; no way. Those machines which print stickers are numbered. Every sticker with a value comes with a number. So I want to make a small amendment that we remove the word, “Rubber stamp”, because it is very dangerous for us and it will promote theft. Someone can pick money and just keep some. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we never pronounced ourselves on the report, so it is okay. What we pronounce ourselves on was the motion for the second reading of the Bill. So whatever is said in the report – there is no problem with that.  Okay, let me put the question. Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled the “Stamps Bill, 2013” be read the second time. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE STAMPS BILL, 2013

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We stay clause 1 until we finish; we will come back to clause 1. 

Clause 2

MR SSEBUNYA: On clause 2, instruments chargeable with duty, insert a new sub clause 3 to read as follows: “Notwithstanding sub section 1, stamp duty is not chargeable in respect of an instrument executed by or on behalf of or in favour of institutions that are enlisted in the First Schedule of the Income Tax Act and organisations listed in the First Schedule of the Value Added Tax Act in any case, but for this exemption, the institution or organisation will be liable to pay the duty chargeable in respect of the instrument”. The justification is, Government of Uganda has entered into agreements with listed institutions in the First Schedule of the Income Tax Act and organisations listed in the First Schedule of the Value Added Tax wherein these institutions are exempt from all forms of tax in Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, is that clear. I put the question to that amendment - 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, on clause 13, there are practical difficulties in terms of payments and getting receipts. So, I would like to suggest that we increase this time from 30 to 45 days.

MR SSEBUNYA: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 6 – yes, Member for Lwemiyaga.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I beg to propose an amendment to clause 46 (3) which talks about a situation where a person fails to put in an application within the period stated in sub section 1 and that the commissioner may, upon application in writing by the person liable to pay duty extend the time for lodge for an objection.

I want to propose that this time for lodging an objection be extended to 15 days rather than leaving it open-ended.

The justification is that the 15 days are well within. One having failed within the 30 days, it is plausible that 15 days are allowed because the commissioner can give only two days. So, we better put it to 15 days, which are well within where the one liable to pay tax shall have no excuse. I pray that chairman allows because certainly this is paramount in this matter.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I don’t know why he is worried because sub-clause 4 says that, “It shall only be granted where the commissioner is satisfied that the failure of the person to lodge an application was due to absence from Uganda, sickness or any reasonable case. So that gives you even more time from the one he is proposing. If I was sick for a year and I come and complain to the commissioner, he may allow me as long as the circumstances dictates.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Why would you want to limit a taxpayer? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr chairman as you can see from clause 46 (1) and (2), they give specific dates within 30 days and therefore by you opening it say to a year as the chairman is proposing, is to leave it open ended.  I would propose that for us to have certainty, if it can’t be within 30 days, then let us add some 15 days and it is within 45 days, but if that was not the case why are we providing for the 30 days in the first place?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The 30 days is the time within which you should apply, but where you fail, you have an open-ended situation because your failure to do that might have been occasioned by your absence from the country for a year or whatever.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman what my colleague is trying to raise is the issue of assisting the commissioner not to actually even abuse her own discretion because the commissioner on application may decide to give you a time frame of even 3 years if for example you are so yellow like her or him. So the intention of the amendment is yet to say the commissioner has the discretion to grant or extend the time but this discretion must be limited in a way that the time we extend must be as reasonable as the other taxpayers who have paid with in time. So it shouldn’t be too open ended for the commissioner to say yes I will grant you the extension for 2 years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is the time for lodging the objection; let me hear this accountant from Karamoja.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you Rt hon. Speaker, and colleagues. When you read the circumstances it favours the taxpayer not the commissioner. On humanitarian grounds you state why you think you should be allowed   time extension. It is you who is requesting and because of sickness, you say, okay, you wait until you recover; if it was favouring the commissioner then we would think something else. The tax collectors want their money to be brought quickly. But now when you say you wait, you really want the person to comply because of reasons you pardon the taxpayer; so it is in favour of the taxpayer and that is why it should be worded like that.

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to thank you for this opportunity. When we are making laws on taxes we need to think outside the box. For the person to object the first 45 days, and you give him a leeway to consider when he or she should appeal; I find the time appropriate for the tax payer. Imagine you have a stock of about 16 containers and you want to evaluate and see whether the days given to you are appropriate. You have to evaluate whether they are correct or not. 

And in all tax agreements, when you are negotiating with a tax collector always a businessman thinks of the time which is favourable for him; for example people who import goods and they have not paid in time, they have not sold the stock, why do you limit them to a few days when they cannot manage? So even if it is open ended I can appeal to the Commissioner General and tell him the stock is there, I am not running away, I am looking for money. So when you limit me to 14 days, it becomes very difficult and this taxpayer might not comply. So I find the law to be more favourable to the businessman.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you for your indulgence, Mr Chairman. You realise that once you leave such discretionary powers open ended; it is open to be abused. The yardstick may not be similar whereas some struggling companies can express their complaints and they are forced to pay with in time; now you are leaving the commissioner to consider favoured companies and yet favoured persons can have a leeway, and can take 5 years. So that is why we are saying once we are saying that once you are using one unit, let it be uniform. Let it be certain. Let us all be aware, that after the 30 days, you have another 15 days. Short of that, you will have companies privileged.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The time you are proposing is in respect of what?

MR SSEKIKUUBO: This is in respect to clause 46(3) which provides that after the lapse of the 30 days, one should have the opportunity to have 15 days, and once I know that within these 15 days I should be able to lodge my complaint or have it addressed, then it would be common and known to each and every tax payer and I don’t think it is the intension of Government to have a flip sided tax regime that is not certain, clear and indecisive.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But still there are two aspects here; there is a time that is going to be given by the Commissioner General with in which a person can file an objection; there is also a time with in which that application will be made. Which one are you talking about? It can’t be both. Read the provision again.

MR SSEKIKUBO: In (a) it says, “Where a person liable to pay stamp duty is dissatisfied with a decision made under this Act, that person may within 45 days after service of the notice of the decision lodge with the commissioner an objection to the decision”-and then you come to (3) “Where a person fails to lodge an application with in the period stated in sub-clause (1) that is the 45, the commissioner may upon application in writing by a person liable to pay stamp duty extend the time for lodging an objection”. And once you live it open like that that’s where I was having a problem, we should be cognisant – (interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to thank our Secretary General for giving way.  I am trying to understand his argument. That if you allow Commissioner-General a leeway, somebody may come at any time and apply, and the Commissioner-General has discretion to extend or not to extend. That is why we want to make sure that this is tied. It is clear you must object within 45 days and within 45 days if you have not objected, you must have reasons which we can allow. There are only two reasons, when you are in prison or you are out of the country mostly. 

But if you are sick, the business is not sick, you must have somebody to look at it may be they will need only your signature. So I want to concur with hon. Ssekikubo that having given 45 days; the maximum again we could give is another 15 days which makes the total period 60 days. That is my thinking.

MR AYENA: Mr Chairman this seems to suggest a disability; there was somebody who should have raised an objection but he had a disability because he was either sick or out of the country and when he comes back, he is now able. Therefore, he is going to make an application or to put that objection to the Commissioner-General. I would support the proposal made by hon. Ssekikubo that it should not be left open ended but extended for a certain period of time from the time when the disability actually stopped. 

And then again, there is a contradiction in this provision. When you look at sub-clause 1, it talks about objection and then when you come to sub-clause 3, he is now talking about application. Can we be consistent and say, “Where a person fails to lodge an objection within the stated period…” so that it is consistent with sub-clause 1.

So, I propose strongly, Mr Chairperson, that we should not leave it opened ended and make an amendment to state that the Commissioner-General should give a certain period of time and I think that 15 days is a reasonable period of time from the time when the disability of the person ceased. I thank you.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us clear this. These are the types of events – a person has an objection and that objection should be filed within 45 days. This person has failed to file that objection within 45 days for whatever reason. Now this person comes 60 or 90 days later and wants to file the objection but the law says that you cannot file the objection directly because you must first apply to the Commissioner-General so that the time to be extended for you to be able to lodge your objection. 

So, that is now where the application in (3) comes. You apply to the Commissioner-General and say that the time has passed but for these reasons, I am requesting you to give me the time within which I can file my objection- in other words, the 45 days have already gone and now I am saying that I did not do it in 45 days so please allow me more time to file it. Now whom are you saying that the time limit should be imposed on? There is no time limit on the Commissioner-General. Now you are saying that the Commissioner-General should – let me understand this. Now you are saying that the Commissioner-General should say – okay, I am going to allow you to file your objection but you must file it within 15 days.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that what you are saying?

MR EKANYA: That is very dangerous.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that is what they are meaning. So in other words, the Commissioner-General must state that for some reason, you were not able to file within 45 days and now that you have come after a year, you do it with 15 days. That is what you are proposing.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairperson, the rational is clear. When you look at sub-clause 8, even when you make you application for a late filing of the objection and the Commissioner-General is silent and does not respond to your application, sub-clause 8 comes into play because it is deemed the Commissioner-General has accepted and you file your objection. But under sub-clause 3, there is no time being given to the Commissioner-General that limits him or her within which the person he has allowed to sign his objection lately should file that objection. So, the Commissioner-General can say I am allowing you for your reasons of sickness or absence from Uganda to file your objection but I am giving you a time of two years.

MR KAKOOZA: I have been in business and really most of the time, the tax laws have never favoured a business man. But also, the tax collector must be also favour  a tax payer so that he or she can comply and that is why all those provisions in business are there – that I can negotiate terms where I can pay. You can be in China and you have seven containers for shipping and you can spend a month there. But when you come back, you have not verified and then you are asking the Commissioner-General to say that within 15 days – this is even before the goods are verified, you have not understood the decision taken regarding you and now you are telling that person to do it in 15 days. Please, think outside the box! You are in Parliament and do not think that this law that you are making will not catch you when you are in business.  

So, we must think outside the box so that a businessman who is given leeway for a time in which he or she thinks can comply, I find it very good and better for business in this country.

MR AYENA: The reasons advanced by very able brother seems to be self-contradictory because if it was unreasonable to give any time, then you should not have given the 45 days objection time to begin with. Once you have given the 45 days’ time for lodging objections, it also means that when you are now able and you make an application to the Commissioner-General, the Commissioner-General should give you a specified time and if you un agreeable to 45 days, suggest a longer time. If you think that 15 days is too short a time because there are vagaries of business that are difficult to contend with, tell us when you think that it is reasonable. Otherwise, to leave it open-ended would amount to being capricious and unreasonable –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Members – please first wait. The problem was that suppose the person does not do comply within 15 days, then there will be another application. You see that this is now at the tail end where the Commissioner-General’s discretion is required. Discretion is about case-by-case handling and is not a general rule where you are going to fix time. This is now where the Commissioner-General is saying that, “I have looked at this case. I have looked at the requests and I am granting this.” If you say that we allow another 15 days and the person again fails in those 15 days, what happens?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, with my experience in audit work, you find that some files are moved to court, some document maybe with the IGG, some with your tax expert and so your argument of discretion of the Commissioner-General should really be left because it depends on case by case and as the circumstances demands.

Commissioner-General Of course we do not expect the Commissioner-General to behave like that or abuse the discretion. Can I have the member for Moroto Municipality?

MR SIMOM ALEPER: Mr Chairperson, you have ably explained very well and the reason as to why this provision is there is just because the Commissioner-General in his or her position is seated there and this person comes in, he or she may not know the reason given – that you are talking about sickness or absence. 

Now this provision gives room where this person may come and the reason is not yet certain. Now when the chairperson explained, I thought that was the correct one and I beg to proceed that these provisions stay as they are and we do not amend. I thank you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: From my understanding, it is that for every rule, there is an exception. The mischief we must try to cure is that the exception does not become the rule as we make any law and that is why when you leave it ultimately open-ended, you create a danger of the exception that you intend to create becoming the rule and it can be used anyhow and could be a centre for corruption where the Commissioner-General, by his stamp, can waive off- You can do away with it. You are creating one big person-

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank you, honourable for giving me way. The clarification I seek is that we are trying to suggest that the commissioner will be too generous to even surpass the time because the commissioner is working on behalf of Government to collect taxes. The commissioner will not be too generous to extend the time beyond the financial year because he will also be targeting- So I would really like to propose that we retain the proposals in the Bill.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Chairman, the matter is very clear, that you are supposed to file an objection within 45 days. If you have not filed within 45 days then you must give reasons why you have not filed. In that case, you are now supposed to request the Commissioner General to grant you that permission to file and the reasons must be clear. In accounting, revenue authority is audited. If the Commissioner General does not apply or stays way outside the limited time, then the audit will query why you have not- The process is actually clear and therefore tax collection is a very complicated matter. It is a quid pro quo; you pat my back, I pat your back. You allow me to move, I also move together with you.

Taxpayers are not criminals that we should pass laws that would hurt them and their businesses. And therefore, Mr Chairman, I would like to appeal to members that we retain that provision in the Bill as it is.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: I think we have listened to the arguments; one, the amendment by the hon. Ssekikubo of 15 days and also those who are opposed to the amendment. I think there is no value we can add by continuing to argue. Mr Chairman, the motion is that the question be put.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the question be put. I put the question to that motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the honourable member for Lwemiyaga that there should be a time frame provided here.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 46

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question- Further amendment of clause 46?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mr Chairman, on clause 46 sub clause 5 where it says that the only place you can go when the commissioner refuses is to apply to the tribunal for review of the decision. This means that there is no other place you can go. If the tribunal refuses, you cannot go to court and that is why they have even quoted this in memorandum two where they are talking about a case of URA vs. Meera Investments when they went to High Court.

Mr Chairman, I want to move an amendment that you can apply to the court for review or to courts of law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is 48.

 MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If you read ahead to 47, 48 and 49, it would cater for that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I now put the question to clause 46 as it is in the Bill that it stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I am just seeking your clarification because you are very schooled on this subject.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You can only seek procedural guidance.

MR EKANYA: Okay procedural guidance. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. On the burden of proof, I thought that our laws are based on a common English law but if you read (50), it seems we are shifting the burden of proof to the francophone aspect that you are guilty before convicted. So based on this, what guidance can you give?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Even under our laws there is what we call strict liability offences. That is a situation where the burden is on you. For example, if they find you with a gun, it is your duty to prove that you own it legally. Nobody else can prove it for you. So it is a very normal process.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I agree with you because even you who alleges must prove. My only problem with clause 50 is actually in respect of (b) regarding the burden of proof. Does it occasionally come on appeal? Why wouldn’t we leave the burden of proof and make a statement that the burden of proof in an objection decision shall be on the person liable to pay duty and we stop it at that. We should not invoke burden of proof when the matter is on appeal. I am seeking your guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, so that it captures the whole situation. If the situation is arrived at, on an appeal you are going to raise new facts, which might require a new level of proof. That would be it. In other words, this elaboration is not necessary; (a) and (b) are not necessary. Just join the paragraph to read, the burden of proof is on the person liable to pay duty on the balance of probability as to the extent to which the objection decision made by the commissioner is excessive or erroneous, whichever is the case in dispute.

So the proposal is that (a) and (b) should be struck and then the provision just reads like that.

MR SSEBUNYA: I go by your guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is not my guidance. Is there any objection to that?

MR KAKOOZA: I am finding it a problem. A tax collector is guided by the law. When he takes a decision against me, I should have a way to appeal and the only way I can move to appeal a decision against a tax collector is to go to the tribunal or to the court. But when you do not put that process there then-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which process?

MR KAKOOZA: Like in a review of objection of a decision by the tribunal. In the Constitution, the reason why the tribunal was put as a tax tribunal is for me. I have been dictated and I have to go to the tax tribunal against URA.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now this is saying whether you are going to the tax tribunal or the courts, the burden of proof will always be on you. So what is the problem with it? Are we now on the same page? Honourable members, the proposal is that (a) and (b) sub clauses are redundant to the extent of trying to explain what the burden of proof in this situation is. So the proposal is that they should be struck out and the sentence just continues as it is. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 51

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, taxes are a debt due to Government and it is in our Constitution. What is this one trying to explain; taxes or duty payable to government is a debt due to Government and it is a fast call. How can the law emphasis the constitution; it is very clear in the Constitution – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Precisely, that is the point, operationalisation of the whole decision. I put the question that clause 51 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, they say here that they can only collect from movable property. I want to give an example of someone who deals in rental property; his assets for the business are the buildings. He may not have chairs and other things. Now, here they state that they can only distress movable property; they should even distress the immovable property – (Interjections) – under sub clause 1, it says, “The commissioner may recover any unpaid duty by distress proceeding against the movable property of the person liable to pay duty in this section referred to as the person liable”. 

This means that they can only distress movable property. Now, supposing the person has no movable property but has immovable. We should be able to distress immovable property. For example, if you demand Shs 1 billion in form of tax and his movable property is worth Shs 100 million, where will you get the Shs 900 million? You should go for his properties like the building and so forth because this is a debt due to us.  So I want to move that this is against movable and immovable properties. 

MR NIWAGABA: I thought this particular clause is in respect of a manner of collecting duty by way of distress. And distress in legal terms relates to attachment of movable properties, not immovable property. So we would be changing the meaning of the word “distress” if we are to include immovable properties on this clause. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And secondly, it has to do with something that you still have control over. 

MR SSEBUNYA: This clause is mainly on movable property, but also on clause 55, that is when we talk of security on property for unpaid duty. There are provisions there to be applied by the commissioner. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You can’t come to my shop and grab my property on which duty has already been paid and then call it distress. It has to deal with things that are still within your control. 

MR AYENA: Also, derived from the principles of common law, distress generally states that you do not distress immovable property. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I put the question that clause 53 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 54, agreed to.)

(Clause 55, agreed to.)

(Clause 56, agreed to.)

(Clause 57 , agreed to.)

(Clause 58, agreed to.)

(Clause 59, agreed to.)
	
(Clause 60, agreed to.)

(Clause 61, agreed to.)

Clause 62

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I am looking at clause 62, inspection which you may tend to secure any duty or lead to the discovery of any fraud or omission; that is the purpose of inspection. And it goes on to say that: “A person authorised in writing by the commissioner to inspect for such purposes as -” I was making a case on this but my colleague has advised that we leave it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 62 stand part of the bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 63

MR SSEBUNYA: There was the power of the minister to amend the schedule. We delete where it is mentioned and “to allow the minister to vary the rates of the stamp duty”, that is the mandate of Parliament. But we have been advised that we can leave it –(Interjections)– when you read sub clause 2, it says: “An estimate made under sub clause 1 shall as soon as practicable after publication in the gazette be laid before Parliament and Parliament may within 21 sitting days by resolution -” 2  should not be deleted –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is right to say we delete 2. The responsibility of changing rates belongs to Parliament. The moment the minister has power to change that, there will be a problem. That is why we allow them to have a collection order for four months, if it needs changing the Finance Bill, we can deal with that. Mr Chairman, I want us to maintain the initial wording that we delete – (Interruption)  

MR EKANYA: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I thought you are saying that the power to make law and impose taxes is with Parliament. The committee wants that deleted so that – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, they have withdrawn the deletion. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, the chairman wants to withdraw that and say that one percent is going to be taxed as valuation fee – they are giving the minister powers to collect money without our authority. That is why we want to maintain the committee recommendation. It is illegal for the chairman to agree with a person as an individual without the rest of the committee. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is mixing up things; he gives a good thing with the right hand and then takes it away with the left. We should retain what is provided for in clause 63(2): “An instrument made under sub clause 1 shall as soon as practicable after publication in gazette be laid before Parliament and Parliament shall within 21 days sittings -” add, “By resolution annul or approve -” we need to add that phrase, “Annul or approve -”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Ekanya, the Constitution says that the only institution or person with power to levy a charge is Parliament. If you allow the proposal of the chairman to amend schedule one and two: if you look at schedule two, it is on stamp duty and applicable rates. If we allow the minister to just sit in cabinet and decide; by the time we come here to annul or approve, it will be already in effect. So, we should maintain the position of the committee and when they bring it to Parliament, we will chose either to approve   they can go and collect or not.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay let us make a distinction so that we can move cautiously. The original drafting in here is such that (2) would only be subject to a negative vote of Parliament. Which means it can operate until Parliament says no. It is not subject to an affirmative resolution of Parliament in which case, it does not start to operate until Parliament allows so. So, the history of this one is such that it should start operating immediately the minister gazettes it. It can only stop operating when Parliament says no. Otherwise, whatever is done under it remain a lawful act. And that is what is in here.

So, do you want to say that this instrument should not move at all until Parliament approves it? But that is not the spirit of the provision of the collection law. You might want to cater for many other issues because they might take a decision arising from some kind of situation - but of course Parliament has to approve.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, you see Schedule two is so detailed that if you have a corrupt minister, they can decide to vary any tax knowing that Parliament is on holiday. You get the point – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, this is not new. You have the provisional duties and taxes collection Order Act in this Parliament.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I am talking basing on the experience as given by the hon. Okot-Ogong who got exemption to import sugar but on technicalities. The license was given for a limited period because the country was suffering. But his sugar was deliberately delayed at Mombasa on technicalities – (Interjections)– I said it was technically delayed at Mombasa. It may have not been Government of Uganda. But by the time that sugar arrived the prices had gone down yet the taxes were still the same. So, he had to pay while the licence had expired. That is why my brother is in problems. It was not his will and that is why there is need to have an oversight institution on this matter.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to say that the provision as it is in the Bill is in line with the current provisions that we have in other laws – that as soon the new financial year starts on 1st  July, the taxes proposed by Government take effect. But when Parliament pronounces itself otherwise, that tax is annulled but from the date Parliament pronounces itself on that matter. So, this provision is consistent with what we already have in other tax laws. I thought we should adopt what is stated in the Bill.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to ask the House to look at how Government is going to operate. If we stop Government from collecting taxes because we haven’t pronounced ourselves on this particular tax yet it was already proposed by Government, what will happen to those who will be doing business in that period when Government won’t be collecting  taxes because they await Parliament approval?

So, I would like to propose – and it cannot be called a tax arrears because they will argue that there was no law – that we allow Government to go by its operations to collect taxes. If Parliament feels that at the time of the presentation of this tax that it is not allowed, we will stop it at that time. Otherwise, we should allow Government to move so that we don’t hinder its operations.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Chairman, the way taxes are collected is different. Once the Bill is gazetted, collection of taxes starts and that is the law. Secondly, the work of the tax collectors should not be impeded by Parliament. Once the law is passed, they should collect because there is already a law on provisional collection. So, whether you approve this now or not, that provision is already protecting it.
Therefore, what are we saying as Parliament to say that before Government collects taxes, they should seek Parliament approval. Don’t you know how Parliament works? Parliament will commit the Bill to the relevant committee, which will take ages before it comes here for final approval. This will affect tax collection. 

So, I would like to appeal to Parliament that this matter of tax collection we are dealing with is a complicated matter. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi did a course in taxation and law – he knows this. But he needs to know that I also did economics taxation –(Laughter)– yes economics of taxation –(Interjections)– no, about my sugar, it was because of my people here. They are the ones who went to Mombasa and blocked my sugar from there. It was not about the law or URA; it was about those evil minded people. So, we should not mix those two. We want a good law and the best way to do is to allow the minister do the collection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the full implication of deleting those two – the word “and” and the figure “2” - is that we will have nullified a whole Act of Parliament in respect of its application to this law. That is the full implication of it and that is why we should move cautiously. By just deleting the word “and” and the figure “2” you will have nullified a whole Act of Parliament. But we don’t want to go along that line unless we have been fully briefed by the relevant committee. So, please I am going to put the question – Honourable member for Budadiri West, we have exhaustively discussed this matter. So, I think let me –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, tax must predictable and it must be certain. What you raising, Mr Chairman, about collection order, I want to say that the moment the Bills are announced by the Minister of Finance on 1st July – the minister will have the proposals ready and they will have given effect to the collection order.

But what we are talking about here is not in respect of collection order. What we are talking about is how the minister - for example, I have a value to transfer of Shs 100 billion and stamp duty is one per cent, that is, Shs 1 billion. Now, the minister has got the power to issue an instrument to immediately amend the rate to be paid to maybe 0.01 per cent, if we pass the law like this. What that will mean is that instead of paying Shs 1 billion, I will pay less. 

Honourable members, do not look at increment only; it can be applied to reduction. Even yesterday we passed a law here by deleting “and 2”. The reason we deleted “2” was so that we do not allow the minister to vary taxes without authority of Parliament. We did it in the last sitting. 

Mr Chairman, what we are trying to say here is that we want to give the minister authority; after passing this law in October, for example, she can decide to vary rates at her own time, whether to increase or decrease. I was saying tax must be predictable and certain. Why hon. Okot Ogong suffered - he should have suffered further - was because what he was doing was outside the law. They gave him an exemption for a fixed period outside the law, but if it was the law we had passed here, he would not be suffering. I want you to continue suffering because you had changed the rules of the game for your own benefit and you were caught there. (Laughter) 

What I am trying to say here is that schedule 1 is a currency unit, - it is about currency – and the responsibility to change the currency is the minister’s. The Minister can vary the currency points; that is his or her responsibility and not the responsibility of Parliament. That is for purposes of value. 

Varying taxes or rates, however, is the responsibility of Parliament. Between July 1st and October - that is even in the law - the minister will be entitled to a collection order. So, I would plead that we should not give authority to the minister to vary a rate at any time in a year. It will be very dangerous for this country.

MR KAKOOZA: Chair, there is a section, “power of the minister to amend schedules”. Honourable members, this is not the first time we object such a headline. I do not know what they wanted because as my colleague has said, a tax measure is predicted within a financial year. That is why the minister says, “I vary this rate and I am going to collect this amount” in her speech. 

Also, the law of taxation has never been discriminatory; it cuts across once you pass it. So, when you give a variance in a rate, it becomes a problem to some and others can out compete. That is why I remember in 2004, we said that for a minister to vary any rate they must come to this House and we approve. 

I have been in taxation for quite a long time. If a minister has a problem, they come to Parliament here, we approve and they collect. To say at the beginning of the financial year that the minister has got a statutory collection order for three months! That is why the Budget Act says that within two months, the minister should have completed the budget and her tax measures and when that Bill is assented to, then you continue to collect your taxes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what are you saying in respect to this?

MR KAKOOZA: I am trying to say that we should not give powers to a minister to vary the schedule as she wants. In schedule 2, there is administration of a bond, for example; I have a bond, someone else has a bond and we are business competitors, but I have leeway to convince someone to vary the rate in my favour or another person’s favour. I can say I have removed the one per cent for you. 

This used to happen in the past, but today there are measures that are very efficient. All laws must cut across and we must pronounce ourselves as Members of Parliament. That is why I am saying that the schedule must not be varied any time. It must be varied when all of us are here and not anybody else.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you suggesting that stamp duty that appears in schedule 2 can be varied in the middle of the financial year? Can it be varied or it is a tax measure, which falls within the budgetary processes?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I thank God and the people of Tororo County. The Minister of Finance has been playing games on the Gaming and Lottery Act. That Act is very old and they have been varying at their pleasure; even in the middle of the year, if a new investor comes in, you see a variation. We, as Parliament, have been putting pressure on them and it has taken time. It is just this year that the Bill has been brought. This is because the Act gave the minister power to vary taxes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, can we take a decision on this. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I think let us go by the proposal of the committee and we move on; otherwise, the minister has been presenting an instrument here like we have one. For the benefit of Parliament to have a look at this schedule, let us - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is that in 63 (1), the words “and 2” be deleted. I put the question to that.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 63, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to introduce schedule 2, 18.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we do not have amendments on items 1 to 7; on item 8, we propose that we substitute item 8 with the following: “8(a) Appraisement or valuation made otherwise than under an order of court of the total value 0.5 per cent”. It is one per cent and members were reducing it to 0.5 per cent. “8 (b) Appraisement or valuation ancillary to mortgage deeds,  Shs 100,000.” This is a flat fee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what this is saying is that I, Nandala, if I want to know my assets’ worth, I go and value them for my books and because it is not for mortgage, I will pay Shs 100,000. However, if it is for my balance sheet, I will pay 0.5 per cent. Valuation has no implication on what you want to get; sometimes you want to know your net worth. So, if you put 0.5 per cent and I value myself and get Shs 10 billion, that means that I must pay Shs 500 million to URA for knowing my net worth. In that regard, 0.5 per cent should not be applicable. 

If you want me to register my mortgage, I should maybe pay Shs 5,000 as normal stamp duty, and that is the reason. When you go to the bank, before they register your mortgage, they will always charge you a value – there is one per cent and now you proposing it to be 0.5 per cent. So, the first one is not acceptable.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So what are you proposing? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am proposing that we delete 8 (a) and 8 (b) - the mortgage deeds. For purposes of URA to get some money in addition to the one per cent that they get from the bank, we can say Shs 100,000 for registration. That is all. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, what has been in the law, which is in the schedule, is appraisement or valuation made otherwise than under the order of court at one per cent. So when he says that we delete (a), that means that he would have removed everything and put it at nil, which is not tenable. This is estimated revenue for the whole year and people are already collecting. That is why we reduced it, at least for some convenience. 

MR EKANYA: The committee chairperson is worried about revenue. I am going to introduce an area of revenue so that we can have a balance. That is why I was talking about 18, which is capital duty – (Interjections) - No, I want to remove his fear through this information, so that members should not be worried about revenue. 

On (c) - becoming public through the operation of the stock exchange - when a company becomes public through the operation of the stock exchange, they are going to pick money from the public and here we are saying that it is very dangerous. So, I want to introduce some tax measures here so that we balance what we are deleting. Let us delete this because I want to introduce one per cent; because you are going to collect money from the public, you should pay some tax.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I agree with the deletion, to make it nil.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, what does it mean?  “Appraisement or valuation made otherwise than under an order of court of the total value should be nil”. 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Now what happens to this one: “Appraisement or valuation ancillary to mortgage deeds”? Is it also zero, or it does not come in? It was not in the Bill. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, when you go to the bank and borrow money, there will always be a stamp duty on your mortgage, and it is 0.5 per cent or one per cent. So, if I go to the bank, I must first pay one per cent on mortgage and again I pay Shs 100,000 – that is why money is becoming too expensive. The whole of this one should be deleted.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I was trying to appeal to my fellow member of the committee to at least allow this Shs 100,000 to be paid as a flat fee. It is not much money for someone who is doing valuation for land worth Shs 1 billion. I am just appealing to you.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I would not disagree with the chairperson but we are commemorating democracy with the youth. Can we put a threshold? If the youth are doing valuation of land worth Shs 10 million, honourable minister, allow them – in fact we did that in some law - but if it is me and you who are dealing in billions, we should pay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But there are some youth wealthier than you are. (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Yes, and that is why I am proposing a threshold upon which a person should pay the tax.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what this means is that whether the value of your asset is Shs 100,000 or Shs 50,000, you must pay Shs 100,000 for the mortgage deed. That is what it means, and it does not make sense. When I go the bank to borrow, the bank charges me one per cent as stamp duty for mortgage. 

Now here, you are saying that – Even if it is me, the principle must be applied across. A youth wants to borrow Shs 100,000 and he goes to register some small assets of his father worth Shs 200,000 and before he borrows Shs 100,000, he must deposit Shs 100,000 on the registration of the mortgageable  deed. I think it does not work.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to beg the indulgence of my chairperson and the minister; we should not kill the incentive of people to invest or to value their property. It does not really make sense for somebody to pay Shs 100,000 to borrow Shs 100,000 because it means that you are borrowing negative – you are borrowing zero. That is what we are saying.

MR SSEBUNYA: My committee member, this is on appraisement of valuation auxiliary to mortgage deed.  

MS FRANCA AKELLO: That is what it means.

MR SSEBUNYA: You cannot borrow Shs 100,000.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Even if it is Shs 1 million, that will still kill the incentive of people borrowing on mortgage. It is not only the rich people who will go for mortgages.

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First of all, the reason as to why we proposed nil on capital duty was to bring us in conformity with the rest of East Africa. It was agreed at the East African level as a measure to encourage mobilisation of funds through the various stock exchanges.

Also, the Shs 100,000 applies to appraisal or valuation ancillary to mortgage deeds, not to any borrowing but mortgage. By the time you mortgage a property, you are not going to be talking of Shs 100,000 or Shs 200,000 but millions. I beg to submit.

MR EKANYA: I am so happy with the Minister for Finance that today she is talking about harmonisation of duty within East Africa. Last week when we talked about excise duty –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we deal with the subject?

MR EKANYA: Yes. She has now brought in East Africa, but last week when we talked about the excise duty on soft drinks where Tanzania is at five per cent, Kenya at seven per cent and us at 13 per cent, we said that it was not applicable. Today on capital duty, she is saying it was agreed. 

Within the East African Protocol, Uganda has the highest threshold on VAT despite the protocol saying that it should be harmonised. Therefore, I do not think she is right to protest against people who are listing companies in stock exchanges by giving them -

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I have been borrowing money from the bank and when you go to the bank, what is your intention? That a bank values your assets and you borrow money. If you want to encourage that person, then do not put tariff barriers for him not to go and borrow because when he borrows, he will bring that money into the economy and purchasing power will increase. When you put a barrier, for somebody who is in a SACCO, for example, who says he is going to value his property to get money from the bank and you say no, first pay Shs 100,000 - I think is prudent and proper-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you are taking us back. This is not on that. This is on mortgage.

MR KAKOOZA: That is a tariff barrier if you tell me to pay Shs 100,000. Why do I go to the bank? I mortgage my title in order to get money from the bank, but here you are telling me to first pay a cost. That is a cost. You should have encouraged me to go and borrow and bring money into the economy, but if you say I should first pay, it is a cost. I want to borrow money-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, the surprising thing is that people whose signatures are on these reports are the ones opposing it. Your signature is here, hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s signature is also here and you are the ones turning round. What happened last night or over the weekend?

MR KAKOOZA: It was an oversight.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We will go by the oversight.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Of late, there has been the youth livelihood programme and the youth capital venture. All these have been aimed at encouraging young people to do business. 

The reason why any person goes to borrow money is because, probably, what he has is not enough to do whatever they want to do. When you begin saying, before you get this money, first bring Shs 100,000, then you are primarily telling me to first go and borrow elsewhere so that I am able to borrow from you. So, in what way are we encouraging the less income earners to begin mortgaging even their little plots so that they can also make a difference in their income?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us hear from the minister and then we can see how to proceed.

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We concede to that point so that the honourable member does not have to go and borrow Shs 100,000 in order to register a mortgage of Shs 500 million. I beg to submit. We concede that it will be at nil.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, it is withdrawn. So, the amendment from the committee is not accepted and actually it is withdrawn. The one proposed by hon. Ekanya in 18-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You are going ahead, Mr Chairman. That means 8 has been deleted, we have agreed-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, item 8 has not been deleted; they put nil.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, they have put nil instead of one per cent. Mr Chairman, before we go ahead, there is 6 which says that an agreement relating to deposit of title deeds, pawn or pledge of the total value is one per cent. This means, if you have your gold- I have a title of my house in Kyambogo worth Shs 500 million, if I am depositing it in a bank just for custody, I must pay one per cent. That means I must pay Shs 5 million as stamp duty before I deposit my title. This is very dangerous as people will keep titles in their houses and they will be stolen. 

So this agreement relating to deposit of title deeds or a title of anything, even a car log book, states that you must pay one per cent of the total value. That is not what it is. The bank will charge me banking charges for keeping my title there and those charges will be subject to 30 per cent of corporation tax. So, this one is also not applicable; it should also be nil as it is no different from 8. 

MS KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, number 6 is to continue to an on-going arrangement, so we cannot concede at this point without doing some research into it. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you just putting it in this law but it has already been in force? It is because this law is repealing other laws so maybe they are just- Under what has this been in force? Stamps duty?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, since you have brought the law for amendment, maybe we have passed it in error and we must deal with it. That is why, as you have seen, there are sections we are repealing. Why did we repeal? We never carried everything; there are those that we have added and those we have subtracted. So, I want to plead with you, Mr Chairman; a law of this nature must stand the test of time so that it is not amended now and then. When we have seen a mistake, we must deal with it.

I want to appeal to members. This means that anybody who takes his land title to the bank for safe keeping will be charged one per cent as stamp duty of the total value of your land title besides the bank charges and whatever charges. What we are saying is that we want to encourage people to keep land titles in the banks for safe custody. We want to encourage them, and to be able to encourage them we should allow them to take the titles, pay bank charges and they are charged 30 per cent. If we add the one per cent before I take my land title, I would rather keep it under my bed and yet this is also very dangerous.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I am worried about the manner in which we are proceeding. It would look like we are going on rampage deleting-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The House never goes on rampage.

MR LUGOLOOBI: I withdraw that, Mr Chairman. What I am trying to say is that the rate at which we are deleting proposed measures is alarming. Only last week –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I know hon. Amos Lugoloobi as my chairman of the Budget Committee and he is a good man. However, for him to propose that this House is proceeding on a rampage, I suggest is not in order-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I have already handled that and he has withdrawn it.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: For him to insinuate that we are proceeding in a manner that is not proper and yet we are really in the process of scrutinising these laws so that we do not make any mistakes- Mr Chairman, is he in order to proceed that way?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you have just said the honourable member is the chairperson of the Budget Committee. He is raising a concern and his concern is that some of these measures are already captured in what he is handling. Now you are removing them at this stage. That is his concern.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman, for that very wise ruling. Indeed, I am concerned because only last week we were discussing the expenditure side of the budget and we approved a number of measures leading to an increment of our expenditure. As we all know, we must balance the budget. Some of these deletion measures we are introducing now are to the effect that we shall not be able to generate the revenue that we need to balance the budget; that is why I am terribly concerned. 

If a measure has been in place for years, like the one in number 6, I do not see why we should delete it or reduce it to zero. We need time to study it otherwise we are going to face very serious repercussions as far as balancing the budget is concerned. 

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Mr Chairman, I think what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying is very different. If you take a title for safe custody in a bank, that is different from taking a valued title to get mortgage. So I want clarification from the minister or the chairperson about this. When I take my title for safe custody, will they charge me the one per cent? I will not have valued that title because there is no condition to first value the title before you take it for safe custody. 

In addition to that, I also want to support the chairperson of the budget committee; if we go on deleting these taxes, how shall we get services like roads and electricity? As leaders, we should be worried about what we are doing here. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us first get this clearly. I used to work in a bank somewhere and I actually worked on those things of safe custody. I do not recall any charges of this nature for safe custody. However, item 6 does not relate to that kind of safe custody deposit. It relates to security deposits that do not qualify to be mortgaged - where you deposit a title and you are given money but no mortgage is registered. There is that class of borrowing for small and low level borrowers, where the implication of borrowing is not high; you deposit something – actually they call it security deposit - without an instrument registered as your title. This is the category being referred to here. 

So let us not talk about safe custody because it is a different matter; this is security deposit. You can go and say, “Here is my title; give me Shs 100,000 or Shs 1 million.” There are many banks which do these kinds of security deposits without registering a mortgage on your title. Actually, most of these money lenders do not register any instrument but they keep your title. That is the difference. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to appreciate your explanation because when this matter was presented before us in the committee, our argument was, “why do you charge people who are depositing titles for safe custody?” The people from finance clearly told us that this stamp duty is not targeting transactions relating to safe custody. To prove that, they said that this provision has been in the existing law and people depositing titles for safe custody have not been charged. 

So I want to clarify to my senior that in the beginning, all committee members also though that people depositing titles for safe custody should not be charged. We still stand by our position that deposits for safe custody should not be charged. At the same time, we were convinced as a committee that this proposal is not targeting such people. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to pick up from the clarification that members are trying to give. Reading item 6, it says, “Agreement relating to deposit of titles deeds, pawn or pledge of the total value”. I think what should be guiding us is the import of those last three or four words - “the total value”. 

Mr Chairman, I get the impression that it is against a figure that you are borrowing when you put in security; otherwise, if it was for custody, it would be the normal bank charges that would apply. If that is the case, I want to realign my thoughts to the issue raised by the chairperson, budget. He is very worried that we are removing everything that would generate resources to fund the budget, which is of course not our intention. However, I also think that it is the intention of this House to look at aspects that stimulate productivity in the economy so as to generate resources beyond revenues arising merely from taxes. 

I think the economists here know that there is a huge population of this country that is not banking. People keep their monies in pots and in all sorts of places. Every time a market catches fire in this country, you here people crying about billions of money lost. They are not even in that segment that has developed confidence - right in the heart of this city – to take their money to the bank. The women groups still keep their money in pots in the villages. 

So, chairman of the Budget Committee, it is in the interest of this House to encourage people to go to banks and deposit their things for safe custody. Also another thing I know about this country is that not many of us have– 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, on what exactly are you speaking?

MS ALASO: I am speaking against the imposition of the one per cent as an element that will discourage the people from taking their titles to the banks. Even acquiring titles in this country is a big problem. So I pray that the House appreciates the need to encourage people to bank. If you add more charges, people will shy away from the banks.

Also, on the question of just acquiring titles, as long as people think that you are better off without a title, then they will not become part of this segment. So, we should stay away from this one per cent. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this is not about safe custody; this is about security deposit. Where you are going, anyway the bank will require you to bring a title. Now, they are saying on that, they have been collecting in the past. So, for this to change there is need to research its implications because people have been paying this. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I think people are debating other things, which are not in this Act. We are looking at agreements relating to deposits - if a boda boda man wants to borrow money, for example, and he wants to stake his boda boda as security. This is not about titles being deposited but you put an agreement in the bank so that you can get money. 

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, when the boda boda person goes to the bank for money, does he leave the motorcycle there or he takes the log book?

MR SSEBUNYA: He goes away with his boda boda but it is his security. It is very risky but the bank has to remain with something, with the assumption that the boda boda man will pay the whole amount.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we all know that by passing clause 65 we have repealed the Stamps Act, which had its own provisions about what was being collected. By repealing it, we are replacing it. Some of these measures are imported from the old Stamps Act, which we have just repealed under clause 65. That is why the minister is saying that for them to change this, it would be a completely new situation that would require a study because this is what has been happening under the Stamps Act; they have been getting these monies on these deposits.

So, honourable members, why don’t we just make progress on this and move on? The proposal was that item 6 be made nil. The proposal in the Bill is that we retain the one per cent which the minister says is in the old law. I now put the question that the one per cent, which was in the old law, be deleted.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are there any other?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I want to propose something on capital duty – 18 (c). I want to propose 0.5 per cent. “On becoming public through the operation of the stock exchange”, I propose that we introduce a capital duty of 0.5 per cent. Also, in 62 –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us deal with that first.

MR EKANYA: They are related, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us first deal with this one. Honourable minister, we are dealing with 18 (c). I know that the minister said that this is what has been agreed on in the East African Community. 

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This is something that the honourable member I am sure put a lot of thought to before be made his proposal. We wish to also be given the opportunity to study the implications.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What does that mean?

MS KIWANUKA: We cannot consider this matter at this time.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Chairman, our Constitution is very clear that proposals regarding taxes are normally presented by Government.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is why I was seeking the minister’s statement.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Chairman, I am worried that at this particular time, a proposal to vary tax is being moved by a Member of Parliament. This is against the sprint of the Constitution. Maybe I need guidance from you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, for as long as the Executive agrees to it, it is okay. That is why I asked the minister.

MRS KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, I moved that the proposal be stayed until we study it further.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, the honourable member has proposed a tax and we have seen the category of businesses that he is talking about benefit when they put their business on the stock exchange; they start collecting money. Why do we allow them to collect and we do not tax what they collect? So, I support the idea; we do not need to study it. He is even proposing another avenue where Government –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Executive does not agree to it, so constitutionally we cannot sustain an argument. It would be unconstitutional. If the minister had agreed to it, that would an Executive position and Article 93 would not bother us; we would move forward. It is as simple as that.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I commend the hon. Ekanya for proposing a tax measure. However, just as the hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, taxes must be predictable. We cannot do this in the middle of the financial year – we are almost three months into the financial year. The minister can propose it in the coming financial year. It is a good idea and many such good ideas have come from the committee and have informed Government and taxes have been imposed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is there any other amendment under this schedule?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I find this argument not sustainable. If a patient suffering from malaria has been delivered to a doctor, it is the responsibility of the doctor to find out whether that patient has typhoid or any other complication.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It does not mean that you can even start talking to the askari at the door to do that. That person must be qualified to do so.

MR EKANYA: Yes, Mr Chairman, but as we talk, it does not mean we are proposing this – I have shares in some companies and it is just prudent that we pay taxes. The chairperson of the Budget Committee was complaining that we are reducing revenue; here we proposing measures to increase revenue but the Government is playing games. 

The case we have in the UK of Tullow v. Government of Uganda is capital duty gains. So, I would like to request, Mr Chairman, that the amendment to introduce 0.5 per cent be accepted. Also, with your permission, I want to introduce another one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Ekanya, this is what the Constitution says. You can only propose in relation to a reduction; you cannot impose. That is why I am seeking the concurrence of the Executive. If they do not agree to it, it is dead on arrival.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to propose an amendment to item 29, to add the words “his or her.” It will then read thus: “any instrument by which any person affects the dissolution of his or her marriage…” I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I thought the women were not supposed to pay. But now they are well liberated, so they also want to pay.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, under Articles 32 and 33 of the Constitution, there is the provision of equality and in respect to that there are also women who seek dissolution of marriages. So, if the person is the one seeking, then this provision will apply to that particular person seeking the dissolution. It is already being implemented in courts of law, anyway, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, if you just deleted the word “his” it would suffice.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, according to this, it is only a man who can register. If the woman seeks dissolution, she does not need to pay stamp duty.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, if you want to take away that, just delete the word “his” appearing in there. Should we do that?

Honourable members, the proposal is that in 29, the word “his” appearing before the word “marriage” should be deleted. So, it would read, “...any person, effect the dissolution of marriage”. I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I hope hon. Omach and hon. Maria Kiwanuka will concede to this one; of course, we want to raise revenue. Item 62 (b): “The transfer of shares in an incorporated company listed on the stock exchange, arising from the trading of those shares on the stock exchange.” 

I would like to introduce 0.5 percent on that. This would raise revenue that would balance other measures. I pray that members consider this proposal so that the budget can balance.

MS KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, we concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to this particular amendment on 62 (b). 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, we have 0.5 per cent replacing nil.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, one of the reasons why people easily borrow, which certainly enhances productivity by any measure, is the easing of the transfer process. I am glad that my brother came up with that proposal. I had also wanted to propose 0.5 per cent on (b), which has already been done, and 0.5 per cent on (a). So, the 0.5 per cent would be shifted to (b). So, 62 (a) - of the total value - instead of 1 per cent should become 0.5 per cent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that. 

(Question put and negatived.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I know we have defeated the proposal, but the reason why people are not declaring the right values for transfer is because of the percentage. If it was lower, people would declare the right value. We have defeated it but the minister should think about it. 

I want to make a proposal on 48 (a), on the insurance policies. I am told an insurance policy for a small car is Shs 30,000, but I must pay stamp duty of Shs 35,000 for that policy of Shs 30,000. For a motorcycle, the insurance costs Shs 8,000 but I must pay stamp duty of Shs 35,000. 

Mr Chairman, an insurance policy is basically for the purpose of stamp duty - to register it and give it effect. You do not have to make it prohibitive. I will give you an example. Registration of a partnership costs Shs 5,000; hon. Geoffrey Ekanya and I could register a partnership to deal in gold, worth billions of shillings, with only Shs 5000. On the other hand, a person who wants to insure his motorcycle for 3rd party -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I have a lot of difficulty entertaining you. You are part of the committee, you sat through the committee meetings, and now you want to transfer the committee meeting into the House; please! It is not right.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to withdraw. Maybe in the committee I never saw it very well but now I am seeing it.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we have no further amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that schedule 2 -

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, I have a difficulty with item 64 under schedule 2 - any other provision not specifically mentioned, Shs 5,000. It is very dangerous.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is an incidental clause. Something may show up which is not regulated here – you are a lawyer, you know how we draft - to capture instances of similar provisions that could not have been foreseen. I put the question that schedule 2 as amended stands as schedule 2 to the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 3, agreed to.


Clause 1

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we propose that commencement is as of 1 July 2014, except where amendments have been made which will not come into effect on the date of publication.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: How will you know which ones were amended?

MR SSEBUNYA: Then we can say the commencement is 1 July 2014. This has been an old law that we have amended to correct the English, introduce administrative measures and we have not changed much in the schedule. So, these are taxes that have been ongoing and we are saying let commencement be 1st July, and there is a provisional collection order.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, this is the Stamps Bill that we are dealing with; it has no relation to the collection order. When this law is assented to and signed then the other one becomes invalid. It is even here in the regulations; there is a clause which talks about regulations and when it comes into effect. It will come into force and then the other one becomes invalid.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Since we have even made two - we have made the law and we have put the schedule, which more or less falls under the collection order - this law will come into effect on the day it is assented to. The justification is that we have repealed the law and at the same time we are dealing with a schedule, which deals with the collection of taxes, and this schedule is under the collection order.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The question here is a practical question: Are there measures that we have altered in this Bill that were only surviving on the basis of the provisional collection order? If not then it is okay, but if there are those measures that were only surviving because of the provisional collection order, then we need to say something about that, if there are changes. However, if there are none, then we are okay.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we have made amendments, including the one to 62 (b), the one that he has changed - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If those amendments were in the Stamps Act -

MR SSEBUNYA: In the East African Excise Management Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, you may have to take counsel on this so that we may not make mistakes. You may have to take counsel from your technical people on this issue so that we can pronounce ourselves.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, the minister has consulted and she has given me authority to read (Mr Ekanya rose)- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, please proceed. 

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and thank you, alternate. This Act shall be deemed to have come into effect on 1 July 2014 except items 8, 62 (b) of the Schedule 2, which shall come into effect on publication. I would like to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you – [Mr Ekanya: “On publication?”]- Yes.

New Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the commencement clause. That means that you are proposing the insertion of a new clause 1, which is the commencement clause. I now put the question to that amendment to create a commencement clause to this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1

MR LUGOLOOBI: Reading through various provisions in this Bill, we find the expression “duty” which has not been defined in the interpretation section. I am wondering whether it is not necessary to define it expressly so that we know what we are talking about –(Interjection)– When you read clause 46 (1), for example, a person is liable to pay duty. What duty are we referring to? –(Interjection)– That must be defined! You should know that there is something called import duty as well.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. In fact, even the heading has a problem - the Stamps Bill. It should be, “The Stamps Duty Bill.” Stamps are those things that are used by the post office, which you put on a letter. So, I think that it should be the Stamps Duty Bill. That will also answer hon. Lugoloobi’s question because then we can say, “duty” means stamps duty, if the minister agrees with this free knowledge.

MS KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, we agree.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you concede to that amendment? I will put the question to the amendment on the definition of duty, that it be included. What will it be? You are not on record.

MR SSEBUNYA: I do agree with the amendment by hon. Lugoloobi that duty should mean stamp duty under this Act. “Duty means Stamp Duty under this Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

MR SSEBUNYA: We propose to amend the title to read, “The Stamps Duty Bill, 2014.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, are you agreeable to that?

MRS KIWANUKA: Yes, we agree.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. I now put the question to the amendment of the title. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

2.20
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.21
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Stamps Duty Bill, 2014” and passed it with amendments to items 8 and 62(b) of the Schedule 2.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.21
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE STAMPS DUTY BILL, 2013

2.22
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamps Duty Bill, 2013” be read for the third time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Stamps Duty Bill, 2013” be read for the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE STAMPS DUTY ACT, 2014”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister; congratulations, chairperson; and thank you very much, honourable members. It is now about 2.25 p.m. 

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Kalongo Primary School in Agago District. They are represented by hon. Amos Okot, MP Agago and hon. Franca Akello, Woman MP for Agago District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause) Honourable members, the House is suspended to 3.30 p.m. I thank you.

(The House was suspended at 2.25 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.38 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for what we were able to accomplish this morning. Given the time we have, I want us to go to item No. 6 instead of the Valued Added Tax one. I think item No. 6 might take us a shorter time than item No. 5. So let us deal with item No. 6.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014 be read for the Second Time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is seconded by the Minister of State for Health, Primary Health Care. Honourable members, you know that this Bill was before our committee. To support this motion and explain to the members what the position really is, as well as to discuss the principles of the Bill, this would be a proper time to receive the report from the committee.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, the object of the Bill is to amend the Income Tax Act, Cap 340 to:
1. 	Provide for the rate of income tax for companies.
2. 	Provide for the rate of income tax for trustees and retirement funds.
3. 	Provide for withholding tax on winnings of sports and pool betting.
4. 	Provide for capital gains tax on sale of commercial property.
5. 	Repeal exemption from tax on interest income on agricultural loans.
6. 	Repeal the provisions on initial allowance.
7. 	Make provision for the definition of start-up costs.
8. 	Provide for precedence of international agreement over other laws dealing with matters covered by the agreement.
9. 	Provide for thin capitalisation ratio from 2:1 to 1:1.
10. 	Provide for tax on winnings of sports and pool betting.
11. 	Amend the second schedule. 
12. 	Amend the third schedule. 
13. 	Provide for related matters.

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairperson-

3.41
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule Sebunya): Rt Hon. Speaker, this is a report of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014. I am not going to read the object of the Bill because the minister has read them. Let me just go to the observations of the committee.

Arising out of the public hearing, the committee makes the following observations:

Elimination of Initial Allowance

Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to repeal Section 28 of the Income Tax Act. Currently, under Section 28(1) of the Income Tax Act, a person who places an item of eligible property in service for the first time is allowed a deduction, which is an initial allowance, at the rate of 50 per cent and 70 per cent depending on the location. The committee has examined this issue in detail and observes that:
(a) 	Uganda is not yet rich enough to attract new investment. While the Government may push for more revenue, investment capital should not be suppressed.

(b) 	With this elimination, there would be a longer period of recovery of the capital cost. Therefore, the item on investment would be very low.

(c) 	The proposal would discourage borrowing since the same would be recovered over a very long period thus discouraging investments. 

(d) 	The effect is that accelerated depreciation as an investment incentive will no longer be enjoyed by this business. 

The committee recognises the need to broaden the tax base. However, the committee proposes that- 
    a) the elimination of initial allowance should be gradual to allow for proper planning by the investors; 
    b) the rate should be reduced to 25 per cent from 50 per cent for areas in Kampala, Wakiso, Mukono, Jinja and Njeru; and 
    c) the rate of 75 per cent should be maintained for investment in the other areas of the country.

Repealing the Exemption from Tax on Interest Income on Agricultural Loans

Under clause 8(b) of the Bill, interest income earned by financial institutions on a loan granted to any person for the purpose of farming, forestry, fish farming, bee keeping, animal and poultry husbandry or similar operations will be taxable.

The committee observes that the proposal may cause financial institutions to reduce loans to the agricultural sector, given the inherent risk. Financial institutions are also likely to pass on the tax costs resulting into increases in the interest rate on agricultural loans. The committee notes that this will hinder commercialisation of agriculture and therefore recommends that the proposed measures to provide for application of income tax on interest income on agricultural loans be reconsidered and alternative sources of revenue be sought.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the Bill be passed subject to these proposed amendments. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, the motion is that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014 be read the second time. That is the motion I propose for your debate. If there are debates on the principles of the Bill, this would be the time to start the discussion, but if you think we can handle this matter more specifically when we come to the actual provisions, then we could take a vote at this stage and go to the actual amendments and handle it from that level of committee stage. That would also be proper.

MR GEOFREY EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think this British system of handling things needs to be modified because time is money. I think we better move to the second stage and we can progressively debate and discuss when we are handling clause by clause.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014 be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Just in case, can we defer clause 1 for now?

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause two stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.
Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR SSEBUNYA: We propose an amendment to Section 21 of the principal Act - delete paragraph (b). Justification is that the financial institutions are likely to pass on the tax cost resulting into increased interest rates on agricultural loans. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman and colleagues, we gave this exemption to commercial banks and the purpose of doing this was to ensure that loans being given to the agriculture sector would be charged at a lower rate. However, none of the commercial banks has reduced the interest rates payable on agricultural loans; instead, this exemption is being enjoyed by the banks themselves and they are not passing this over to the various farmers that were intended in this exemption. So we are now proposing that it be removed because the farmers are not benefiting from that. 

Government has instead given, under the agricultural credit guarantee scheme, a total of Shs 60 billion, from which government is not getting any funds because the rate charged is very low - it is 12 per cent - and it is going to the commercial banks. We are also proposing to borrow Shs 70 billion that will go into agricultural loans. So, I do not accept this proposal by the committee. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to inform this House that if government imposes this tax, it will largely affect our rural farmers who mainly borrow money from SACCOs. When we were considering these proposals, we interfaced with people who manage SACCOs. Normally, what happens is that SACCOs lend to people who cannot easily access borrowing facilities from the bank and the interest charged by SACCOs is affordable in the circumstances of the lenders. 

With this proposal in effect, it means that these SACCOs shall now be paying tax on the interest on the loans and they will pass over this interest to the borrowers. That is why we are saying that there are many areas where government can collect money. Let this proposal be stayed for now, because we are about to get into other debates that have direct impact on agriculture. This is one area where we should not let go because the impact is going to be felt by our rural farmers. Thank you.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I agree with the minister in respect to terminating this interest incurred on agricultural loans simply because no farmer benefits from these loans. 

My colleague has been talking about SACCOs lending to farmers; there are no SACCOs that give out agricultural loans –(Interjections)– They only lend little amounts of money. This money is being borrowed by traders under the pretext of investing it in agriculture and at the end of the day, the Government is not earning anything out of it; it is actually the bank people benefiting from this. 

At first, I thought that this was a bad idea on the part of Government but I have now realised that the intended beneficiaries are not benefiting out of this tax. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I do not want us to confuse two things. What is interest? Interest accrues on money borrowed; whoever you borrowed from, whether a bank or a SACCO, that is their income. The reason government came up with an exemption of tax on agricultural loans was so that agricultural loans become cheap and therefore affordable to the farmers.  

Many members here are farmers and I want to know who of you has borrowed money under the agricultural loan facility. None of you! So, very few people may be beneficiaries - maybe Kakira and Mehta. Just a few of them benefit. What the bank does is to categorise them; out of the money they lend out, say Shs 1 trillion, Shs 600 million could go to agricultural loans. So, that income leaves the tax bracket; in short, they evade tax and yet nobody benefits from it. 

Honourable members, do not assume that taxing these banks on interest affects farmers. When we did this, we gave a chance to banks to make money and evade tax. So, the minister is right; we should terminate this policy because it is very dangerous for us. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I concede because the minister had already said that banks do commingle this money and it never benefits the farmers. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I am surprised that my chairperson of BCU, which I applied to join, is speaking like this. 

I have been borrowing money. I am a poultry farmer and I am joining him in coffee. The interest rates in banks are determined by several factors: the CBR rate, the microeconomic conditions in the economy and if banks make profits under the Financial Institutions Act, they are audited by auditors cleared by Bank of Uganda and their balance sheets are pinned on the board. Therefore, the report from the Ministry of Finance for the last 12 months shows that the rate of non-performing is very high. This means that the people who are borrowing money are failing to pay. So much property is being mortgaged and so banks are really doing very badly. 

I have just returned from some bank, which was willing to give me a loan at only 17 per cent. The only thing I asked them to do was to fix that rate. But they told me that they cannot fix it because the CBR rate varies. So, the proposal by the hon. Fred Omach on the agricultural guarantee is only for big people because it is very hard for an ordinary person to access that money. The hon. Matia Kasaija confessed in this Parliament when he told us that while he is a farmer, but that he also failed to access that money. And I don’t know whether the Minister of Defence who grows pineapples has also been able to access this money. The process is corruption infested and so it is very hard to access that money. 

So, this small window is to help those poor farmers in rural areas who borrow between, one and two million shillings. Yes, the minister said they have done a study –(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I just want to seek clarification. You said that interest rate is determined by several factors one of them, being the CBR, which is okay. But what is the CBR for agricultural loans? Two, if I borrowed Shs 1 million, what interest rate should I pay?

MR KAKOOZA: Honourable members, I think we need to agree on some points because there are issues that we have been facing. I am a famer – when we amended the Income Tax Act, we thought that by exempting them, the loans would be cheaper and so the banks would perform the way we expected but they didn’t do so. What they did was to take advantage of that situation and begun to lend out that money at a commercial rate. I have ever been to a bank and noticed this. When I tried to explain to them that we had amended that law to enable farmers benefit –(Interjection)– but they said that is not possible and so they would lend people money at a commercial rate.

That is why I think that the argument of the minister is worth that Government collects taxes from that interest component. In fact, I was one of the people who had thought it would benefit the farmers but when we did some research, we got to realise that it was only benefiting commercial banks. That is why I want to implore colleagues to let this tax be levied for Government to collect taxes.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, some time ago, I moved a motion here that we create agricultural bank to take care of these farmers. But up to date, the Ministry of Finance has refused to issue the certificate of financial implications. Now that they are coming up with this, what is left for farmers? That is my concern. And when are we getting that certificate of financial implications to enable us move a motion to create an agricultural bank that will work in the interest of farmers?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I don’t see it under Clause 8.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, in the long term.

MR OMACH: No, I don’t see it under Clause 8.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, what is your plan in the long term to deal with this situation?

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you for giving way. Mr Chairman, it is true the hon. Geofrey Ekanya came to me for a certificate of financial implications to move that motion to create an agricultural bank. It is also true that I have extensively discussed this matter with him on the way forward.

What we have done, Mr Chairman, is to take together the government owned institutions of Post Bank, Prime Microfinance and UDB. We have said that Government will push out its agricultural loans through these three institutions. The good thing is that Pride Microfinance and Post Bank have more branches unlike UDB, which has just one.

Mr Chairman, I am happy to inform the august House that since the Budget was read, we have identified and secured Shs 70 billion of agricultural financing for only SME farmers. That is the way we are going – we are using the existing institutions to avoid additional overhead and additional management costs using those Government owned banks to push the agricultural financing for SME farmers. I beg to submit. And all this would have been given to my shadow minister when we had the meeting but we have arranged for it after the budget.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, now that the amendment proposed on Clause 8 has been withdrawn, I not put the question that Clause 8 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, agreed.

Clause 9

MR SEBUNYA: In Clause 9, the committee proposes that the principal Act is amended by substituting for “50 per cent” in sub section one with “25 per cent”. The justification is that the elimination of this allowance should be gradual to allow for proper planning and that the rate be reduced from 50 to 25 per cent for areas in Kampala, Mukono, Wakiso, Jinja and Njeru.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, the chairperson of the Budget Committee, do you have any issue on this matter?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I would like to differ from the committee’s support to the proposal on the Bill to repeal Section 28 in the principal Act, for the following reasons –(Interjection)– hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, you have been the worst –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Order! Thank you, Mr Chairman. You see one day, a dog bit me but I told it that its day would come. (Laughter) But, Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Amos Lugoloobi who is also a member of the Budget Committee and also who signed the report, save for some of us who did not sign it – he was very much against the chairman’s decision to stick to Government’s position – to now change his opinion and begin to support the position of Government?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The honourable member for Ntenjeru, have you been on the road to Damascus? (Laughter)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I have since gathered additional information relating to this provision. And you may note, under Section 21 of the Income Tax Act, there are a range of exemptions from A to Z and so on. Also this House has been complaining about exemptions. 

At one time years ago, I happen to have worked with the Uganda Investment Authority and I recall that the Investment Code of 1991, tax holidays were provided for. However, in 1997, because of the progress we had achieved then, it was realised that tax holidays was not the way to go. So, we moved to a new regime which was these initial capital allowances. At that time, it was very difficult to set up business in Uganda. There were a lot of challenges. Those challenges have now diminished dramatically; I am comparing 91, 97 and today, and now we are in this situation where we should limit the number of exemptions. Right now when you talk about establishing an investment in this region, you don’t actually need to provide for this incentive or someone to set up business in Kampala. You don’t have to provide for extra incentives because now the infrastructure is available. 

In a bid to balance revenue and investment I felt that investors could continue enjoying incentives that are provided in the income tax under section 20 Y and Z. In those two sections an investor investing in agro-processing is entitled to an exemption from income tax. 

Under section 21 exempt income and includes in Z; the income of a person for a year of income derived from agro-processing where the person or the associate of the person has not previously carried on agro-processing upon commencement of agro-processing in Uganda etcetera. So that is a complete exemption for investors in agro-processing. So we have already provided enough concessions. 
In Y it is talking about an investor deriving income from exportation of finished consumer and capital goods for period of 10 years. There is an exemption of 10 years so there are already enough concessions within the existing laws, and I agree that we should repeal this particular section 28 that was providing additional incentive to investors.  I submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think I need to again explain something to hon. Amos Lugoloobi may be he could understand and know what we are talking about. Initial allowances do not mean exemption; for demonstration it is like this. You buy a plant for 10 million. When you put a plant in Kampala they say that the first year you are entitled to 50% allowance that means 50% of 10 million you will be allowed Shs 5 million allowance to be deducted from your profit or added to your loss. The balance of 5 million will be granted over the remaining period of time maybe four or five years. But the total deduction for the whole entire period would be 10 million so there is no guide that someone will be allowed initial allowance and it will exceed what he invested. 

What does this mean when we go for initial allowances? It means that instead of paying big tax in the first year, you are allowed that money instead of paying tax, you spread it over a period so that might be paying after two or three years, because basically you have borrowed the money. So when you are talking about exemption please you are making a big mistake, it is not exemption, it is just accelerated capital allowance so that you are not able to pay big taxes in the earlier years because of the investment. 

To promote investments in Gulu, Mbale, or Soroti, you will need to put incentives for people to go and invest and one of them is to say that “I want you to go and invest there” you will be given accelerated capital allowances so that in the earlier years you are not able to pay taxes. We can understand why you are talking about Kampala; you may be circulated but even if it is circulated you don’t get up in the morning like this and decide that you are withdrawing them all 100% that it is why as committee in its wisdom decides that for Kampala we gradually do it from 50-25 so that next year you can remove, but for upcountry, you need these initial allowances to allow people go there to invest. Otherwise, you don’t do it, I can’t do it because I am worried that my investment will not be able to recoup early enough so I wanted to make that correction colleagues that Amos is lying that we are giving people exemptions; it’s just the initial allowances being granted so that taxes are not paid early. 

Having said that –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But what is the difference because you are supposed to pay 10 million in tax and you don’t pay it, what is it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me demonstrate, Mr Chairman. I said you have invested 10 million in a plant –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What I am saying is, if by the operation of normal things I was supposed to have paid 10 million as tax, now I am not paying it because of some operation or something you are technically calling initial something, I have not paid that, have I not been exempted?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Mr Chairman, it is like this; it is deferred taxation. Let us put it in context. With capital allowances on 10 million, initial allowance at 50% will be 5 million; the balance of 5 million will be spread over a period of four years; that means every year I will be allowed 1.25 for the next four years. Now their capital allowance means that if I made a profit for simplicity of the first year of 3 million, it means it will be 3 million minus the capital allowance of 5 so I have -2 which means I am not able to pay taxes. But if you remove it, it means you divide the whole 10 over the period of four years; now it means in the first year I will be allowed only 2.5 if I make a profit of 3 million; you deduct 2.5 so there will be 5 million to pay as you will be subjected to tax. 

In short, with initial capital allowance you are deferring the period of paying tax. So that you are able to pay it later, but there is no way that you will be allowed out of 10 million 11 billion, no. The total allowance over the period of your plant will be 10 million. 

What I am trying to say you will not dodge tax, it is only deferring the period so that the initial money you have like now if for the 3 million, if we save it you can expand the business, you can reduce the interest in the banks, mention it. That is the purpose of the initial capital allowance being bigger so that you are able to invest.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to pick up from where hon. Nandala has stopped and I want to tell this House that initial allowance benefits businesses in the initial years of investment. How? When you are allowed to charge depreciation at a rate of 75%, that amount is allowable for tax purposes. So what that means, you will have lesser taxes to pay because this initial allowance is going to reduce your profit. Let me come back to the debate; we have just passed a clause which I was totally against. But my colleague hon. Nandala argued that the beneficially of this tax on interest is businessmen and the banks. Coming back to initial allowance, who benefits from initial allowance? This is Mukwano, Roofings and others that can afford to pay taxes but are the beneficiaries of initial allowance and that is what I want to tell this House. Therefore, based on the earlier argument, I want to support the minister’s position – (Applause) - that this initial allowance be eliminated. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I put the question to this?

MR SSEBUNYA: On 9, we had proposed not to delete and we had proposed 50:25 but the members are saying that we should consider – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So what is the position as of now?

MR SSEBUNYA: That we remove initial allowance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So you withdraw your amendment?

MR SSEBUNYA: Because you have said time is money.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I want to plead with you – (Interjections) - yes, I thank him for conceding. But colleague, when will our investor open a factory in Amuru or Kisoro? When, if we do not have incentives? Why did we have incentives for Kampala? Now that Kampala is congested – but you are forgetting Kisoro, Karamoja if there is no initial allowance. Colleagues, this initial allowance benefits business people and that is why they are able to employ, expand and bring new technology. If you ‘kill’ the companies, how will they employ? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is no amendment on this clause and so I will now put the question to Clause 9 as it is in the Bill. There is no amendment. I put the question that Clause 9 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR SSEBUNYA: The committee proposes amendment on Section 140 of the principle Act. Delete the words, “...and to an additional fine equivalent to two percent of the fine for everyday the offence is committed.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister.

MR OMACH: I have no objection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR SSEBUNYA: Amendment on Second Schedule of the principle Act –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Procedure.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The procedural issue that I am raising is that there is an amendment on Schedule 1 and now this is Schedule 2. At what time is best to be introduced? That is the procedural issue that I am raising.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, now that we are on Schedule 2, we will deal with Schedule 2 and then you can raise it. Where is Schedule 1 on this?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is not there because it is a principle – what is happening is that Schedule 1 deals with exempting institutions and there was an institution –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us deal with this which is in the Bill and then I come to you on that issue. Is that okay? Let us handle it that way. So where are we? Clause 15.

MR SSEBUNYA: Amendment of the second schedule of the principle Act. Insert after “three percent” in the second column of the following “of gross turn over” and that is to correct an error.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister.

MR OMACH: I have no objection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment in Clause 15.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, you said that you are coming back to me.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do not worry because yours is not in the report or Bill and that is why we need to finish with what is in the Bill and then we come to what you are saying.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, you remember this thing of sports –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, please. Let me call the chair. Let us have some order because he has an amendment to propose.

MR SSEBUNYA: I think that the Sixth Schedule collapses since we have not provided for initial allowance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. So the point that you were making -

MR EKANYA: I was telling the committee chairperson that to the best of my knowledge during the debate, we had proposed amendment of the Third Schedule on Withholding Tax rate on winning from sports betting and so forth –(Interjections)- yes, it is Part (X). The challenge that we have now is that even in sub-counties, civil servants and students are gambling their fees and we wanted this to go to 50 percent instead of 15 percent but it is missing in the main report. What happened?

MR SSEBUNYA: We have a substantial Bill on pools betting – the Rotaries and Gaming Bill and so, I think that we should handle that matter there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But does that mean in terms of this one? Because if we pass this one like this, then we have to amend it again unless you are saying that we delete it from here.

MR EKANYA: Therefore, I want to move – because the other one is a Bill and we do not legislate in anticipation that instead of 15 percent, we raise it to 50 percent. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is incremental and I need to hear from the minister. On Part X of the Bill – withholding tax rate applicable to wining from sports betting and pool betting is 15 percent. The member is proposing that it should be 50 percent.

MR OMACH: I thank the shadow minister for bringing this but we need to study the impact of this because we are moving it from where it was zero percent to now 15 percent. So give us time to see the impact on this – (Interruption)

MR EBIL: Excuse me. I think that there is a problem here because I do not see any problem with what the shadow minister has said. What he is doing is that he is helping you balance your budget. The problem is that a good budget must balance and what you need now is to raise revenue on things like sports betting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you know that it has to be quantifiable and quantified for it to feed into the budget. (Laughter)

MR SSEBUNYA: We received those members of the sports betting industry and they were even going against this 15 percent, and were saying that they were being squeezed but we said we should go by the minister’s proposal and then we shall re-evaluate as we do the other Bill.

MR EKANYA: Can we lower it to 30 percent then?

MR KAKOOZA: First of all, it was zero percent and two, when did it start? Otherwise, you might put a tax to ‘kill’ a business whereas you may also benefit from it. So you can ‘kill’ a business and –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So what is the proposal?

MR KAKOOZA: My proposal is for it to stay as it is at 15 percent because we collect revenue from it and then we study it more.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Chairman, I think in taxation it is important that Members of Parliament understand certain principles. You tax to raise revenue and you can also tax to prevent. In this sense, members are saying since people are gambling, they should increase the tax so that people do not bet but you are leaving out the first principle of raising revenue because right now, if you astronomically increase to 50 per cent, the revenue will drastically fall and according to the budget, we are supposed to raise Shs 70 billion. When you increase, you might not raise the Shs 70 billion and therefore it affects the budget you are talking of. 

As such, I would like to appeal to members that we agree because the minister has already done a survey, they have debated it and they have proposed 15 per cent. Let us handle it at 15 per cent. Maybe next year after some analysis it can be increased.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I want to hear the minister again on this. Honourable minister, should we maintain 15 per cent? This is not a matter that should generate debate.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I thank the shadow Minister of Finance for bringing this proposal but I say that we are moving it from zero to 15 per cent. So let us stay it at 15 per cent. Maybe in future we can look at it but as for now, we maintain at 15 per cent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shadow minister -

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I concede with pain because to me this tax is immoral. It is not productive because people gamble fees and salaries. I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is now no amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have an amendment on withholding tax.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So I put the question that Clause 16 stands -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I recall during the time of the committee that insurance companies - we discussed when they were saying VAT of 18 per cent on reinsurance business vis-à-vis withholding tax on the premiums for reinsurance so that it is treated as a profession, as a foreign company that a certain deduction of withholding tax is the final tax.

It was agreed that instead of VAT on reinsurance premiums, we should have withholding tax on that. I thought my chairman would raise it. Since we are on the schedule of withholding tax; we proposed that 15 per cent withholding tax be levied on insurance premiums. 

The justification is to save the loss, which we will incur because VAT is complicated and it has a problem but we have agreed that withholding tax of 15 per cent will be a final tax and we will have a lot of money because many companies now have decided to do the following. They have a branch here, they have their headquarters in Kenya, they say we are doing reinsurance and they push all the money to Kenya and we are the losers as the money goes there. If we deducted 15 per cent, even if they take the balance there is no problem. So the proposal is we put 15 per cent on reinsurance premiums.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I would agree with his proposal but we have not considered VAT yet. So he is anticipating that we shall remove withholding tax on reinsurance in VAT schedules and then give it here as withholding tax. I don’t know -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This matter is before us here.

MR SSEBUNYA: Okay, I concede to his proposal.

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, it is true that reinsurance companies that have been in operation in Uganda were all foreign and all insurance companies in the country were required to subscribe to reinsurance companies. This resulted in a lot of capital flight because this money was going out of the country but of recent, there is a Uganda company, Uganda reinsurance, which was introduced. We would seek that if this tax is to be applied, it should be applied on the foreign reinsurance companies so as to protect our own company and let it grow because then it would also accumulate a lot of monies and use the very monies to promote growth of the insurance sector in Uganda. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So what is the proposal now?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I concur with the honourable Minister of State for Finance. If the reinsurance is here that means the money will -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the wording.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The proposal is that 15 per cent withholding tax on reinsurance premiums for - IT can be a foreigner and he does it here. For foreign companies - help me.

MR EKANYA: Whose shareholders are non-Ugandans or foreign based.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Because regarding reinsurance for foreign companies, the money will go out. Definitely even if it is a Ugandan company and it decided to take money out, we should be able to deduct. I think we have to be careful here. It could be a local company with a foreign interest. I think all reinsurance premiums, which are externalised, should be subject to 15 per cent withholding tax.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can somebody work on this or can we adopt the principle?

MR BIREKERAAWO: Mr Chairman, we must be very careful when we are passing this because, for example, the insurance for air craft, even if we left a Ugandan company, which Ugandan company will reinsure an aircraft without taking it outside? All reinsurance companies should be treated equally because a local reinsurance company will definitely have to take money outside whether you like it or not.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to thank our Secretary General for DP. That is a very good idea. I might be a local national insurance but I am insuring against a risk, which has no capacity here and I will take money to the UK. Let us say that all reinsurance premiums will be subjected to 15 per cent withholding tax. The moment it is a local one, it is not a reinsurance -

What I am trying to say is that all reinsurance premiums will be subjected to 15 per cent withholding tax and that will be the final tax.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, much as I support the principle, we need to be given time. For instance, there are some of these reinsurance companies with whom we already have written agreements. We need to have some studies; but in principle we agreed. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, the agreement does not take away parliamentary power, now I am hearing that agreements made outside of this Parliament on taxes have become law – (Interjections) – you may make the agreements, but they must be domesticated and legalised. So I think the proposal of hon. Aston Kajara is valid; we can have indigenous companies whose shareholders are Ugandans and that creates jobs and deepens capital in our economy. So, I think let us pass that principle and then the rewording can be done later. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have noted something. The moment it is a local company - withholding tax means that when preparing your accounts, it is considered advance tax paid and it is allowed. 

So what hon. Kajara has said does not arise. If it is a local company, the withholding tax may be waived and instruct them not to deduct. But for foreigners: South Africans and Kenyas, the 15 would be their final tax. I think what hon. Kajara is raising is not affected. If they do not get exemption from URA, it will be advance tax paid and when they compute their tax, it will be allowed or you can give them exemption. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, we have an understanding. This we do not tax; you can put a schedule under and we can agree to the amendment. We have Africa Re, which is a member of COMESA and we do not have tax obligations under that. And we have got our own; the Uganda Reinsurance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But now, where is the schedule - this is third schedule to the principle. So which other schedule are you talking about? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we have already agreed that it is 15 percent on withholding tax except for the following: Africa Reinsurance and Uganda Reinsurance. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Before the chairman comes in, I have heard that the proposed rate is 15 percent withholding tax. My view is that if we are to accept this – 15 percent is too high; it is actually going to be a killer tax. I do not want to kill industries. I think we need to do a study on this. Five or six percent would be normal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Initially, they wanted to make it 18 percent as VAT; but the reason we are making it 15 percent – it is like the professionals; if I do professional work in South Africa, they deduct 15 percent and give me the balance. 

So this is professional business of reinsurance that is why we took 15 percent as opposed to 18 percent under VAT, which was going to increase costs to people who do business in Uganda. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, with your permission, apart from Uganda Re and Africa Re, we have the African Trade Insurance Agency; this is also a member –(Interjections)– yes we are members. 

With regard to withholding tax, the rate is six percent. So if we go straight away to 15, it is slightly on the higher side. May be we could put it at six percent. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think the Minister of Finance is now aware. Withholding tax for supply of goods and services is six percent. Interest is 10 percent; professionals pay 15 percent. So we want to treat reinsurance as a profession, which was done with the other sectors. You wanted to charge 18 percent as VAT, but we have decided to be fair and put it at 15. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether he was talking as the chairman of Bugisu or as a professional. So, I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So it is 15 percent with the exception of those three firms: Uganda Re, Africa Re and Africa Trade Insurance Agency; the rest of them will have no exemption. 

MR MPUUGA: Mr Chairman, I am a little concerned because the minister’s list seems to be growing and changing and we are trying to consider stretching the same list. I do not know whether the minister is now sure –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It will be him to bring the amendment back; the burden is on him. If he has left somebody out, he will have to come back with an amendment later. So I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Schedule One deals with exempt institutions like Aga khan Foundation – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you proposing a new clause 17?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, I propose a new clause 17 to amend the first schedule. The issue I was trying to raise is the Institute of Certified Accountants of Uganda. Somebody asked why – (Interjections) – of my interest, I have been a member since 1993; I am number 32. Let me tell you why it should be exempted. 

Mr Chairman, the institute was created by an Act of Parliament in 1992 and these are its legal mandates: admission of members who qualify – not just those who claim to be members when they are not. Accounting professional standards; insurance for practising certificate and licences; inspection and audit quality control review; financial reporting award; continuing professional education; disciplining members – you know, Kazinda was not disciplined because he was not a member. Registration of students and conducting examinations.

So, Mr Chairman, this is for public interest and benefit. It does not derive a profit; it is not a profit-making entity. Its income basically comes from the members. It also makes regulations like the way Bank of Uganda and the Insurance Regulatory Authority and others do. Because of this, it has now supported the growth on this accountancy profession in Uganda. In Kenya, it is called the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Kenya. In Tanzania, it is called the National Board of Accountants and Auditors of Tanzania. In Rwanda, it is called the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Rwanda and all these are exempt to income tax.

For the lawyers, you know that the Uganda Law Council is not subjected to this income tax. Anyway, what I am trying to say is that if we tax ICPA Uganda, more accountants will come from Kenya because we have liberalised the market –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you would be of more help if you stated for us the kind of organisations to exempt in the first schedule. Please, do that for us while I ask somebody to bring me the Income Tax Act.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: If it does not make money, what do you tax? What is the tax for?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This organisation depends on members’ subscription. This subscription – supposing this year the organisation makes a surplus of Shs 50,000, that surplus should not be subjected to tax. What the minister of finance is doing shows that they want to tax a surplus, which is not supposed to be the case.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it being taxed?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes because if we don’t deal with it here, it will be subjected to this tax because already URA has written that they should pay this tax.

MR SABIITI: Mr Chairman, may I know if it works like a club and if so, are other clubs taxed or not?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clubs are not taxed. Yes, the hon. Jack Sabiiti has raised a good point. It is like a club or association and which are not taxed. It is an association that administers standards, examinations and so on, on behalf of members to promote accounting standards not like what Kampala Club does, which promotes social evenings.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I have the first schedule of this law. What you are proposing is too far from what is listed here. We have the Australian Development Agency, the African Development Bank, African Development Fund, Aga Khan Foundation, Belgium Technical Corporation, Danish International Development Agency, Gtz, East African Development Bank, East and Southern Trade and Development – they are in those categories – the International Labour Organisation, the Korean International Agency, the United Nations related agencies – so, it is not really elated to any of those things you are proposing. So, there must be housing for what you are proposing but not in here.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also agree with you that the Institute of Certified Public Accountants is not very close to the cited institutions under the Income Tax Act. However, its prayers can ably be accommodated under Section 21 of the Income Tax Act – under exempt incomes.

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, I have listened to the proposals being made by the honourable colleagues. But I think we cannot take a decision now because there could be similar bodies that will think they have been segregated or cheated or that matter. They will accuse us for giving special treatment to one body.

So, I think since we have had the proposals tabled, let Government study them and next time we handle similar matters, these should come up. But that should be done after some study has been done. Otherwise, if we take a decision now, there are bodies that will be disadvantaged.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It cannot treat it under Section 21 because in this section, institutions are not listed. So, we might have to find a proper time to handle this but not in this way. Wed either put it in the Act that created the institute or see how else it can be accommodated but not in this form.

So, hon. Nandala, would you like to withdraw this proposal so that we can see how to proceed? Maybe we can talk about subscriptions and things like those but now –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the exempt income under 21 (1), it is said that, “The following amounts are exempted from tax: (a) The income of listed institutions” – so the moment you list those institutions under Schedule I, if at all you did so, it means it will fall under exempt income. The reason I raised this is because I had seen 21 and that is why –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you see, you cited the case of the Uganda Law Society and all other institutions created by Acts of Parliament. Those are the ones you were citing but which are not listed here. The Uganda Law Society is not here. Even the Uganda Law Council that you mentioned is also not here. The medical people are not here yet they are all institutions regulating professional standards. That is why I am saying we need to find a proper housing for this one day when the sun shines brightly. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, thank you very much, Mr Chairman. That is so fine.

Clause 1

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we have got no amendment on Clause 1, which is about commencement.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, honourable members, I not put –

MR SEMUGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to raise this as procedural matter but also seeking guidance from you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, would you like to resume your seat, honourable member? Let me finish this business; we will guide ourselves later. I now put the question that Clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014” and passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Bill for an Act entitled The Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, chairperson, committee members, and thank you very much honourable members for moving this steadily. One down and a few to come.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much but for the future, I want to request the minister of finance so that the Hansard can capture, that schedule that revocation of legal notice, we have so many companies that government has been exempting. We hope that the minister of finance will do the necessary studies and have all these deleted from our law like Coin, Bidco, Steel and Tube, and so many others. There are so many companies that are exempted and I hope that next financial year, you will bring all this and we delete if not we shall help you. Thank you very much.

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is section 19 (2)(d) it is not amended here; we exempted almost the district councillors but at the moment URA is still charging them. They are getting 100,000 per month in allowances; they take away 30% that is 30,000 and yet here when I read section 19 (2)(d) of the Income Tax 2009, it is exempting them. Any allowances given for and which does not exceed the cost to be incurred etcetera, it is exempting them. I wonder why ministry of finance does not advise or write to URA to stop charging this money illegally from our district councillors!
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, respect the law. All your agencies must respect the law. The honourable member is saying the emoluments of this nature from the district councillors are exempted but whatever emoluments that are exempted under the law I have not yet seen it here. Please, ensure that the law is observed.

MS KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, I concur. The minimum threshold is Shs 235,000 a month, so we’ll definitely make sure that it is adhered to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we move and receive the report on the value added tax? Are we prepared to receive the report?

BILLS
 SECOND READING

 THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we at least receive report from the committee and then we see how to proceed with this?

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that motion seconded? Minister of Defence, minister of state for finance, minister of state for ethics, second the motion.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to amend the Value Added Tax Act Cap 349 to -
    1) provide for the removal from the exempt supplies, the supply of:- 
(a) 	feeds for poultry and live stalk, (b) machinery used for the processing of agricultural or dairy products,
(c) 	accommodation in tourist lodges and hotels, 
(d) 	new computers, desktops, printers, computer parts and accessories, 
(e) 	computer soft ware and soft ware licences,
(f) 	liquefied petroleum gas, salt, packaging materials exclusively used for the milling industry for packaging mill products;

    2) provide for application of VAT on- 
(a)	the supply of printing services for educational materials, 
(b) 	seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and hoes, 
(c) 	cereals where the cereals are grown, milled or produced in Uganda and 
(d) 	machinery tools and implements suitable for use only in agriculture. 

I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, that is the motion for second reading of this Bill. At this time we will be discussing the principles of the Bill as you are aware this matter was referred to the committee and the committee is ready to report. So I ask the chair to report.

5.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Ssebunya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will not read details of the Bill because the minister has read it well and we have the expected revenue from the termination of these exemptions and its related supplies under the 2nd and 3rd schedule of the VAT Act. We put it there so that members know that whichever action they take, if we terminate the exemption, Shs 215 billion will not be collected and on the termination of the zero rating supplies under 3rd schedule we shall be losing Shs 30.4 billion. 

Committee observations 

Termination of the zero rate status of the supply of cereals grown, milled or produced in Uganda 

Clause 4, (1) and (f) seeks to terminate the zero rate status of the supply of cereals grown, milled or produced in Uganda. The committee noted that government zero-rated the supply of cereals in order to build a milling capacity in the country and equally add value to the cereals products; that is agro-processing or value addition.

The committee observed that the bulk of the cereals are gathered from farmers by the middlemen who are below the threshold for VAT registration. We also observed that this measure will be counterproductive by making Ugandan rice, maize and other cereals uncompetitive as there will be influx of rice, maize and other cereals from other COMESA countries who are subsidising their farmers.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

The committee, therefore, recommends that proposed measures to provide for the application of VAT on supply of cereals grown, milled or produced in Uganda be stayed. (Applause)

Termination of VAT on the supply of seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and hoes. Clause 4 (1) (f) seeks to terminate the zero rate status on the supply of seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and hoes. The committee noted Government zero rated tax regime on the supply of seed, fertilisers and pesticides as an incentive previously to the agricultural input sector. However, in this year’s budget, Government has proposed to terminate the zero rating on the supply of seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and hoes. 

Specifically to speak about seeds, the seed subsector is a critical subsector in agriculture. Seed security precedes food security and therefore more attention needs to be paid to ensure seed is accessible and affordable to the majority of farmers.

And also to speak specifically on fertilisers, the Uganda Census of Agriculture of 2008/09 revealed that most farmers (50 percent) were not using inorganic fertilisers because they are expensive. The concern of the committee is that application of VAT on the supply of inorganic fertilisers will escalate the price of inorganic fertiliser even higher.

And also to speak specifically on pesticides and hoes, Mr Chairman, considering the fact that the usage of purchased inputs has been low especially in the rural areas, application of VAT at the standard rate on these inputs will make the situation worse. The danger of increase in diseases is real for users who may be discouraged in using pesticides as a result of high prices of pesticides. 

The second concern of the committee is the emerging of counterfeits in pesticides and bending hoes on the market, which will make agricultural production more expensive. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that these items should be exempted from VAT.


Termination of the zero rate on the supply of machinery and tools for agriculture

Clause 4 (1) (g) seeks to terminate the zero rate status on the supply of machinery and tools for agriculture.  

Mr Chairman, machinery and tools which are already expensive shall become more expensive. The committee’s concern is that the measures will hinder mechanisation of agriculture which is associated with high level of production and increase value addition.

The committee, therefore, recommends termination of zero rate on the supply of machinery and tools for agriculture to be stayed. (Applause)

VAT on reinsurance services and micro insurance

Clause 3 paragraph (a), applies VAT on the supply of insurance services except the supply of health insurance, and life insurance services. The committee received petitions against the imposition of VAT on micro insurance and reinsurance services and makes the following observations: 

Reinsurance 15 percent with a Ugandan reinsurance company. Uganda Reinsurance Company only commenced business in July 2013, and does not currently have the capacity to provide the required level of reinsurance cover for the Uganda market and in turn needs to heavily reinsure its liability on the international reinsurance market. 

The extent of foreign reinsurance can be illustrated by the figure reported in the IRA’s annual insurance market report and the latest is 2012. Mr Chairman, I will not read this table but will go ahead and say that of the business underwritten by the licensed insurance companies as per table above, 45 percent is ceded to international reinsurers. 

VAT will accordingly constitute a substantial additional impact on the insurance industry by Shs 25.4 billion yet the profit on non-life business in 2012 was only Shs 13.5 billion. VAT, therefore, renders many insurance arrangements as either uneconomic or loss-making. VAT is charged on reinsurance as an imported service and is a final tax to the insurance companies since it is not allowed as a credit.

The minister in the committee conceded to these observations. The committee, therefore, recommends that this proposal be withdrawn. 

Micro insurance

Micro insurance, like any other kind of insurance, offers protection against specific risks in exchange for regular premiums. As a specific class of insurance, micro insurance particularly protects low income earners against specific threats in their life cycles for regular premiums proportionate to the likelihood and cost of the risk involved.

The committee observes that charging VAT on these policies will increase the cost of the insurance, and yet it is intended for people with low incomes that cannot afford the regular policies. There is already a Shs 15,000 stamp duty on policies of micro insurance.

The minister also kind of conceded to this measure and the committee, therefore, recommends that this proposal be withdrawn. 

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the Bill be passed subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move. (Applause)

MR EKANYA: Minority.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, as we deliberated, we also found out that one of four members in the name of hon. Ekanya did not agree with some of the proposals that we made and he wrote a minority report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member.

5.15
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I also want to thank the chairperson. The committee did a commendable job and, therefore, the minority report under Rule 194 is basically on Clause 3 regarding the supply liquefied petroleum gas and then a repeal of the salt. I strongly oppose the termination of exemption on supply of salt and liquefied petroleum gas

The justification is that salt is still expensive for some people. For instance, some families burn leaves and even matooke peels and use them as salt because they cannot afford to buy it.  In addition, this tax will further increase the price of salt –(Interjections)– it is deleted from exempted supply; you will have to pay VAT on salt and you know the implication of not consuming salt: you suffer from goiter and related health complications and also, it is a very serious matter that people in districts where hon. Akol comes from burn, what we call in Teso, Abalang – those are matooke peels and other leaves which is very dangerous for human health. (Laughter)

On liquefied gas, Uganda loses more than 800 acres of forests each year. In addition, liquefied gas is used for lighting in homes, hospitals and also used in animal industry. Therefore, by imposing VAT on this, we are really going around telling people that everybody should go to the forest that does not exist. It would be prudent that Government instead subsidises liquefied gas so that we save our forests for the future generation. I beg to move and thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion as I proposed to you earlier is that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill” be read the second time. We have received the report of the committee; we have also received the minority view from a member of the committee on what the principles of the Bill are. Can we have a debate at this time or should we - We start tomorrow morning?

Honourable members, the Bills that are remaining will be included but the ones we also have reports for now include: the Tax Procedure Code Bill, the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, which if the other one had been passed and assented to, we would not have to consider this one. We also still have a Bill that is supposed to come; the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, which is not yet here and eventually also the Appropriation Bill and this Value Added Tax Bill.

Honourable members, the issues around this have been very popular everywhere on radio, in the newspapers and in public discussions so we need to have time to discuss it properly. I do not want to start that debate now and interrupt it; we need to take it and finish it properly.

So tomorrow morning we will start with the Tax Procedure Code Bill and then in the afternoon, we will handle this particular Bill. Is that okay? Okay. Thank you very much, honourable members. We have heard from the committee so this House is adjourned to tomorrow, 10.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.19 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 16 September 2014 at 10.00 a.m.)












