Wednesday, 5 September 2012

Parliament met at 2.29 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, honourable members. You are welcome to this sitting. On the 6th of September this year at the Sheraton Kampala Hotel, there is what is called Nile Gold Evening with Members of Parliament. The request has been made through the Speaker’s Office that Members of Parliament should attend this function. This is part of the stakeholder arrangement between Parliament and Nile Breweries Limited to have this interaction. Therefore, you are invited to participate in this function. Those of you who can go all the way -(Laughter)- you are invited to go all the way. Those of you who cannot go all the way, you are invited to just attend this function. It is called Nile Gold Evening with Members of Parliament.

Honourable members, as you can see from the Order Paper, we have lots of business and we will be applying the same rules we use for our time so that we can accomplish all this business. If you look at the notice of business to follow, you will see that there are very many things. Therefore, the shorter we take on discussions on a particular matter, the better for all of us in accomplishing the task which is already before us on the Order Paper today, and the notice of business to follow. We should be keeping time properly. That is my only communication to you today. 

Otherwise, thank you very much for coming on time. Today, we started a bit late, so we have to move fast to catch up. Next item. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (PPDA) REGULATIONS, 2012

2.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to request that I lay this particular paper at a later time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will tomorrow be okay?

MR OMACH: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us do that tomorrow.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

RELEASE OF USHS 64,820,285,657 TO ROAD FUND DESIGNED AGENCIES FOR MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL, DISTRICT AND URBAN ROADS IN QUARTER 1 OF FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Works and Transport. What is happening to this paper? Government Chief Whip? 

2.34
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, the minister has been called by the President and he just sent us a message that he would be able to do it tomorrow. Sorry about that, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow me to alter the Order Paper to accommodate reading of a Bill for the first time. It came to our attention when the Order Paper was already published. So, I will alter the Order Paper to allow Bills First Reading at an appropriate stage. If it comes now, it will be coming now.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have just come back from recess and as an institution of Parliament, we are here to do serious business for this country. We expect the government side to be ready with the programme or activities to go forward. It is saddening that even yesterday, we could not have some ministers present to give us a way forward. Today, the Whip on the government side has equally requested that some ministers be excused from laying the documents or to present them to this Parliament tomorrow. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

One, that once Parliament is in business, we expect full preparation and participation from the government side. You should also be informed on time of any shortcoming maybe if the minister – one of them has been called for emergency duties - rather than waiting for us to come here with high expectations to transact business on behalf of the country, only to be told that a minister is not coming. Mr Speaker, you should even have been told in advance of those setbacks. Could this be a sort of excuse rather than the reality on – okay -(Mr Wamanga-Wamai rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was a point of guidance. Do you want to guide the hon. Member?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I want to give her information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was a point of guidance. She is seeking guidance and I have to guide. If you can give the guidance, honourable member, go ahead and give the guidance. 

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I was concluding as I seek your guidance that it will be prudent that the side of Government takes the business seriously and you, our head as the Speaker, should not be ambushed because also on our side of the Opposition, we are preparing for the same activities. Why can’t the government side caution and whip their ministers to be in the House to transact business rather than postponing business, while we lose time on so many pending matters concerning this country?

I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The guidance I am seeking is that this Parliament sat here and approved more than 70 ministers and there are more than five ministers in a ministry. It is surprising that we come and sit in here and the government is not even able to put the issues forward. The guidance I am seeking is that we have more than five ministers. What are these ministers for? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you expect the Speaker -(Laughter)- to guide on that? Leader of Government Business, this matter came up yesterday and it is about laying of papers. Anybody can lay these papers, if the papers are ready. Why should we keep it on the Order Paper day in and day out? Can’t another minister lay these papers on the Table to get it off our list of business? Anyway, it does not look very good.

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, when I was responding, I carried an apology. And, I want to commit myself before you and the House that tomorrow, these papers will be laid on Table; either by me or the Minister of Works and Transport. So, on behalf of Government, this will be done tomorrow.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.40
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table a report of the delegation from Parliament of Uganda to the 23rd ACP – EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly, and the 28th ACP Parliamentary Assembly which was held in Horsens, Denmark. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; we will find time to deal with that report in detail. 

PETITION BY KYAMBOGO UNIVERSITY STUDENTS TO RESUME LECTURES

2.41
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Mr Speaker, under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I present to you: 

The humble petition of the students of the fraternity of Kyambogo University, presented on their behalf by me, Member of Parliament Kalungu West, Ssewungu Joseph Gonzaga, states that: 

The humble petitioners are students of Kyambogo University who are aggrieved by the decision of the university chairperson to indefinitely close the university premises. This petition, in so far as they have specifically appended their signatures hereto; 

1.	Whereas Kyambogo University is a public university, over 70 percent of the student population is privately sponsored with the majority of your petitioners hailing from poor family background with education as their only hope for a better future –(Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, the mover of the petition cited Rule 99 and when I consult with the Rules of Procedure –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was mispronunciation; he meant Rule 29. Please proceed. (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: He has to come back to my class, Mr Speaker. 

2. 	Whereas Kyambogo University is a public university, over 70 percent of the students population is privately sponsored with the majority of your petitioners hailing from poor family backgrounds with education as their only hope for a better future. 

3.	 The subject of this petition is that on the authority of the university council, circular 149, dated 28 August 2012, the university chairperson decided to indefinitely close the university and incidentally that too, is the industrial action that resulted in a strike by the university’s academic and management personnel. 

4. 	Following the closure of the university, your petitioners have been evicted from the university premises and have borne and continue to bare untold academic financial, emotional and all manner of loss; pain and suffering as a result of the said unreasonable eviction.

5. 	The said abrupt and unreasonable closure of that university is in that regard an additional cost to your petitioners who are already faced with an escalating and rising cost of living in hostels and all rented apartments whose costs will further rise exorbitantly should this standoff be continued and consequently result in unwarranted semester extension.

6. 	It is paramount to note that this state of affairs with most certainty brings to light a number of issues that your petitioners have hereto highlighted for the attention of the university authorities for urgent action.

a)	The recent hike in functional fees of up to 600 percent; and

b)	Inadequacy of technological and physical infrastructural facilities including laboratories, internet connectivity, sanitation facilities, security to mention but a few.

Therefore, the petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that:

1)	The Kyambogo University crisis be urgently determined with the view to re-open the university;

2)	The issues that have occasioned the subsisting state of affairs be exhaustively and urgently remedied by the responsible authorities; and

3)	The subject matter of this petition be given priority and consideration being mindful of the wider implications as highlighted herein. 

And your petitioners, as is duty bound, will ever pray. 

And hereto your humble petitioners have by annexure appended their signatures. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this petition on Table and I beg to lay the appended signatures from the petitioners. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Yesterday, there was a petition of a similar basis; this petition is no longer about just re-opening, it has more issues raised. It is sent to the appropriate committee to handle expeditiously so that a solution can be found to the problems that are disturbing Kyambogo University.

Petition by traditional leaders, religious leaders and civil society organisations

2.46
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I am presenting this petition under Rule 29. I would like to confirm that this petition meets all the requirements under Rule 29. 

The title: “The Traditional and Religious Leaders and Civil Society Organisations Petition to the Ninth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.” 

They state as follows: 

The humble petition of the traditional and religious leaders and civil society organisations in the area affected by the LRA in Uganda, the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Central African Republic, state as follows:

1)	To the dismay and shock of the communities affected by the LRA conflict, the Minister of Internal Affairs invoked his discretion under Section 16 of the Amnesty Act as amended and declined to extend the application of art II of the Amnesty Act. Through Statutory Instrument 34 of 2012, the application of part II of the Amnesty Act was declared as having a lapse.
 
2)	The implication of the actions of the minister is that no one will be able to benefit from amnesty in Uganda anymore. This is inspite of the fact that the ranks of the LRA rebels include young children, who were themselves abducted and forced into rebellion. 

3)	The action of the Minister for Internal Affairs was premised on the mistaken assumption that the LRA conflict is over; that the lapse of the Amnesty Act would have little, if any consequences; and that amnesties violate international and domestic law obligations to prosecute perpetrators of gross violations of human rights. 

4)	Although a large part of Northern Uganda is enjoying relative peace, the theatre of operations of the LRA conflict has shifted from Uganda to the DRC and CAR. Furthermore, the LRA, in particular, is largely comprised of abducted children and young adults forced into rebellion from both inside and outside Uganda.

5)	 In addition, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) is reported to be still active in Western Uganda as well as Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. As a result of these activities, the Amnesty Commission has maintained an office in Beni, DRC, working with MONUSCO (the UN agency in DRC) to repatriate former ADF and other combatants to Uganda. 

6)	In light of the above considerations, Uganda has both a moral and legal responsibility to continue to employ all means necessary to isolate Joseph Kony and his commanders so as to end the enslavement and abuse of abducted children and the suffering of other communities in the DRC, Central African Republic and Western Equatoria State of South Sudan.

7)	 In its efforts to deal with conflict, the Government and people of Uganda adopted amnesty as one of the tools to end our civil wars. This policy has been immensely successful in the affected areas and today the LRA is weak and small in numbers on account of the amnesty. 

8)	 Ever since the beginning of the LRA conflict, several agencies as well as the Government of Uganda have employed, with considerable success, programmes that encourage defections. The popular Mega FM in Gulu was set up for this purpose and through its “Dwogo Paco” (come back home) programme, many former LRA combatants have returned home and have been reintegrated into their communities.

9)	This strategy has been adopted and used in the DRC, Central African Republic and Southern Sudan by the UPDF, UN and other agencies. The messaging and radio programmes that have encouraged defections were premised on Uganda’s amnesty law, urging combatants to come back home to benefit from the amnesty.

10)	All of these important programmes employed as part of a military and peace strategy are now at the risk of a catastrophic failure because of the lapsing of Part II of the Amnesty Act. This will only help to embolden those around the LRA leader to continue with the rebellion rather than abandon him. 

11)	The rebellion comprised of largely abducted children and young adults; people who are unwilling combatants, coerced into the commission of heinous crimes against their will, lest they would suffer possible death in the hands of the LRA. 

Mr Speaker, I want to move straight to the prayer of the petitioners. They would like to pray to this Parliament as follows:

a)	To revise the decision of the honourable Minister for Internal Affairs in lapsing the provisions of Part II of the Amnesty Act and restore in its entirety the expunged provisions;
 
b)	To resolve that Statutory Instrument No.34 of 2012 issued by the Minister for Internal Affairs on May 23 2012, be revoked;
 
c)	To direct the Minister for Internal Affairs to immediately develop and table before this House appropriate regulations and clear criteria for the exclusion of certain individuals from benefiting from amnesties as provided for under section 2A of the Amnesty Act (as amended); and

d)	To direct the Minister for Internal Affairs and the Amnesty Commission to develop and table before the house clear procedures and plans for the promotion of reconciliation as required by section 8 of the Amnesty Act (as amended). 

Mr Speaker, this petition has dully been signed by:

Archbishop John Baptist Odama, representing Acholi Religious Leaders Peace Initiative; Kenneth Oketta, representing Prime Minister, Ker Kwaro of Acholi; Mark Abola, representing Gulu NGO Forum; Francis Odongyoo, the Executive Director, Human Rights Focus Gulu; Lucy Akello, representing Justice and Peace Commission - Gulu; Rt. Rev. Bishop M. Baker Ochola, Kitgum Arch Diocese; Sheik Musa Khelil, Chief Khadi of Acholi; Rt. Rev. Bishop Onono Onweng, the Bishop of Gulu; Source Opak, representing Iteso Cultural Union; Ojok Boniface, representing Justice and Reconciliation Project; Anthony Kerwegi, representing Concerned Parents Association; Ojara James Latigo, representing Uganda Historical Memory and Reconciliation Council; Patrick Luwuum, representing Acholi Religious Leaders Peace Initiative; Mzee Yusuf Adek, an elder and Rwot in Acholi; and Santo Okema, Ker Kwaro of Acholi.

Mr Speaker, I beg to present and the copy is here. I lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Hon. Members, the issues raised in that petition have some serious legal issues; issues of re-enactment. I am sure the committee will find out if a lapse law can be re-enacted by a minister or by the House. On the issue of revocation of the instrument that gave the Amnesty Act life – if it is revoked, will the Amnesty Act still have life? Those are issues that the committee needs to resolve expeditiously so that the state of affairs can be restored and the interest of all those people concerned dealt with properly.

The committee, of course, has the maximum of 45 days, but it would be appropriate, since it is a focused matter, if the committee can act expeditiously on this matter and report to Parliament so that appropriate action can be taken by the House. I thank you. The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs will be handling this. 

The next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS REGULATORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you will recall that clause 8 was stood over and it is the sincere hope of the chair that some harmonisation has been done. So, would the chairperson like to address the committee on this?

MR BAGIIRE: I thank you Mr Speaker. The committee on ICT sat today to look at that particular clause, and we would like to propose as follows; that other than us having a detailed prescribed contents committee, we are proposing that –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, we are on clause 8. First deal with clause 8, which is about the composition of the Board of the Authority.

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairperson, the committee indeed did look at clause 8 as well. The committee is in agreement that indeed the constitution of the board should include a lawyer, and as a result, the committee proposes that we do away with recommendation (c), which is, “A person from the academia knowledgeable in the field of information and communication technology”, because that would be covered in (a).

Therefore, we are proposing that we adopt what is in (c) in the original Bill, which says, “One prominent lawyer who is a member of the Uganda Law Society.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members that is the new proposal from the committee. What about the rest of the amendments to this?

MR BAGIIRE: The other amendments that the committee had recommended were that clause 8(3) be redrafted to read as follows –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable, I thought you were still dealing with the issue of 1(2). Are you proposing that we deal with the amendments you proposed in the report and you are only removing (c) and retaining the (c) in the Bill?

MR BAGIIRE: That is it, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, that particular part is okay with you. Honourable members, there is a proposal from the committee, on page 10 of the report, where they are proposing those changes in clause 8(2). Now they are proposing to take out (c) and retain what is on the Bill. So, we don’t have to do any amendment to that because that is what is in the Bill. 

He is proposing to make those other changes in a, b, d, e, f, g, h. Are we together? Can I put the question to this amendment then? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NDEEZI: Have you put the question?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I haven’t put the question to the whole clause. This was just part of the clause and I am now going to the other parts of the clause.

Sub-clause 8(3)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Speaker, the committee proposes that clause 8(3) be redrafted to read as follows: “All members of the Board shall be appointed by the minister and at least three of them shall be female.” The justification is to ensure that the board is gender balanced.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The usual word is, “women”, I think. Isn’t that the consistent term in legislation, hon. Ruhindi? To be consistent with other legislations, “women” would be more appropriate. I am talking about consistency with all the other laws we have passed in this House and those before us. Are we together on this? Is it okay for me to put the question on this?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am a bit uncomfortable with that blanket amendment. We need to be mindful of the gender issue. Secondly, when we say that all the board members be appointed by the minister, bearing in mind clause 8(2) where the composition of the board members is varied, it creates a lot of difficulty when we put all these under the minister to carry out this alone. 

Thirdly, my discomfort is that there would be too much power vested in the minister, so that our interest in checks and balances would not be guaranteed. I would propose that Parliament should be envisaged here, and the Commission should be put in place to guide us on this. My discomfort is that too much power in the hands of the minister would not bring about accountability in the way we want it to be. We want it to be more transparent and accountable. That is my discomfort. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is provision (4) also; have you looked at it. Honourable members that is the proposal of the honourable member from Kitgum; that you should involve Parliament in the appointment of Board members of the Commission. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, when we start saying that Parliament goes into choosing membership on Boards, then it means we are almost interfering with the work of the Executive. Why don’t we leave this minister to do his job very well so that when things go wrong, we pin him down properly.

I was of the view that we leave it the way it is and we should not start involving Parliament into this because parliamentarians will start looking for people from their own constituencies. Of course, I would want to have somebody from Mbarara Municipality on this Board. So, I was of the view that we leave it to the minister.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. Appointment and disappointment of boards, is the prerogative of the Executive. Once you bring Parliament into appointment and disappointment of the board, you are going to end up in unnecessary bureaucracy and you may actually paralyse and polarise the functioning of Government. 

I think this is properly captured and of course the checks and balances are in the fact that the minister takes this matter to Cabinet and I believe we can also give some level of respect to what Cabinet does. The checks and balances can be performed there. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we take a decision on this particular recommendation by the committee in sub-clause (3). I put the question to the amendment by the committee, of course, including the change from “females” to “women”. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause 8 (4) be deleted. The justification then was that it was redundant largely because we had amendments to clauses where professional bodies were required to recommend members to the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, are you saying the amendment is not necessary? Okay, let us hear from hon. Alex Ndeezi.

MR NDEEZI: I beg to remind you that yesterday, there was an important motion moved by an honourable member in relation to the composition of the board. A few minutes ago, before your arrival, I had a brief chat with the minister and the chairperson of the committee although we did not have enough time to conclude our discussion.

I am now happy that the gender aspect has been considered in the composition of this committee, which is in line with the provisions of the Constitution. We are very grateful for this improvement. 

However, Mr Chairman, I beg to bring to your attention the provisions of Objective Six of our Constitution. Let me read it out for Members who didn’t carry their copies. It states as follows: “The State shall ensure gender balance and fair representation of marginalised groups on all constitutional and other bodies.”

Mr Chairman, the board we are talking about is a very important one and it is a State board. Therefore, I am of the view that this Parliament by ensuring representation of Persons with Disabilities on the board is attempting to comply with the provisions of this Constitution.

Also, under Article 32 of the Constitution, we are required to ensure that we implement the principle of affirmative action. I would like to quote paragraph five of this important Article and it says, “Parliament shall make laws for the purpose of giving full effect the principles of affirmative action.”

So, Mr Chairman, without varying, allow me to quote the provisions in Article 35 of the Constitution. It says, “Persons with Disability have a right to respect and human dignity and the State and society shall take appropriate measures to ensure they realise their full mental and physical potential.” The same Article requires this Parliament to make laws appropriate for the protection of Persons with Disability.

All we are requesting for is that our people be represented on this important board as a constitutional obligation. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would you then like to move an amendment, hon. Ndeezi?

MR NDEEZI: It is (i) and it reads thus, “A person with disability and knowledgeable in ICT markets.” That is the amendment. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you propose to increase on the number of board members. Is that so?

MR NDEEZI: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: Isn’t that going to increase on the number of the board members. Isn’t it so?

MR NDEEZI: Very fine; as long as we comply with the requirements of the Constitution. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, what is the size of your board by policy and how can this be accommodated?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Chairman, the number proposed is seven voting members. But a comment, with your permission, Mr Chairman, it is true we had a discussion with hon. Ndeezi, but also with a number of colleagues representing the interests of Persons with Disabilities. Our view is that if we take into account what Ndungu Ndeezi is proposing, we are likely to have a board of perhaps 15 people. This is because there are many other important interests to be taken care of. It is also true that there are all sorts of considerations. But we have assured hon. Alex Ndeezi and his constituency that Government will as usual be very sensitive to the interests of Persons with Disabilities. But that it would be difficult to make an amendment where we enshrine Persons with Disabilities as members of this board. And on that basis, therefore, I do oppose the proposal that has been moved by hon. Alex Ndeezi.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But honourable minister, can’t it be accommodated in one of the qualification clauses like we have qualified in (3) for women? Can’t such a qualification be made to include maybe one or whatever number of persons representing persons with disabilities? In such a way that it doesn’t swallow up the number of the people on the board, but so that the consideration is within the law, instead of making an addition to the number? Okay, honourable learned Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, rather than setting a precedent in the enactment of a law that we may have problems in following up, I think the best would be – and this could be a better precedent – and of course this is to supplement the honourable minister’s submission because it has been the policy of Government that in appointing members to such boards, marginalised interest groups are taken care of. 

So, to avoid particularising any of them, we could actually re-enact Objective 6 of the Directive Principles of State Policy, which is in the Constitution and say thus: “In the appointment of the members of the board, the minister shall take into consideration, gender balance and fair representation of marginalised groups on the board.” Then the minister and Cabinet will ensure that those interest groups are taken care of.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairman, I am a bit uncomfortable with the Attorney-General because what he is talking about can only work if the Attorney-General and the current minister are still in charge of this work, because they are sensitised on our issue. 

But I also think we can address the concerns of the minister. As you have mentioned, the numbers can remain the same, but we state that one of the members of the board should be a person with disability. I think that will address the concerns of the minister. The number remains the same but among them is a person with disability. I have no problem with that, Mr Chairman.

MR BALYEKU: Mr Chairman, don’t you think that much as we may want to consider hon. Ndeezi’s amendment, we have so many other special interest groups. We have the youth, UPDF, the workers – and we have already considered the women as an issue of gender. Maybe, we should amend and say that the minister should consider special groups because you cannot increase the number, but the minister should consider, when appointing the board, that all special interests as per the Constitution, are well catered for. 

Otherwise, we have to increase the number of the board members because hon. Ndeezi’s issue is very sensitive; the disabled are constitutionally empowered to sit on any board, but if we emphasise and say the disabled have to sit there; then even the youth have to sit; as well as the workers and the UPDF. So, the minister should be the one to consider all the special interest groups.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I totally concur with the Deputy Attorney-General and hon. Moses Balyeku because the list of interest groups is long and it does not only stop at the disabled. When they are appointing, they should put into serious consideration all those under that category because if you start singling out, then we may miss the point. 

For instance, I have already written to the minister that when appointing, make sure that you include at least a Muslim. So, if we go into those details of including this one and that one - let the minister, when appointing people on this board, consider all interest groups including the marginalised Muslims. (Laughter)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Yesterday when this point was being raised, it was argued that the persons with disabilities, especially mental and physical - there was a point on mental and physical disabilities, which was requested to be amended not to misconstrue the marginalisation of persons with disabilities.

The point of argument is that this sector of Information Communication Technology is so vital for persons with disabilities and they really need their interests to be taken care of. That is why, from their point of view, they are saying that if they can be represented, then their issues and concerns, which need to be factored into the technology and policies that go with that, can be taken care of.

Since we have already spoken for the women, who are also an interest group, we cannot go and begin marginalising people like that. If we have accepted women, why are we trying to suffocate persons with disabilities?

Mr Chairman, my point of view would be that we say at least among all these others because a person with a disability can be a woman or a man. So, we can just say, among the members of the board, at least one should be a person with disabilities, so that we take care of the special interests and needs of these people who are more aligned to the technology, because it enables them to live a much better life than when we did not have modern technology in place. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which clause are we considering now? Have we voted on it? Hon. Ndeezi has agreed that we do not swell the number because the minister does not accept the number being enlarged. Can we then go and handle that under sub-clause (3) or explain it under sub-clause (3) properly to capture the specific interests of persons with disabilities? Can somebody help us with that drafting then, so that we can take a decision on this? 

Curiously, I would like to know from the chairperson why the approval of Cabinet has been removed in the amendments you are proposing. This is not in the amendments.

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the reason we removed the approval of Cabinet is because it is automatic.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is not automatic; is it?

MR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Chairman, it is standard practice that all Boards go to Cabinet for approval to ensure that specific interests of people with disabilities and other interests are taken into account so this is a standard practice by Cabinet.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But what about the other laws? Are they also silent?

MR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Chairman, if I may give information, even on other laws, there is no specific reference to Cabinet. This is more of a standard practice other than a legal practice.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I salute all my colleagues. The question of parliamentary participation in the approval is to cure a problem in this country -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we are talking about Cabinet.

MR FUNGAROO: If we leave it to Cabinet, it is the same as the minister. The minister is a member of the Cabinet -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, on the issue of whether Cabinet should be involved or not, that one is settled. Parliament cannot be involved in the appointment of boards. We are now dealing with the issue of why it should not go through Cabinet expressly by law. That is where we are and the explanation, which I still need to be guided on, is whether the approval issue is always silent in the law, but my recollection seems to suggest otherwise. And then we can see how to include the issue of persons with disabilities. (Hon. Sebaggala rose_) Are you coming out with a draft, Member for Kawempe North? I need a draft not an issue. Let us deal with the draft now to accommodate the issue of people with disabilities and then we resolve the issue of the Cabinet. Let us go step by step.

MR KAKOOZA: Clause 8(3) redrafted to read as follows: “All members of the board shall be appointed by the minister, at least three of whom shall be female and one person with disabilities knowledgeable in matters of ICT.” I beg to move.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairman, I thank hon. James Kakooza for enabling us to arrive at a very important compromise amendment. I support the amendment and beg to move that you put the question.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I need to resolve this issue. Yesterday, we spent a lot of time on it also.

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, I want to propose that we stand over this issue and first revisit the issue on the content committee. If our colleagues with issues related to disability are not convinced, then we shall come back and re-draft. That is my proposal, but the idea is –(Interjections)- it is not diversionary. The idea is that we can actually competently take care of them in the content committee.

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: I would like to give a further amendment on hon. Kakooza’s amendment. But before that, I don’t think it is clear to stand over this; we could just finish it right now. I don’t think it is necessary to say that the person with disability should be a person knowledgeable in IT. We have seen board members, but not all members should be professional in that field. For as long as the person has got the basic education, they can serve on the board. 

MS AMODING: Mr Chairman, I beg to be guided. What I heard from hon. Kakooza was that at least three women, one of whom should be a person with disability. Is that what you said? 

MR KAKOOZA: No.

MS AMODING: Then I put my issue to rest. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have listened to hon. Majegere, hon. Amoding and hon. Ndeezi, and I seem to be in agreement with the proposal that hon. Kakooza raised to include a fourth person not necessarily deleting the third woman, but including the fourth person who should have professional knowledge in PWD issues so that we are not guessing around. 

Whereas some of the people who don’t have disabilities can read, touch and see, it is pertinent that this person be included as a fourth person or among the marginalised groups so that at the end of the day, when we are constituting the board of seven, we should have at least three women and one person with disabilities, and then the other three can come from the descriptions that we have defined here. 

DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I support the amendment by hon. Kakooza except that - unless I didn’t get it very clearly - it may affect the number which we gave the Minister. I would propose, basing on hon. Kakooza’s proposal, at least three of these four members would be women and then one other person with disability. This would affect the number. I would propose, if this will not hurt the women folk, that it reads, “All members of the board shall be appointed by the Minister, at least two of them shall be female and one other person with disability with knowledge in IT.” So that the number which the minister was worried about wouldn’t be affected. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do agree with the amendment moved by hon. Kakooza and amended by hon. Majegere, because when you look at the board, there are various professionals. Why are we tying this person with disabilities to be knowledgeable in IT? There is an opening for economics and financial management; there is an opening for consumers and something like human resource. I believe that if this person with disability is qualified, not necessarily in IT - and we know the challenges PWDs have been going through - I strongly feel that they should not be tied to IT only, and the number of women should remain three and not be reduced to two as the hon. Omona proposed. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let me propose this and see if it can solve this matter, because addition of the PWD person at the end seems to imply that it should be a woman. Let me propose as follows: “All members of the board shall be appointed by the minister. At least one of them will be a person with disability and three of whom shall be women.” (Applause) 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. It is good we have fixed first the issue of persons with disability because this is a possibility for everybody to become one of them; God forbid. 

Secondly, a person with disability can be either male or female. If the best candidate for the slot of PWDs is a woman, can we still say that the women still have a slot of three apart from the one of the PWDs? So, we should say, at least three women, one of whom  shall be a PWD, so that if the women are two, one will be a PWD, which is okay. 

MS NTABAZI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I don’t know whether it is in order for me to contribute because I am a member of the committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Proceed. 

MS NTABAZI: Thank you so much. Really, I am trying to put clear what my colleague, hon. Fungaroo has said, that the one of three women should be disabled. Disability is for everybody and like he said, it doesn’t select whom to start with and whom to end with. So, I am of the view that the three constitutionally, should be women. 

Then among the seven members, among the qualifications which are put here, one of them can be a PWD, in which case it can either be a man or a woman. So, we are not saying that particularly from the remaining three or four remaining; in any case, if I can compete as a lawyer, I can compete with a gentleman and take the position on top of the three. So, we are saying, let the person with disability come from the seven, whether a woman or man, like you proposed Mr Chairman. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You know there will be seven people. Out of the seven, at least three will be women; at least one will be a PWD. It doesn’t matter whether one of the three is a PWD or whichever side. It really doesn’t matter, but the answer is that there is at least one person with disability. You can have all the seven as PWDs or all as women. No man is going to show up and say, “We are being marginalised,” I suppose. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us have the chairperson of the legal committee and then we conclude this matter.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I only have a problem of a fundamental nature in this legislative process, where we shall be prescribing the number of women -(Interjections)- listen. (Laughter) The problem I have is that the Constitution guides us on the representation of women – a third. I do not know whether you are going to be subjecting the number of women on each board of the institutions that we shall be debating. The Constitution is very clear and, therefore, I do not think we should belabour on the number of women and person with disabilities because that is already provided for. And this is a situation that will be confronting us on a very new legislation that we shall be dealing with. I am just seeking your indulgence, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, honourable member, please propose what you think will move us forward now.

MR TASHOBYA: In essence, what I am saying is that I do not see the need to specify the number. Once we agree on the number, I do not see the need for specifying a minimum number of women to sit on the board because that is already provided for in the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what should we say in this Bill? Nothing? 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thought that hon. Tashobya was actually stating the spirit of the newly proposed law. I do not see any problem at all in providing specifically for affirmative action. We know for sure that if we left it generally that “there will be seven members” and we leave the minister to decide, he may be tempted to abuse his discretionary powers, especially against the women. 

I find it appropriate to agree with the proposal that you put forward that three women be there and then the fourth person – whether a man or a woman - that would be an added advantage to either sex; we cannot legislate on that so that it is left for the person with disability. And as hon. Fungaroo has said that we are all candidates of disability; anybody can be disabled. So, do not think that they are few. Presently, I know of one Member who had a very serious back problem and he was not able to walk – that could be a disability. (Laughter)

But, Mr Chairman, I propose that if that can be conclusive enough, three is almost one-third of the seven. If one is added, it would only be fair that whether a woman or a man takes it, it should not be a matter that we should labour to legislate on at this point.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will put the question. Can somebody re-state the proposal that came from the chairperson for the Hansard? Would you like to do that, Mr Chairman?

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the proposal that came from the chair was that, “All members of the board shall be appointed by the minister, at least three of whom shall be women…”  (Interjections) I will repeat, “All members of the board shall be appointed by the minister, one of whom shall be a person with disability, three of whom shall be women.” [MEMBERS: “A third.”] 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. Is it a third or three? Nobody has come up with a third. Now you are beginning to change at the last minute; you had earlier said, “at least three” but now again you are saying “a third”.

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In this particular case which we are discussing, we had agreed on a number of seven for the board members and we had also agreed on three women. So, if we go back to “a third” and all that, I think it is taking us back. What I would request is that we take it as the committee chairperson was reading it. We could go with the issue of “a third” if the number of the board members had not been pre-defined.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, “All members of the board shall be appointed by the minister. One of whom shall be a person with disability and at least three of whom shall be women.” Okay? That is the proposal. Hon. Ruhindi wants to perfect the drafting – you know he is a senior draftsperson. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, your proposal is very good, but I want to re-state the position of the minister in the law. He said it is standard practice that these boards are approved by Cabinet. I want the position in his Bill to be captured still in the Bill because it seems the committee was deleting, “…with approval of cabinet.” I want that to be retained in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, that is the proposal. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, first of all, we had proposed a deletion of clause 4; and that is why we thought this would be 6 - if we had deleted. But that now stands. In essence, this insertion would be a new clause 7, as opposed to 6, and the idea is to insert a new clause 7 to read as follows: “A term of office for the board shall be three years.” 

And then in addition to that, add another clause to say that, “A member of the board, other than the executive director, shall not be eligible for re-appointment after serving two terms.” And the reason for this is that the executive director is appointed for a five-year term.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, but what is wrong with the existing clause 6?

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the time we were considering this Bill was during the EALA elections and there was confusion in the House with regard to one further term. So, we thought we should make it explicit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that the best way to cure that supposed ambiguity? Would that cure it so that I put the question?

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Chairman, since already there is a discrepancy in terms of the years, because you are talking of five years for the executive director and three years for the board members, why can’t we be specific here, when we are talking about a member of the board other than “the Executive Director shall not be eligible for re-appointment after serving two terms of three years each.”

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I am very mindful of what transpired as far as the East African Community Treaty is concerned. Up to now, I am not quite sure whether that issue has been resolved, and the only cure is to put the usual word at the end of current (6); “only”. “A member of the board shall hold office for three years and shall be eligible for re-appointment for one further term only.”

You do not have to mention the executive director because the terms and conditions of the executive director are clearly spelt out within the Bill in another clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “Shall be eligible for re-appointment for only one further term.” Clear? I put the question -

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Chairman, we have to be very careful not to insinuate that it is automatic that once this person serves the first term, he automatically qualifies for another term. Let us be careful with the words we are using.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is why they are saying. “Shall be eligible.”

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: “May”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “May be eligible”. I think the “may” or “shall” at that point does not matter because the discretion is already inherent there. Eligibility for re-appointment shall be “eligible”.

MR RUHINDI: No, you see, Mr Chairman, you have to be very careful with these modifiers because “shall” qualifies eligibility. In other words, you are entitled by law for further vetting to see whether you are eligible. So, if you remove it, it means that that person is not even eligible. 

“May” be eligible or may not be eligible; so it takes you into another argument whether the person is actually eligible but this by operation of the law means that that person is eligible. That is why we use the word “shall” and then they vet you and see whether you qualify to come on board or not once again.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, as I mentioned earlier, the committee sat this morning and reflected on the proposed new clause, and we have a proposal; that rather than prescribe what the content committee should be, we are proposing that we insert clause 13(2) to read as follows:

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Proceed, Mr Chairman.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are proposing that under committees of the board, we amend as follows and say that, “The board shall establish a contents committee to oversee content matters under the Act.” And then subsequently, re-number the following clauses: 13(2) becomes 13(3); 13(3) becomes 13(4); 13(4) becomes 13(5); and 13(5) becomes (6).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is clear, honourable members. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause 15(2) be redrafted to read as follows: “A person shall not be appointed executive director unless that person has relevant knowledge and considerable experience in communications, broadcasting, postal communications, economics, finance, law or administration. “And the justification is that -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Page 14 of the report.

MR BAGIIRE: Honourable colleagues, because of the amendment, we have made - 13(2), all the amendments on the content committee have been withdrawn.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, amendments running from the bottom of pages 11, 12 and 13 have been withdrawn. So, those ones are now ineffective. So, we now go to the initial numbering of the Bill.

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, I think I will go through this over again. The committee proposes that clause 15(2) is redrafted to read as follows: “A person shall not be appointed executive director unless that person has relevant knowledge and considerable experience in communications, broadcasting, postal communications, economics, finance, law or administration.” The justification is to broaden the academic requirements and experience.

Mr Chairman, the reason for this is that we are harmonising broadcasting and communications. So, it is only prudent that aspects like broadcasting and postal communications are also included because they are part of the harmonisation process. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment – yes, Member for West Budama South?

MR OBOTH: This is a good proposal by the committee, but I am hesitant to say that in Uganda or elsewhere, it is impossible to find a person with this measure and vast experience. When we put this, it should be the word “either” in communications, broadcasting and so on, until you qualify the word “or” administration. When we leave it like this, the implication is simply that this person must be knowledgeable in communications, broadcasting, postal communication, economics, finance, law or administration.

It is my humble appeal that it is further amended to include and insert the word “either” in communication just in between “in” and “communication”. It would still serve the purpose for which it is intended. Unless I am wrong, but the way I see the chairman, he seems to be agreeing with that. His smile tells it all.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Experience in either communications, broadcasting or administration. The proposal from the honourable member for South Budama is that you insert “either” before “communications”. Is that okay, Mr Chairman? 

So, we put the question to the amendment? Attorney-General? 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, thank you. The proposal made by the honourable member is in order. It removes ambiguity for the ordinary readers in law. Otherwise, the current formulation is okay with “or” at the end. But this is much better.

However, I am wondering why the committee abandoned “commerce”. I do not know whether they are arguing that it may be embedded in one of the others they have captured. I just want an explanation as to why commerce, which is in the Bill, has been abandoned in their proposal.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Commerce is wide. What we understand as commerce involves finance; it involves management; and it involves marketing. So, if you use the word commerce, you may as well just say communication because communication is also a wide subject. When you talk about communication, you can assume that broadcasting is part of communication. You can assume that postal communication is part of communication. So, you narrow down the qualification to be communication, commerce and whatever else you want. So, do we really need the word “commerce” or do we need “finance”? I think by using “finance”, we are saying that this person who may have commerce as a qualification must have majored in finance. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Chairman, I have some difficulties with the subsequent requirements of economics, finance, law or administration. Of course, getting a broad-skilled person with all this kind of knowledge is not easy -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But the issue has been sorted out. Say either or any of those qualifications; not everything. 

MR RUHUNDA: The problem I have – of course if you choose an economist to be executive director or a finance person without the core knowledge - because I am looking at the core knowledge of communication. I see communication as a very specialised area, which -(Interjections)- I am finishing my point. The way I understand communication and broadcasting; these are very specialised fields. When you have someone who has done economics or law and you say, “Come and be executive director,” of course you will say that, “You know you qualify because the provision is there for you. You are a lawyer. You come and become an executive director.” I do not think this is right. We must protect and preserve this field for the specialised skilled individuals. These others are just an added advantage.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. While I respect the submission by my colleague, I wish to state that we are not looking for the best engineer in the world. We are looking for the best manager. We are looking for somebody who has got vast knowledge not only in communication, but maybe also in administration. Not in broadcasting, but it maybe somebody who, when he sits in that chair, has got the capacity to manage everybody within the commission, so that we get the results we want. We might take a lawyer with an MBA, or an engineer or a teacher, who has eventually upgraded to the extent that he distinguished himself as a manager. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR BALYEKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have to be very careful when we are setting these qualifications because generations are changing, and courses are changing. I have a Masters in International Business. I have done economics, finance, law and administration. But here we are saying relevant knowledge. It is just a subject I have done. Let us specify and include more courses here instead of just saying communication or broadcasting. Broadcasting is just a small component. Nobody has done a Masters in broadcasting only. You will find that it is attached to either audio-visual or something else - maybe people going to the moon now and whatever; let us be clear. Which courses qualify? Not just relevant subjects. To become an executive director, we have to know that you have to have either Masters in IT, Masters in Communication, Masters in Broadcasting or Masters in something; not just saying communication, economics, law. If I have a diploma in law, do I qualify?

Hon. Tim Lwanga has said we are looking for that person because if I have a diploma in law, I will apply and say I have vast experience. I have practised for 10 years with my diploma. So, I qualify to be an executive director of this institution. Let us use courses not just knowledge of this particular subject.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think we should also try and avoid enacting a job advert in the law. We should avoid that. 

MR BIGIRWA: Mr Chairman, I think I rise to support the proposal by hon. Oboth and the idea of adding the word “either” sorts out many of the challenges we are finding. This is also to believe in my chairperson of the Committee on Budget, that the position of the executive director is not necessarily to look for highly qualified technical people in the communications industry. It is about management and administration in my own thinking. I would, therefore, propose that you put a question on the matter, especially to do with the amendment as brought forward by hon. Oboth. I feel it is much better and I also support you that this is not a job advert in the law. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, is it correct to say that broadcasting, postal communications are all communications? [HON. MEMBER: “Yes.”] In which case we take the word “communications” and leave out broadcasting and postal communication as details. Is that okay? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] If we can take that, we are making some progress. Hon. Majegere, let me first make some progress before you come up.

The other broad subject would be Economics. Will that be correct, or you want to do commerce? [HON. MEMBERS: “Economics.”] Then what would be the next broad subject; Finance, Law or Administration? So, the proposal now would read: “A person shall not be appointed executive director unless that person has relevant knowledge and considerable experience in either communications, economics, finance, law or administration.” 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I agree with the proposal. But hon. Balyeku just opened my eyes when he talked about relevant experience and knowledge. I think the insertion of the words, “Has relevant qualifications, knowledge and considerable experience” should be part of the requirements. But also, as we merge these words, “Broadcasting” and “Postal Communications”, I think our intention here is telecommunication engineering. 

I do not know whether somebody who did Bachelor of Communications in Makerere would qualify for this kind of work; are we not looking at telecommunication engineering? 

But my reason for rising up is to add to your proposal that the words, “Has relevant qualifications” as advised by hon. Moses Balyeku should be added. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “...relevant qualifications, knowledge...” and I do not see “engineering”; Is that not a relevant area? I will put the question now –

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, you are on the right track. If you look at the interpretations that we have, communication services indeed do include telecommunications and postal broadcasting among others. 

So, if you say, communication, that covers it. That is actually included in the interpretations – it is all embedded in that. There is telecommunications engineering; we do not have to repeat engineering in that particular clause. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, a civil engineer cannot be part of this? Okay, I will put the question. Honourable members, please, let us move forward –

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Chairman, we can take the technical perspective of it to require a Bachelor’s degree. Then we say, - for managerial level, one requires masters – and that can be an MBA –(Interjections)– Mr Chairman, you protect me.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Majegere, I have just said, let us leave the job advert for the board. But the law should just give broad principles; we cannot go into the details of whether one should have a Bachelor’s, Masters or PhD; that is for the board. So, I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, we have an amendment on Clause 15(3), but it is indeed similar to what we had for the board. So, with your permission, I would like to propose that we maintain what is in the Bill, but add, “Only one further term”, as proposed by the Attorney-General.

So, that would read as follows: “The executive director shall hold office for five years and shall be eligible for appointment for only one further term.”
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is the amendment. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether this is premature, but we propose to amend Clause 15(4)(d) to substitute for the word “Director General”, the word, “Executive Director”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, I think that is consequential. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR BAGIIRE: On clause 16, we have an amendment on clause 16(1)c to redraft paragraph (c) to read as follows: “Administering organising and supervising the staff of the commission.” 

The justification is the phrase “generally controlling” is embedded in the word “supervising”. 

MR KAKOOZA: I seek clarification. Do we need to put this in the law? If the executive director has these qualifications, what else would his job be? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For the avoidance of doubt I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 17, agreed to.)

(Clause 18, agreed to.)

(Clause 19, agreed to.)

(Clause 20, agreed to.)

(Clause 21, agreed to.)

(Clause 22, agreed to.)

(Clause 23, agreed to.)

Clause 24

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, there is a very small inclusion here, and that is clause 24(2); substitute for the phrase “Section 4c” with the phrase “Section 4(1)c” because that is what the Bill is referring to. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 25

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, I have an amendment for clause 25(2). The first one is that we re-number paragraph “c” as “b” and paragraph “d” as “c”. That is because the numbering jumps from “a” to “c”. 

The other amendment on that particular clause 25 is a proposal to introduce, after paragraph (c), paragraph (d), to read as follows: “The environmental impact assessment.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members that is a straight forward requirement. Should I put the question to it? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: There is a proposal to rephrase 25(3) to read as follows –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you amending 25(3)? Proceed.

MR BAGIIRE: To read as follows: “A person who contravenes the sub-section (1) commits an offence, and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 96 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding four years or both.” –(Interjections

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let him justify.

MR BAGIIRE: I beg for the indulgence of the Members. I think the copy that you have may not have a justification for this. However, the justification is to basically harmonise the final and custodial sentence in the clause with the provisions of the law revision, fines and other financial amounts in Criminal Act, 2008. 

As you know, this law we are amending right now, was enacted in 1996, and so, it is important that it is harmonised with the other laws. But in saying that also, we need to harmonise the penalty in the clause with other penalties in the Bill in that actually, the 1,500 currency points is far beyond all the other penalties in similar offences in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, the Member from Kyamuswa.

MR LWANGA:  I thank you Mr Chairman. If I am right, a currency point is Shs 20,000. Am I right?  Shs 20,000 multiplied by 96 is 1,920,000 – that only? In the communications industry? That is very little money. We must have a penalty that is deterrent and I do not think that this is deterrent enough. I would propose 200 currency points.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Bill had 1,500 currency points.

MR LWANGA: I beg to propose that we stay with the 1,500 currency points.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: West Budama South.

MR OBOTH: I know that North is also here. Like hon. Timothy Lwanga is saying, unless the currency points in this particular law are different - it is more than Shs 20,000. This would be very encouraging to those who would be committing crime. If it was 1,500, there would be no reason unless the proposers of this law are planning to commit the same offence. (Laughter) But to discourage that, I think the proposal to have 1,500 if it is still at Shs 20,000 would be appropriate in the circumstances.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairperson, would you like to withdraw so that we take a vote on this matter?

MR BAGIIRE: I withdraw.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are withdrawing the proposed amendment on (3).

MR BAGIIRE: Yes, I would like to withdraw the amendment on (3)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I thank you.

MS ANYWAR: I thank you Mr Chairman. I am seeking some guidance. You will excuse me, but on this clause 25, the heading states, “Installation of television and radio stations.” I am seeking your guidance Mr Chairman, on whether there will be any other provision other than the communication masts, which are scattered all over the country and hence, need to fall under this protection because it also affects the environment and has health implications. I would want your guidance on that so that I rest my case. Otherwise, I do not see it here and I am perturbed. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is because there is a particular sector regulating this sector. This particular sector is regulated by this communication - the member for Busongora North.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, what my colleague has talked about is actually imbeded here in the clause that she read, “Installation of television and radio stations.” In my interpretation, I see that you cannot have a radio station without a mast; and you cannot install a television without a mast. So, those ingredients are part of this and, therefore, we cannot legislate on them independently as she was saying. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The chairperson.

MR BAGIIRE: We did discuss this particular issue yesterday and the honourable minister made it categorically clear that there is a move towards harmonisation and installation of masts and indeed, there are now companies in Uganda that have taken over masts from telecom companies and in essence, the operators will no longer need to go and install masts. 

If one telecom company has a mast in one place and it has been purchased by these particular companies that are running the masts, they will go and hire that particular mast and use it. In essence, we might be seeing the end of various masts scattered all over the place.

MS ANYWAR: I am happy to hear that the committee was aware of this problem of the masts scattered all over the country, and as per his explanation, I would want him to give us assurance on whether the existing improperly installed masts hovering over residential areas, including schools and hospitals, with their health implications are going to be withdrawn and re-organised so that we have them positioned where it is no longer dangerous to the environment, and to the health of Ugandans. I need that assurance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, the question is directed to you.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: I thank you very much. The concern raised by hon. Anywar is shared by all of us and one of the mitigating measures now is the fact that private companies are coming in to manage these towers and also, to have the operators sharing the masts. The Uganda Communications Commission, whose Bill we are discussing now, has the responsibility to regulate those installations. They are very sensitive and aware of these problems, and are working closely with NEMA and other Government departments to ensure that the public is protected from these installations. 

MS ANYWAR: I thank the minister for that submission. I would pray that at an opportune time, you allow me to reinstitute the question that I had actually posed to the minister about the   -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are at committee now and I cannot pronounce myself on that particular matter. Honourable members, can we move forward on this? I would have put the question to the amendment but it was withdrawn. 

I put the question that clause 25 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR BAGIIRE: We would like to propose that clause 26 on registration of televisions and radio stations be deleted. The justification is that the provision is already in the Press and Journalists Act, Cap.105. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, would you like to confirm this? 

DR RUGUNDA: I support the proposal by the chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You confirm? Okay. 

MR LWANGA: I am not a lawyer, but I thought that if I got this law, it should be comprehensive even if it means having the risk of having the same repeated in another law. Is there anything wrong with that? Why don’t we put it in here so that when I read this law, it is comprehensive and it says it all? And you go to another law; it says exactly the same thing. What is wrong with that? I would like to be clarified, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: I think the Attorney-General will help, but the whole idea is combining two laws into one, and I think that is why the chairman, with my support, did make this proposal. But I would be interested, with your permission, Mr Chairman, to get the learned Attorney-General give us his wisdom.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, these are related laws. And since they are related laws, to me, if a provision is reproducing another in a related law, it is as good as redundant. And in any case, if you see the opening paragraph, I think the chairman of the committee has a point because it says, “A person licenced by the Authority to install or operate a television station, radio station or communications apparatus, shall within 14 days after obtaining the licence register the station or apparatus with the Media Council established under the Press and Journalists Act.” 

It means that even if you were to go with the principle being expounded upon by hon. Tim Lwanga, unless you bring the entire related provisions from the Press and Journalists Act into here, because even this may not be all that we need. It means that in fact you may have to capture all the relevant provisions and bring them in here, which we are not doing. 

I think the proposal by the chairman of the committee, and I believe that they have done good work in analysing; and what is left out here is actually captured in the Press and Journalists Act, and to that effect and conclusion, I agree. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 26 of the Bill be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, deleted.

Clause 27, agreed to.


Clause 28

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee has an amendment on clause 28(2)(b). The recommendation is that we delete the expression “or which contains false information” appearing at the end of the paragraph. And the justification is based on the case of Andrew Mwenda & Charles Onyango Obbo v. the Attorney-General, Constitutional Petition No.15 of 1997, where section 50 of the Penal Code Act on publication of false news was declared unconstitutional, and that it infringes on the freedom of conscience and expression as enshrined in Article 29 of the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, clause 29: “Duties of a proprietor and producer.” The committee proposes that the word “proprietor” appearing in the head notes, is replaced with the word “licensee”. The justification is that it is redundant since it is only used in the head  notes. It does not appear anywhere else.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee further proposes that we insert clause 29(a) with the phrase “and national values” immediately after the word “morality”. The justification is to ensure that what is broadcast is not contrary to national values.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are national values defined? I put the question to that.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. You find that when you talk about national values, they embrace morals. You cannot say that there are some national values which are not encompassing morals. So, I think the word, “morals” should not be added. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Should not add “morals”? Where is the word “morals”?

MS KABAALE: We wanted to include national values and morals. When something is a national value, it means that it is moral. So, it seems to be a repetition. Thank you.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I am wondering whether this country has an agreed set of national values that are being referred to here. I think this would cause interpretation problems. Unless it is properly defined and we agree that this is a set of national values in Uganda, it becomes rather difficult for us to adopt this expression here.

DR BITEKYEREZO: I have a problem with the word, “national values and morality” because when you listen to various radios in this country, people say anything they want. I don’t want to mention some papers because they will write bad things about me, but you know them. People have written things – some of us who have female children fear and are worried. If the government has not bothered to control that in as far as morality is concerned, what national values are you talking about? I am of the view that we need some further legal interpretation from the Attorney-General. He should tell us what morality is.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Chairman, we must know the tenets of a good law. A good law must be clear without any ambiguity. It must not face anybody. Therefore, I would like to ask the Attorney-General or the chairperson of the committee to give the House the definition of morality. They should also give us the definition of national values.  I am saying this because to me, what you may regard as a national value may not apply to me. For example, when you go to my area and look at our cultural values, you realise that putting on a mini-skirt is against the values of my people. However, when you look at our laws, a mini-skirt does not contravene any law in Uganda. I have actually even seen some, here in Parliament –(Laughter) –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I stand on a point of order. As the institution of Parliament, we have our code of conduct. We also have a code of dressing. So, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to insinuate that the female Members of Parliament have gone outside the outlined code of dress and conduct prescribed for each one of us, and dressed in what he terms as unacceptable?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Member for Dokolo, would you like to re-state what you said?

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Chairman, I was saying that when you look at our Rules of Procedure of Parliament and the code of conduct, which appears in an appendix - I can’t refer to it right now - it is clear that Members must dress properly. But it does not state the level of the skirt and the size; it does not indicate – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what were you saying?

MR OKOT OGONG: What I am saying is that values must be defined, so that it is clear – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what were you saying in relation to the dressing of the Members of Parliament because I haven’t ruled on that matter.

MR OKOT OGONG: What I was saying was that what might be right in Parliament of Uganda might not be necessarily right to my people in Dokolo. This is because the level of the skirt in Dokolo, is supposed to be below the knees –(Interjections)– yes, while in Kampala, it is just half-way. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you suggesting that the honourable members of this House wear skirts that are above their knees?

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Chairman, I always appreciate those who dress properly, and I want to inform –(Interruption)

MRS ANYWAR: Order! Mr Chairman, you have ably guided this House. The honourable Members of Parliament who are females and mothers in this country are mindful of our cultural set-ups. The area where my colleague, hon. Okot Ogong, comes from, is neighbouring the area I represent. The honourable member has refused to give decency to the female Members of Parliament and in appreciating that we are role models. Instead he has gone ahead to insinuate that some of us in this House dress indecently, and we are not brought to your attention, Mr Chairman, on a point of order; instead of appreciating that we are mindful of our cultural norms and that we dress decently, and he should treat us as such. Unless he apologises and withdraws that statement, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, honourable members; hon. Okot Ogong has said that what is decent for purposes of Parliament, and which is permissible by the Rules of Procedure of this House, might not be permissible in the local community in his area. So, how can I rule him out of order on that? Please wind up.

MR OKOT OGONG: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for your wise ruling. What I was saying is that a good law must be clear. Therefore, since defining national values is not clear, that should not be included in this law. In the circumstances, I would like to propose that this clause be deleted.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I beg to move an amendment because we don’t really want to have a law with a lot of ambiguities though we also want to protect what Ugandans refer to as morality. In the circumstances, I would like to move an amendment to the effect that clause 29 reads as follows: “Ensure that what is broadcast is not contrary to the professional code of ethics as specified in the First Schedule to the Press and Journalists Act.” This is because when you go to clause 32, the Bill quotes the professional code of ethics. So, I wanted to borrow from clause 32;  delete “public morality” and replace it with “professional code of ethics”, as specified in the First Schedule to the Press and Journalists Act. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the provision here is “public morality.” Do we have any disagreement on how we understand “public morality”? [HON. MEMBERS: “No!”] Is there any disagreement on that subject? I think the disagreement was on “national values”.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, we still have issues with this term “morality.” We are enacting a law. So, how are we going to define “morality”? Maybe the Attorney-General can assist us on that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The phrase “moral” has been used over and over again. People keep saying a person of high moral standards and integrity – the phrase has been used in all the laws. But have we been defining “moral integrity”? We have already passed it in respect of the qualities of the executive director and chairman of the board in this very Bill. Haven’t we done so?

MR SSIMBWA: Maybe, Mr Chairman, for that purpose, we can have it defined within the law, so that it is qualified as part of this clause.

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Chairman, I agree with hon. Ssimbwa that we can have an interpretation clause within this legislation in order to clearly define “morality” and differentiate it from “national values”, but bearing in mind the constitutional obligations. I am saying this because whereas one member was talking about his culture vis-à-vis other cultures, the Constitution is very clear on this matter that we have to respect the fundamental and other human rights and freedoms. Unless we are going to revisit that, then we shall have problems with the Constitution. What we need is to have an all incorporating and embracing definition of “national values” and “morality” that does not undermine the constitutional provisions.

Within the Constitution, we have the National Objectives and Directive Principles of the State Policy, which are very clearly illustrated and that we must follow. So, whatever we are doing has to be within the Constitution. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what do we do now, honourable members?

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This is just a matter of simple English and that is why I will concur with my brother that if we follow the constitutional provision, the national values are all encompassing. It implies that if you are in Kabale, you are supposed to behave the way a person in Iganga behaves. But with morality, there are set standards for certain societies and that is why we are saying we can buy “national values” which are all embracing and we ignore the word “morality”. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am beginning to think very hard especially that we are asking ourselves to legislate on matters of morality and to question whether we have national values in this country. We are beginning to open a door to all our enemies for them to know that we are contradicting ourselves.

A country that is not held up together with moral fibre is a rotten country. Whereas we may not be able to legislate specifically on what the standard of morals would be, morality remains the basic requirement for any society. I, for one, would request that the word “morality”, as it appears in all other legislations in this country as a requirement, be maintained.

Just imagine for a minute, a country where the broadcasters are left to decide what to broadcast. We are raising children, what are you telling them regarding morals? You cannot define morality in any law, but we leave it to be able to - morality comes from how we behave. When you keep quiet as I talk, that is morality. The Constitution talks about morals. Even an MP without morals will lose a seat tomorrow in this country because we need somebody with morality.

Mr Chairman, it is my humble submissions that - those who are watching us are sympathising and praying for this Parliament as we legislate. I expected the Attorney-General to probably guide us on the issue of national values, which could also be deduced from our legislation, especially the Constitution. Mr Chairman, I humbly submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, just look at one provision of the Constitution; Article 163 on the Auditor-General. If you look at (2), “A person shall not be appointed Auditor-General unless that person - (b) is a person of high moral character and proven integrity.” What moral character are we talking about here if it is not what we understand to be moral? 

This is the same Constitution we are talking about and the same laws have articulated issues. So, if you have been found guilty of an offence of moral turpitude, it appears everywhere. Why are we shying away from moral issues in this House? Can I put the question and we move forward on this? The amendment of national character is withdrawn, so there is no amendment on this clause, is it?

Clause 29

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, we have an amendment on clause 29(b) to substitute the word “thirty” with the word “sixty”. The justification is that thirty days are so short a time to prepare appropriate evidence in case of required evidence in courts of law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question if there are no issues.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we substitute for the entire clause 30 the following, “Producer or broadcasting station. A broadcasting station shall have a producer whose qualification shall be as prescribed by the Media Council.” The justification here is that the commission regulates the broadcasters and not the producers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it prescribed by the media council or by the law? Is it a law or the media council itself sits and prescribes? To be safe you can say, “By the law regulating the media council.” Attorney-General, would that capture that?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, as the Attorney-General is looking for the answer to the question raised by the minister. I do not agree with the amendment as moved by the chairman because we cannot have the media council giving the qualifications. There must be a law, not a body like the media council, because it might keep on changing depending on its interests. So, my proposal would be that we cite a law so that the media council is not used to stifle -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the amendment they are proposing is still reciting what was in the Bill. The media council is also in the Bill; so if we want to improve on it - the “media council” wording is not from the Chair. Learned Attorney-General, you were saying something? 

So, I put the question -

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am seeking your guidance because I see here the qualifications of the producer. I just want you to guide me on the issue because as a country, our experience is that despite the fact that as a country we are under a multiparty dispensation, there are some media houses, which have become partisan. We have ably paid for airtime in most circumstances, and such media houses have turned down the offer earlier on accepted. 

As Members from the Opposition, we are seeking your guidance; where do we put such partisan producers in this country mindful that we are under a multiparty dispensation? I need your guidance, Mr Chairman, because it should be one of the issues that we clearly tackle here. How do we all enjoy the established media channels in this country?
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, honourable member, but the substantial issue you raised cannot be addressed at the committee stage of the House. Let me just say this. I think every media house has - unless you are talking about Government media houses - its own policies. Some are owned privately, some are religious based, some are whatever based, and so, they may not want anybody interfering with their ways of doing things. So, you cannot regulate that. Unless you are talking about Government broadcasters, which I suppose are regulated by a completely different law. There is a UBC Act – Minimum Broadcasting Standards are in Schedule IV; but we cannot regulate all the media houses to be accepting everybody. That might be too much high-handed.
 
MS ANYWAR: The government is using taxpayers’ money and yet we in the Opposition are also stakeholders in this country. So, while we make this law it should be pertinently clear that we are also stakeholders and we should enjoy the same privileges. Mr Chairman, you are looking me in the eyes; I would like this to be put straight. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Attorney-General, I see in Schedule IV, there is Minimum Broadcasting Standards. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I just don’t know the variance between the proposal by the committee and what is in clause 30. In clause 30, the only addition to what the committee proposes is (a) to (c); (d) is what they are actually coming out with.
 
Now, having said that, I don’t know whether they actually cross-checked to see what is prescribed by the media council, whether it covers (a) to (c). I would like to be satisfied with that.

Secondly, in law, you state a prohibition. The way it is captured in the proposal by the committee is not a prohibition. When you are stating a prohibition you say, “A person shall not …” that becomes a prohibition and then you follow it up with an offence and a penalty. But when you phrase it in the way they have done, you may have to go further to create a prohibition in addition to what they have stated. That will be unnecessary repetition. So, we need to have better justification as to why they are diverting from what is proposed in the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, can you refocus on clause 30 in the Bill and give us better justification why you want to re-draft it? 

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chair, this Bill is meant to regulate broadcasters and not producers. So, that is why our proposal is that it makes reference to the media council as opposed to saying that a person shall not be appointed a producer of a broadcasting station. UCC is meant to regulate broadcasters and not producers. It is in that spirit that we are proposing that an amendment be made in the sense that: “A broadcasting station shall have a producer whose qualifications shall be as prescribed by the media council.” 

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This is the right time to make a law that we think will stand the test of time. For example, in the recent case we had of CBS, the producers were the ones who had a case to answer. But when you close the broadcasting house when you were meant to punish the producer who has committed an offence of airing unpalatable information is where we have to come in and rectify such mistakes while making this law. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The chairman’s statement is that this law doesn’t regulate producers; it regulates broadcasters, and broadcasters are not natural persons. Producers are natural persons. So, this particular law is dealing specifically with broadcasters. That is the submission from the chairman. So, it would be inappropriate to lease this qualification of a producer in a law that is dealing with broadcasters. That is the point he is making. Then in that case why don’t you just delete the whole thing? 

MR RUHINDI: If that is the case, I have a problem with it, because we are in professions. For example, a law firm like Ruhindi and Company Advocates, if a particular lawyer in that law firm handles a matter irregularly – unethically, he or she is personally responsible say, before the law council. If the law firm itself has any knowledge of that matter or how that matter was conducted, it could also be brought on board. But principally, it is the person conducting that case. That is how we actually function.  

When we talk about offences, they are personal. In criminal law, we talk of mens rea and actus reus – the act and the intention. Those ingredients in a criminal matter – you are talking about vicarious liability - you must prove that. This is why I don’t want to make the mistake of disaggregating the acts of the producer in a matter of this nature from the acts of the broadcasting station. I think you are missing the point.  

If we go to the station at such without any regard to the producers, I think in a matter of this nature - because I am not a professional in journalistic matters - we may have to look at both the broadcasting station and the producers themselves. I do not know what the minister may have to say. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, I want to read this clause again: “A person shall not be appointed…”- The appointment is by whom? It is by the broadcaster; so it is regulating the broadcaster as to what kind of person it can appoint as a producer. (Applause) So it is not regulating the producer. “A person shall not be appointed a producer…” The broadcaster shall appoint a person a producer unless that person is not above 18, is not of sound mind, is not a resident, has no requisite qualifications prescribed by the Media Council; if the broadcaster appoints such a person, there is a problem.

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, I have with me the Press and Journalist Statute, 1995 and the text that we have here is the same as what we have in this one. So, what the committee is doing is actually avoiding copying and pasting, and we are qualifying it by saying, “whose qualification shall be as prescribed by the Media Council.” However, if members feel that is inappropriate, I am glad to withdraw it. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that the provision on registration of televisions be deleted. The justification is that it is not enforceable considering the advancement in technology.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the proposal from the committee. Honourable minister, do you agree with this?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Chairman, with great advances in technology, I concur that enforcement of this is not easy. I therefore support the chairperson’s proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 33 be deleted from the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause 36(2) be re-drafted to read as follows: “Any person who negligently or knowingly fails to comply with subsection (1) commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 120 currency points or imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years or both on the first conviction, and a fine not exceeding 240 currency points or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 10 years or both on a subsequent conviction.” The reason for this amendment is to provide consistency with the provision in the Regulation of Interception of Communications Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is to amend clause 36(2) not by deletion of the whole sub-clause but by deletion of the last part on the penalties and proposing a replacement on the penalties.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I appreciate the penalty in currency points but when we look at the term of imprisonment, the 10 years, in reality this is too much. I beg that the chairperson re-visits the period of imprisonment. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you mean on subsequent conviction?

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. You will find that we have people who have been convicted of murder and they have walked out of prison. However, if someone has committed a media offence, I feel that the penalty of 10 years, even if it on subsequent conviction, is not humane. Let the duration be reconsidered. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What are you proposing?

MS KABAALE: I propose that on subsequent conviction, a person be imprisoned for three years. After that, he or she will be a reformed broadcaster. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: From the first conviction the person serves five years and now you are proposing three years for second conviction? 

MS KABAALE: I feel that doubling the period of imprisonment would not be appropriate; the penalty for subsequent conviction should be reduced.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, this is now a hard-core criminal; he did it and was punished and has done it again. Do you punish him less?

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think in concurrence with the committee chairperson, let him reconsider the period; five years would be okay but 10 years is too much. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us avoid unnecessary debate on a subject that is fairly clear because this Bill is huge. So let us have a proposal on the penalties.

MS AUMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I concur with the committee on the penalty they have given. If we say that the penalty be reduced, let us remember that the information that media houses spread is so wide that if it is defaming somebody’s character, then it has done a lot of damage. So when somebody has made a mistake once and does it again, it means that this is their nature. So they should be punished much more to deter them from making further mistakes. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR BAGIIRE:  Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that the entire clause be deleted. The reason is so that we avoid inconsistencies with section 13 and 14 of the Regulation of Interception of Communications Act No. 18 of 2010.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Chairman, I support the proposal because it is just harmonising our laws and making sure that there is no conflict or duplication.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chair, there is a small amendment on clause 38, which is basically to substitute the word “give” appearing in line one with the word “provide”. The committee felt that would be the appropriate use of words.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “The holder of a licence shall give notice to the public...” and you are saying it should be “shall provide notice to the public”! No; it gives notice. Retain it as is in the Bill. I put the question that clause 38 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chair, the committee proposes that we introduce new sub clauses (4) and (5) immediately after sub clause (3) to read as follows: 
“(4) The Commission shall grant the licence within 60 days from the date of application. 
(5) Where the Commission refuses to grant the licence, it shall provide a written explanation to the applicant giving reasons for the refusal.” 

The justification: to provide a timeframe in which the commission should take action, and also to give feedback to the applicant on why the licence has been refused.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Chairman, I do support the amendment proposed because it increases accountability in leadership.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Chair. I do not agree with the committee and I pray that honourable members realise this. Sixty days is too much. In most cases, we have given our departments, even in the legal system, many days and you find these days cause delays in everything. 

If somebody brings in an application, sincerely 30 days is time enough for the commissioner and his office do enough research and grant the licence, other than dealing with it for all those days. You keep on going there and they tell you it is in this office; you go there and they tell you it is here. When it delays so much, at times even the documents get lost. So, I would suggest that we give them only 30 days because the commission has enough staff to do all this work. Thank you, Mr Chair.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, 30 days instead of 60 days?

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chair, the reason the committee zeroed on 60 days was because most of the people who come to invest in the communications sector are normally international individuals or companies. There is a process of due diligence on these organisations before a licence is issued and that process of due diligence requires ample time. You cannot do due diligence in 30 days; so, we thought the 60 days were good enough to do due diligence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the justification. Honourable member for Kanungu, do you want to reconsider your amendment because if you are going to do international due diligence, then you might need more time. 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Chair. I just thought that 30 working days is time enough; unless there is an international standard but 30 days are enough.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the 60 days has been sufficiently justified, honourable members. Do they say “within”? So, they can do it in two weeks or one week.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Chair. If you say “within”, it can be one week or even two but specifying it is better.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment proposed by the honourable member from Kanungu.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Mine is a small addition, which causes an amendment to the clause. The commission might not refuse but because of circumstances, it might fail to grant the licence within the 60 days. So, I want us to say, “Where the commission refuses or fails...” It might not refuse but it might fail because of circumstances. So, I want to just add “or fails”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are not legislating for failure; are we?

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chair. I am proposing a small amendment to-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we deal with the issue of failure and then I come to yours?

MR OBOTH: Mr Chair, I do not legislate for failures.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, let me justify my amendment. The chairperson of the committee has reported that the commission needs time to do due diligence. Under such a circumstance, the due diligence might not be completed within the prescribed 60 days. In that case, the commission is not refusing to grant but has failed to do due diligence within the 60 days. That is why I propose that we add that word. I am not legislating for failure; I am providing for circumstances where the commission cannot do due diligence to grant a licence within 60 days.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do we have an overriding provision for extension of time in these kinds of circumstances? Do we have a provision where time is prescribed? Normally, you provide for authority to extend time.

MR OBOTH: A humble proposal on clause 40, sub-section (5): “Where the commission refuses to grant the licence, it shall provide written explanation to the applicant giving reasons for the refusal”, and it stops at that. Why can’t we be consistent with the one in (4) on the timeframe for the feedback? It should also be indicated, if possible probably 30 days, so that if the applicant has not been successful, it should be given a timeframe. I was just proposing so, humbly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Two weeks, one month, 60 days or 14 days? If I have refused today, why should I wait for a month to tell you I have refused? Honourable members, can we have proposals on this. If there is no proposal on record-

MR KABAJO KYEWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I think the problem is that we are really looking at it and asking why. Aren’t we over legislating by putting in the law the time within which the commission must write to you? Supposing they consider your application within three weeks and they decide that they are not going to grant it? They can write the following day and say they are not granting it to you. If it takes all the 60 days, especially in the case of complicated applications like the large investments from international investors, after the 60 days are over one would expect that if they are not going to grant the licence, then they would write. Do we have to legislate for that? Isn’t that over legislation?

MR OBOTH: Mr Chair, thank you. We are not over legislating for sure; it can never be so. We are creating the spirit of accountability, as the honourable minister said. We are creating an obligation on the commission. Would an applicant take forever to know or not to know if he was a successful applicant? I have to know whether I have been successful or not and there should be a timeframe. 

If you are providing the other successful applicant with 60 days, I would suggest that this one should be 30 days or within the same timeframe. Just say, “a written explanation to the applicant within 30 days - or within the same period of 60 days - about the refusal.” We cannot reinvent the wheel. The spirit is already above and we cannot deny it below, unless you have a motive of a witch that would be able to refuse.

MR MADADA: Mr Chairman, I would like to convince my colleague from West Budama. He has a very strong point, but we could provide this under the regulations. The details of such could come under the regulations, aware that there are changes in time in terms of technology. If you put this in the law, then it cannot easily be adjusted. If you put it under the regulations, that is the best way.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If you have to put it anywhere, it has to be in the law.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I just wanted to say that the proposal by hon. Oboth is spot-on and is very key in our move to improve our investment climate. We are promoting and facilitating investors and they want to be sure of the terms under which they come here. They want to be sure under which terms they invest. Anything which improves that climate is very good. 

So, immediately after refusal, the authority should communicate. In which case, what were you proposing? Two weeks? What did you propose? (Interjections) I thought it is too long because you have already made a decision. Why should you take 30 days? I think after 14 days - in two weeks - they should communicate.

MS AUMA: Mr Chairman, I propose 30 days because before they reject your application or before you are granted a licence, the team must go and inspect the equipment or the site, which takes some time. Remember before you even apply, there could be some people in the queue. I propose 30 days to be given to the commission to reply to the applicants. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, today I have taken a decision that I will not grant the honourable member for Abim a licence, should I take 30 days to tell you that? I am going to put the question on 14 days. I put the question on the inclusion of the phrase “within 14 days” to be provided under the proposed new clause 40(5). I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In case the commission, due to circumstances beyond their control, cannot finish this process within 60 days, what happens? Hon. Ssimbwa had wanted a provision that they inform the applicants about the reason and whether they are still going to continue with the process. You refused to include the word “fail” but Uganda being what it is, the commission may fail to grant this licence within 60 days, so what happens? 

I would like to propose that, “The commission shall, in case it is unable to grant a licence within 60 days due to special circumstances beyond it, inform the applicant of the circumstances”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, will the proposal providing a general clause dealing with extension of time cure that? Hon. Attorney-General, will that be something to consider? 

MR RUHINDI: Yes, I think hon. Kabakumba has a good point because there may be circumstances that may warrant an extension. For instance, where you may find that sometimes boards expire or for one reason or another some posts may be vacant, functioning may be difficult and time may elapse. So, with justifiable reasons, the authority may fail. In which case, hon. Kabakumba may wish to add something so that even if an extension is given, there should also be a time limit not exceeding maybe another number of days. I do not know what she wishes to propose, but I think the principle, - Mr Chairman, since you have asked me about the principle - subject to what the minister, my senior colleague, may wish to say, sounds justifiable.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think if we consider that proposed amendment, then we will be defeating the purpose of the core principles of efficiency, transparency and urgency for purposes of business relations in this country. If we put in any clause which would give the commission room to extend, the possibility of sitting on people’s applications and lessening them deliberately – because of corruption – will be very high. Let us maintain the timeframe and report either in negative or positive. We should not extend time. 

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, the issue here is not extension of time. Legally, when you look at the amendment, it is only talking about when the commission refuses to grant. However, the Attorney-General has raised an issue, which we have also been raising, that there are circumstances where the commission might not be in a position to refuse or grant. So, under such circumstances, what do we do? 

We are of the view that we have a general provision where the commission cannot grant or is not refusing, but where it informs the applicant of the circumstances under which it cannot grant the licence during that time. That is what we are proposing. We are not proposing an extension of time; no.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If I am unable to deal with your application because time has run out, so what? It means that after 60 days, I just tell you that I have not been able to handle your application and I fold my hands and say, “bye, bye.” Because I will not have any authority to handle that thing after 60 days! Do you come and re-apply?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to concur with hon. Kabakumba because there are realities that we cannot avoid. In this case, I want to suggest that the inclusion of that amendment would be within the period of 60 days, so that it is not something that will take the team by surprise, that within the 60 days they will not have known whether they have evaluated properly or not. 

So, before the 60 days expire, if for any reason they have not been able to conduct that business, they should be able to communicate to the applicant saying, “We were not able to work on it because of this and that”, instead of going beyond the 60 days before they communicate. Before the 60 days expire, they should be able to communicate that they have not been able to handle.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What happens thereafter; does the application die? What happens after the 60 days?

MR NZOGHU: No, it does not die. We have already seen that the refusal can only be after 60 days, but we have the 14 days when they are supposed to indicate to you that they have refused. I think within that period, they should also indicate whether they are moving in a positive direction or not. If they are not moving in a positive direction, I think then even communicating within the 60 days would not be relevant. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where a time has been prescribed by law of 60 days, can you extend it without the authority of that law? If 45 days into examining your application, I discover I will not be able to finish it within the 60 days? I may have sent out applications and notices that will take three weeks to be received. So, I tell you, “I will not be able to finish your application within the 60 days”, but I have only 60 days and at the lapse of 60 days, my hands are tied and I cannot do anything. Is that what you are proposing?

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman, I propose that after the 60 days, we give the commission an extra 60 days. We could follow the example from the budget making process, where we say we should pass the budget by 31st August but the Speaker has discretion of extending it up to 30th October but not beyond that. So when we extend by 30 days, the commission must grant an application and failure to do so might imply that it has refused. I propose that in case the commission is not able, because of unavoidable circumstances, to grant that licence, then the period should be extended by another 30 days but not beyond 30 days.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Whereas the spirit under which that proposal is made is very good and sounds practical, it will actually negate the principle of putting 60 days here from the date of the application. It reads, “The commission shall grant the licence within 60 days from the date of the application”. The general interpretation of this - if I resist the temptation to constitute myself into the Constitutional Court – is that if there are some unforeseeable circumstances that arise, the commission is at liberty to inform the applicant that whereas they have received their application, they are not able to grant it or deny it within this time. That applies even to clause 3(5). 

If you want to specifically legislate on this one, it will be one of the most negative provisions I have seen in any law in this country. Already, the spirit of the law is that it is within 60 days; it could even be within one week. The obligation is created upon the commission to inform the applicant within this time if the application is successful or that the board is not fully constituted, somebody is dead, they have a trip or one of the board chairpersons has gone up-country, etc. 

Honourable members, do you want to legislate for the laziness of the commission? The spirit is very good - it is foreseeable and I agree with hon. Kabakumba and the Attorney-General - but if we put it down, for more than one reason most people will fail. In fact, why would we include sub clause (5)? If just for refusal to grant a licence, you communicate within 14 days, why wouldn’t the commission communicate their inability to grant within 60 days or any other time provided up here? I think it is a self-defeating provision if we put it up here. I understand the spirit and intent, but it will negate the whole provision. That is my fear and I have had to fear loudly. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, what we have articulated is very well understood, but what happens to an application that has not been approved; it has not be refused or accepted but they have just failed to work on it within 60 days? That is the option we want to open. Does the person re-apply so that the 60 days start running again?

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chair. There would be no need for the applicant to re-apply. If you file a matter in court and the judges are not there - you are supposed to file within say, 15 days and a registrar tells you that your matter cannot take off because the judges are in for a conference - would you have to file another matter? The application stays on. 

Maybe the example I used for filing is not applicable, but in this case, within 60 days you are supposed to get a licence. Now, if you are not able to get the licence within the 60 days and it has not been denied, the extension would be by the commission informing you in writing – due diligence or just being efficient on their part. They would write that they are still not able to look at your application, because they would not have been able to look at the merit or the demerits of the application. If we open another provision, that means that we take it that it will collapse within 60 days. I would think that it is administrative; it is left with the commission to purely do a good job within that period.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Oboth, let me inform the House. We used to have a provision in the electoral law that election petitions shall be determined within 30 days. Many election petitions collapsed on the basis of that. I actually argued a case and the matter went to the Principal Judge who said, “I have no authority to extend; the law is strict and it gives 30 days and the 30 days are over and we are in the middle of the trial, so that is it.” That is how it stopped. They had to go to the Court of Appeal to make some changes, but eventually they had to amend the law to give the authority for this extension to the person. 

People do not just sit and wait. Like in the Budget Act we have been doing here, we are supposed to finish dealing with committee reports by 31st August. Last year, we did not but we were able this year to do it by 30th August. We did not use the provision of the law for giving us authority to extend to become lazy. We were able to finish by the 30th, but last year we went on up to September, I do not remember what date it was. If the law had been strict without any allowance for giving us authority to extend, we would have been dead at the start and no budget would have been passed. That is simply the practical situation we are dealing with. I do think we will legislate and then people become lazy because they want to extend the time. Nobody would want to do that if they are a business entity of this nature.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman, for giving us a practical case. I have just been consulting with the technical people from Uganda Communications Commission and they raise two points. The first is that the delay is not necessarily within the commission itself. Quite often, people or companies that make applications send incomplete information and that takes a bit of time. But they think that this matter can be handled under regulations, and it is proposed that the regulations that will be made following this Bill will be presented to Parliament so that the loopholes that may be there, like this particular one, could be handled. 

Mr Chairman, you are a very distinguished legal practitioner in your own ways, and you can give us guidance especially – (Interjections) - Oh! I was going to say especially in the absence of the Attorney-General. I beg your pardon, Attorney-General. (Laughter) I direct, with your permission, the words that I had said to the Attorney-General, so that he can help us out. 

MR RUHINDI: I have strict instructions, Mr Chairman, not to depart form the views of the sector minister on the Bill. (Laughter) That notwithstanding, and without prejudice, I think the spirit in which the minister has submitted on this matter is quite tenable because certainly, these are matters which can be covered within the regulations; they are not so substantive. We can go into the minute details and we shall have a very big Bill at the end of the day. So, I concur with my senior colleague that some of these matters can be captured in the regulations.

MS KABAKUMBA: I would like to concede, but I would like to be assured because even when you make regulations, they should be based on the provisions in the Act or Bill. I hope that that provision will be somewhere within the Bill and eventually the Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: With those cautions in mind, and of course bearing in mind also whether you can exceed the principles contained in the Bill, - If the Bill says 30 days, can you by regulation extend it? That is a matter for debate, which will be handled at that stage when the matter comes up. Can we then move on that? I now put the question that Clause 40 as amended stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42

MR BAGIIRE: The committee has an amendment on clause 42 (4). The proposal is that we substitute the word, “Minister” with the word, “tribunal”. The justification: appeals shall lie to the tribunal and not to the Minister; the Minister as an individual should not be seen to be having quasi judicial powers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is a clear proposal from the committee. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR BAGIIRE: There is a very small amendment there in terms of numbering. Sub clause (4) was skipped and the proposal is that sub clause (5) should be renumbered as (4).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is a proposal for renumbering in clause 43. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44

MR BAGIIRE: The committee would like to introduce new sub-clauses (5) and (6) immediately after sub-clause (4) to read as follows; this is on the transfer of licenses: 
“(5) The Commission shall grant its consent to transfer a licence within 45 days from the date of application.
(6) Where consent is not granted under this section, the Commission shall provide a written explanation giving reasons for the refusal.” 

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, if we are to have a sequence, I have a proposal to amend sub clause (6) and add a timeframe on when the commission should report back to the applicant. I would want to say that this be done within 14 days - “Where consent is not granted under this section, the Commission shall provide a written explanation giving reasons for the refusal within 14 days.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is the 14 days agreed? I put the question to the amendment of the inclusion of 14 days.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS TAAKA: Mr Chairman, the chairperson is proposing to insert new sub clauses (5) and (6) and yet we have sub clause (5) under clause 44.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That will be renumbering. That would be (6) and (7). I thank you. I now put the question to the amendment of the committee that new sub-clauses (6) and (7) be inserted to clause 44. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that a new sub clause (3) and (4) are inserted immediately after sub clause (2) to read as follows: 
“(3) The Commission shall renew a license within 35 days from the date of application.
(4) Where a licence is not renewed under this section, the Commission shall provide a written explanation giving reasons for the refusal within 14 days.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is 35 days? Usually it is 15 days, 30 days, 45 days, 60 days, but this one is 35 days. 

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the chairman of the committee. What is the rationale of 35 days? As a chronology, we have been having 45 days and 60 days? So what is the rationale in this particular sub section? 

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, we are dealing with renewal and we thought renewal would have a shorter period as opposed to a new application. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then you say 30 days.

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, I think 30 days would be okay. We concede to that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47 

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause 47 is deleted entirely. The justification is that it is redundant in view of the changes in the communications sector.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is for the deletion of clause 47 as it is in the Bill. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clauses 48, 49, 50 and 51 be deleted in the Bill. The justification is that the provisions are redundant since the communications sector is now operating in a free market economy. In addition to that, there is procedure provided for under the Land Act and the Land Acquisition Act.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Chairman, I support the amendment made by the chairman of the committee.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 48 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 49 be deleted from the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 50 be deleted from the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 51 be deleted from the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS TAAKA: The committee chairperson said clauses 48, 49, 50 and 51 but we are deleting only clauses 48, 49, 50 and not 51.

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, I think I was categorically clear; I proposed deletion of clauses 48, 49, 50 and 51, much as what is in the report does not include 51.

Clause 52

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 52 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, there is a small correction there. Substitute the expression, “section 64” with the expression, “section 53”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Why is that?

MR BAGIIRE: Clause 54(1) refers to 53 and not 64.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now that we have deleted four clauses, it might even require further cross reference checking. That would now be a matter for the people doing the final text harmonisation. I put the question that clause 54 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When we presented the report yesterday, we mentioned that the Uganda Communications Commission was provided for in the UCC Act of 1997 and up to today it has not been established. The committee therefore proposes that under 67(1), we include the expression, “which shall be set up within one year after commencement of the Act.” The justification: to specify the time within which the tribunal should be set up considering that 15 years later, the commission has not set up this tribunal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would it not be better to have the commencement clause amended to take care of this instead of putting it in the provisions of the law itself? The exception has got to be clear in the commencement clause. You can create the exception there. Learned Attorney-General, wouldn’t that be proper? Can you create a commencement date in the middle or at the beginning?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, your proposal is more flexible, of course given the challenges that we have talked about during the debate. So, I think it is better to say that this part which deals with the Uganda Communications Tribunal shall come into force at such a time as the minister may, by statutory instrument, appoint.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Precisely! So, that takes care of the commencement clause. Can we pronouncement ourselves on this? Is that okay?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, the Bill has no provision for the commencement. In case it is not there, what do we do?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You create one. It is the publication which is not specified, but in situations where you are going to require some parts to come by statutory instrument, you have to make an express provision for that. Can we now vote on the provision as it is? Okay, I now put the question that clause 67 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have a minor inclusion on clause 70 (1) (d). Substitute the word “Authority” with the word “tribunal.” Mr Chairman, you will guide us on whether – we had some considerable debate here – it indeed meant the commission or authority or the tribunal. Let me read it: 
“Vacating office of member of the tribunal 
(1) The office of a member of the tribunal shall fall vacant if- (d) the member fails to disclose to the tribunal any interest in a contract or proposed contract or any other matter before the Authority.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That will be the commission now.

MR BAGIIRE: Well, we thought it would be before the tribunal. That is why we are seeking your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is here where we replaced “Authority” with “Commission”; not so?

MR BAGIIRE: Yes, but the amendment that we are proposing is that this should be before a tribunal.

MR KABAJO: In this particular case, Mr Chairman, what the committee is looking at here is the fact that if an issue has been referred to the tribunal and a member of that tribunal has an interest in that issue, that member is obliged to declare their interests.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the provision as it stands is okay. You disclose to the tribunal a matter or transaction or contract, which is before the Authority and not a matter or contract or transaction before the tribunal. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In which case, the Authority in here will now become the Commission because we already replaced the word “Authority” with the word “Commission.”

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to differ because when you look at the purpose of the tribunal, you realise that it is about attending to complaints from either a consumer or any other person or entity, which cannot be handled by the commission. In that case, the matter which the member is looking at is one that has been referred to the tribunal. At that stage, that matter is not before the commission but before the tribunal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Supposing you have a contract with the commission? Would it be wrong to have both then?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, we are talking about the office of a member of the tribunal falling vacant. We are not talking about a situation where a member of the tribunal has an interest in a matter, but we are talking about a position falling vacant. 

According to the Bill, I think the committee is right in proposing the substitution of that word. When the matter comes to the tribunal and there is a member who has got an interest but that member fails to declare his interest, such a member’s position falls vacant. However, if the matter is still within the Authority and not before the tribunal, if the member of the tribunal does not declare his interest at this point you cannot render his position vacant. This is because conflict of interest cannot arise at that stage.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you cannot contract with a tribunal; can you? Please read it again, or let me read it out: “the member fails to disclose to the tribunal any interest in a contract or proposed contract or any other matter before the tribunal.” Are you contracting with the tribunal?

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, it is possible. I would like to give a particular scenario where a matter may be before the tribunal and a member of the tribunal has an interest. If there is a complainant, a company, and a member of that tribunal is a director in that company, that member has to disclose his or her interests so that they can excuse themselves from the tribunal as far adjudicating it is concerned. It may be a company, where you are a director or one of the owners, which has brought the complaint. This is the same scenario with the judges in courts.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, what about the contract? What takes care of that, because you cannot contract with the tribunal?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I would agree with my colleague if the wording is changed to read as follows: “The office of a member of the tribunal shall fall vacant if the member fails to disclose to the tribunal any interests in a matter before the tribunal.” The moment you mention a contract or proposed contract or any matter, then you have to go to the Authority. So, whichever you prefer, it all works well. 

If you say, “any matter before the tribunal”, to me that is okay. If you say, “any contact, or proposed contract or any other matter before the Commission”, you are still right. I would go with the one that is broader. The matter before the commission is broader. If you say you disclose only that element which is before the tribunal, you are narrowing down the scope and purpose of the principle of disclosure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, you will have a free ride. Even if you have a contract with the commission, that is fine; you do not have to disclose it to the tribunal. It is only if that thing is before the tribunal that you have to disclose. Is that what you want to provide for?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, I agree with that proposal because we are looking at vacation of office for a member of the tribunal and he can only leave office when a matter concerns him. Therefore, I would propose that we amend 70(1) (d) to read the way the hon. Attorney-General has proposed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For the record, what has he proposed?

MR SSIMBWA: If the member fails to disclose to the tribunal any interest in a matter before the tribunal then his post becomes vacant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? Can I put the question?

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, it was in that spirit that I sought your intervention. I think the way it is in the Bill is broader because it also caters for an individual who may want to do business or who takes advantage of their position on the tribunal to do business with the commission or authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So the way it is drafted now, is any matter before the tribunal the same as a matter before the commission?

MR SSIMBWA: That is what it implies from the way it is drafted. However, in the proper sense, it is before the tribunal. When it is still with the commission and the Authority, the member of the tribunal has no jurisdiction over it. So, why then do you force him to leave office on a matter where he has no jurisdiction? Why don’t we bring it at the level where the member of the tribunal has got jurisdiction over a matter, so that for him to fail to expose his interest will mean such an action can be taken? But when a matter is still at the Authority level, he has no jurisdiction. It is like telling a student to resign when a headmaster does something wrong.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So the final preposition would therefore be if the member fails to disclose to the tribunal any interest in any matter before the tribunal. Is that it?

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, the chairman of the committee has just elaborated on the objectives and the mischief they are trying to cure. I would not see any unfairness in inserting or including the words “the commission” or “tribunal” in such a manner that contracts. People in the tribunal can use their position to influence matters that are before the commission. So I thought that as it is proposed in the Bill, it would satisfy the evil trying to be cured. 

The issue here is about regulating the transaction. Most people think they are being barred, but you are being given an opportunity to be transparent and honest so that if you have any matter before or in relation to the commission, you should be able to declare it. I thought the commission or tribunal would still serve the purpose of the proposed Bill. 

DR TWA-TWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am happy that the honourable member has been able to give way so that I can also give him information. The subject matter under clause 70, which we are debating, is about vacating office by a member of the tribunal. I do not see the commission and these other things we are talking about. That is why we are insisting that actually, 70(1) (d) should read the way we are amending it, that if the member fails to disclose to the tribunal any interest in a matter before the tribunal, he vacates office. That is the subject matter under this clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So we leave it as it is, with the exception of changing “Authority” to “tribunal”?

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, the head note can be either leading or misleading at times. In this case, I have understood the information from Dr Twa-twa but it does not defeat the objectives. His concern is that the heading is saying “vacating office of a member of the tribunal” yet if this member of the tribunal has some dealings with the commission or tribunal, he or she should be able to declare it. If he does not, he vacates office. It is not about the member of the commission. 

Now, the heading is as instructive as the way to the East; it is so clear. The member in question to vacate office is a member of the tribunal who, should he be in position to transact with the commission or he has interests in any manner, whether contract, with the commission or tribunal, should be able to disclose it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, let me break it down again, it might help in the interpretation. Any interest in a contract before the tribunal; any interest in a proposed contract before the tribunal, or any other matter before the tribunal; this would be the breakdown of the interpretation.

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I just want clarification. One, what is the tribunal for? I thought the tribunal was put there to correct any anomalies in the commission. So it can refer to anything - if it is a contract within the commission - which the tribunal is handling. That is the clarification I seek.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, the tribunal does not exist to correct anomalies in the commission. The tribunal exists to handle issues, especially complex problems, from consumers and other people, which the commission was unable to handle or which the commission did not handle to the satisfaction of the complainants. In other words, the tribunal does not exist to handle, for example, administrative problems within the commission. It is only handling-

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to agree with the earlier and general position that someone who is on the tribunal should be able to declare his or her interests whether in the commission or in the tribunal. Like the honourable member for Busia Municipality has asked, “What is the purpose of the tribunal?” It is to preside over issues pertaining to maybe disputes regarding the commission. Therefore, if you have interests or business with the commission, you do not need to wait until a conflict arises involving you and has to come to the tribunal; it must be declared beforehand. So, according to what hon. Oboth suggests, I would say that it should include “before the commission and or the tribunal”. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the agreement seems to be that we substitute the word “Authority” with “tribunal”. That seems to be the only thing agreed upon in this clause, and it does make sense. I will put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee that you replace the word “Authority” with “tribunal”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we introduce new sub clauses (5) and (6) immediately after sub clause (4) to read as follows:  
“(5) A vacancy under sub-section (4) shall be determined by the Minister on the recommendation of the Commission.
(6) A technical adviser may resign office by notification in writing to the Minister.”

Colleagues, you may wonder what the technical adviser does but the idea is to have technical advisers to advise the judges on the tribunal. The justification of these inclusions is to provide for the termination of a vacancy in the office of the technical adviser and also to provide for the resignation of that technical adviser. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 70, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that the entire clause 73 (4) be deleted. The justification is that it is redundant since Uganda Posts Limited is a body corporate and may therefore enter into any transaction.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question on that amendment made by committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 73, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75

MR BAGIIRE:  Mr Chairman, the committee would like to rephrase clause 75, which is on levy on gross annual revenue of operators. The committee would like to break the clause into four to read as follows:

“(1) The Commission may levy a charge on the gross annual revenue of operators licensed under this Act.
(2) The levy in subsection (1) shall be the percentage specified in Schedule 5.
(3) For avoidance of doubt, the levy in subsection (2) shall not be less than two percent.
(4)	The levy shall be shared between information and communication technology development and rural communication in the ratio of one to one.” 

The justification is: to ensure that the gross annual revenue payable is not set below two percent and to strengthen the development of ICT and rural communication in the country.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal from the committee is the deletion of the existing clause 75 and replacing it with the redrafting that has been proposed in the report.

MR KAKOOZA: I have an amendment on that particular clause. He says that the commission may levy a charge on gross, but there is nothing like that in financial terms. You do not levy on gross; you levy on net income. Also, by generally accepted standards of accounting, there is no way you can levy a tax on non revenue operators because they have costs that are involved and allowances, which are non-taxable. I do not know whether they interacted with the business community. So, it should have been: “The commission may levy a charge on net income of revenue of operators licensed under this Act.” This is the worldwide practice of finance. 

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, first, I beg to disagree entirely with my senior colleague, hon. Kakooza. Uganda Communications Commission has been levying a percentage on the gross revenue of telecom operators for the last 10 years and over. That has been the practice, and these resources were agreed upon under the Universal Service Fund, which helps to set up IT facilities in centres that are determined economically unviable by the telecom operators. So, the practice is that a levy is put on gross revenue and not net profit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is the position. 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, it is going to contradict the Income Tax Act. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is not income tax. 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, that is what I am saying. Any gross levy cannot be accepted. I can define what a gross levy is – “A gross levy is revenue collected without subtracting returns and allowances.” If you are operating a business, there is no business where they levy on your gross; they charge your net income. This is the definition of income that I am talking about.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where is that definition? 

MR KAKOOZA: It is here. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What book is that you are quoting?

MR KAKOOZA: It is a marketing and finance book. They say that the general acceptable principles of levying a tax cannot be charged on gross; it is charged on net income. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is not a tax.

MR KAKOOZA: On levying a tax, it cannot be charged on gross but it is charged on net income. That is the definition.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is not a tax. 

MR KAKOOZA: When you say “levy on gross annual revenue”, it means gross profit, and gross profit are revenues. It is defined in here. I am talking as an accountant; I am not talking as – The provision we are talking about here is on the financial matters within the company or the operators of these businesses. So I am finding it very difficult to charge even two per cent because any financial statement must – It does not charge on gross but rather on net income. That is the law.

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the member is mixing the business accounting procedures with a levy. If we go by his argument, it means that if companies make losses, then we get nothing, and this can happen. The companies may have gross turnovers of a lot of money in billions of dollars but may have made losses. As a country, we will have lost that money. A levy is taken on the gross and that is for our purposes. I think that is what we mean in this case. 

The accounting he is talking about is business accounting where you compute your overheads or costs, remove from your revenues and then end up with a profit. Out of that net profit, you then compute your taxation, which is different in this case. I want to guide the House that way. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, and Schedule 5 says, “Rate of percentage of gross annual revenue payable by operators. The rate of gross annual revenue payable by an operator to the Authority under section 21 shall not exceed 2.5 percent.” That is what is provided in this law. I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 75, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, we have a very simple proposal here; it is basically editing. Delete paragraph (2) appearing on page 50 of the Bill because it is redundant. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So you will have clause 77 with only one sub-clause?

MR BAGIIRE: No. If you look below it, there is sub-clause (2) - “The Authority shall not incur any expenditure…”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, it is repeated. That is editorial; isn’t it? It just went to the next page. I put the question that clause 77 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we rephrase the opening sentence to read as follows: “Subject to clause 77(2), the funds of the Commission may be applied to the payment...” The justification is: to ensure that clause 78 is applied in accordance with clause 77(2).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it is clear. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 78, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 79, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 81, agreed to.

Clause 82, agreed to.

Clause 83

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that under clause 83(a), (b) and (c), we insert “or any other law” after the word “Act”. The justification is: for consistency with other laws.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it is clear from the committee’s proposal. Unless the Minister has an objection, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee also proposes to substitute the expression “twelve currency points or imprisonment not exceeding six months”, and the expression “120 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years”. The justification is that this is for consistency with section 2(3) of the Regulation of Interception of Communications Act, 2010.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 83, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 84, agreed to.

Clause 85, agreed to.

Clause 86

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that the entire clause 86 is re-drafted to read as follows: “(1) Any operator of a communications service or system, or employee of an operator of a communications service or system who unlawfully intercepts any communication between other persons sent by means of that service or system; unlawfully…” – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no. You have to read like this: (a), (b) and (c) because you are proposing an amendment which should be captured. 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. “(a) unlawfully intercepts any communication between other persons sent by means of that service or system; 
(b) unlawfully interferes with or obstructs any radio communication; or 
(c) unlawfully discloses any information in relation to a communication of which that operator or employee is aware, 
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one hundred and twenty currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years.

(2) Any person who without lawful excuse intercepts, makes use of, or divulges any communication except where permitted by the originator of the communication, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one hundred and twenty currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years.

(3) For the purpose of sub-clause (2), where the conviction is a subsequent conviction the person is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding two hundred and forty currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 10 years.” 

The justification is: for proper chronological numbering and for consistency with section 2(3) of the Regulation of Interception of Communications Act, 2010.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 86, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 87, agreed to.

Clause 88

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause 88(2) and (3) be deleted. The argument is that they are misplaced.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where is it properly placed if it is misplaced here?

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chair, if you look at the head note, it says “sending false distress signals”. Now, this is sending false distress signals but here we are talking about interception.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Alright, it is clear. Honourable members, the committee proposes to delete sub clauses (2) and (3) of clause 88.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 88, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 89

MR BAGIIRE: The committee proposes that under clause 89, offences in respect of radio communications, we re-phrase the last three lines of the provision to read as follows:
“...commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 120 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both and on a subsequent conviction to a fine not exceeding 240 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 10 years.” The justification is: to make the provision even more encompassing by providing for imprisonment in addition to a fine.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is the amendment as proposed by the committee.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, when you look at the justification, it talks about providing for imprisonment in addition to the fine. When you look at the last part of the amendment, it says “imprisonment not exceeding 10 years”. I would like to propose an amendment to add, “or both” because that is the justification they are giving for their amendment.

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chair, I think that amendment is in order.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it proper?

MR BAGIIRE: I think for the first one it is very clear. Let me just read it again - “...commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 120 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both...” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, we also insert “or both” at the end of this particular phrasing. That is the amendment proposed. Can I put the question to this?

MR MAWANDA: I would like clarification from the chairman in respect to the currency points. We would like him to retain the 1500 to be consistent with other charges. I just want clarification from him so that it is consistent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is the offence of the same magnitude?

MR KABAJO: Mr Chair, I think that is where we need your guidance. When we were going through this Bill, we were informed that the currency points are related in some way to the number of years. So, if you say 1500 currency points, it has a relationship to the years. So, you cannot say five years and then 1500 currency points. Maybe you could clarify on that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is related and it depends on the gravity.

MR KABAJO: In that case, Mr Chairman, if we are aiming for five years imprisonment as a possible sentence, then we cannot have 1500 currency points.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, it has to be consistent. The currency points cannot be higher than the magnitude of the imprisonment terms. They have to be at par.

MR KABAJO: That is the reason why the committee proposed as it is here in the amendment.

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chair, in addition to that, we have a law on Regulation of Interception of Communications Act and indeed, intercepting communication also exists in the other laws. So, the idea was to harmonise the laws. We did not depart from the laws that govern regulation of interception of communications.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is that we insert “or both”. It has been adopted by the House; is that correct?

HON.MEMBERS: Yes!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee.

(Question put agreed to.)

Clause 89, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 90

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chair, the committee, under clause 90(1), proposes that the last three lines are re-phrased to read as follows:
“commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 120 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both and on a subsequent conviction to a fine not exceeding 240 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding ten years or both”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 90, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 91

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we insert the expression “or imprisonment not exceeding four years” between the words “points” and “and” appearing in line six of the provision. The justification is: to make the provision more encompassing by providing for imprisonment in addition to a fine.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have you put “or both”?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, I propose that we put “or both” because when you look at the justification, that is what the committee intends to achieve but in the amendment the words are missing. So, I propose that we amend and put “or both”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the insertion of the words “or both” is immediately after the final penalty, to combine the penalties. In the discretion of the judge, he can order both the fine and the custodial sentence. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 91, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 92

MR BAGIIRE: Clause 92, general penalty; the committee proposes that we insert the expression “or imprisonment not exceeding four years or both” immediately after the word “points” appearing at the end of the provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 92, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 93, agreed to.

Clause 94, agreed to.

Clause 95, agreed to.

Clause 96

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, on clause 96, pension fund and retired and redundant employees, the committee has a very minor correction. In clause 96(2), substitute the expression “section 96” appearing in line three with the expression “section 95”. As it is, it would be referring to the very section yet I think it is referring to the section before.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It makes sense but of course there will be harmonisation done since the numbering of the Bill has been changed. So, the cross referencing has to be done to reflect the changes. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 96, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 97, agreed to.

Clause 98 agreed to.

Clause 99 agreed to.

Clause 100

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee, under clause 100 (1), insert a new sub clause (3) to read as follows: 
“Regulations made shall be laid before Parliament. 
The Minister may, after consultation with the Authority and with the approval of Parliament, by statutory instrument, make regulations for better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.” The justification is: for better evaluation and observance of consistency of the regulations within the Act.

There are some contentious issues which members have raised and the reason we want the regulations laid on the Table is for us to verify whether indeed all the amendments, or the spirit in which the law is being developed, have been followed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, are you laying this instrument for approval of Parliament? It does not start working until it is approved by Parliament? Honourable minister, if it is agreeable, I will put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the amendment to clause 100(2) (q) is basically an editing one. Substitute the word “licensing” -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is the spelling of “licensing”. It is typographical; we do not have to take a vote on that.

MR BAGIIRE: Introduce a new paragraph (s) immediately after paragraph (r) to read as follows: “(s) compliance with the regulations.” The justification is: to ensure the regulations made under clause 100 provide for compliance of the regulations and sanctions for non-compliance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But how will this fit? “Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the Minister may make regulations relating to – (s) compliance with the regulation.” What is that? I thought the reflections were made for compliance. What is the significance of saying, “without prejudice to sub-section (1), the minister may make regulations relating to compliance with the regulations?” Even with the Act, is it necessary? Think about it. Learned Attorney-General, the House is –

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, without wasting time, I request to withdraw that amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Is there another amendment? 

MR BAGIIRE: There is an amendment to sub-clause (3) of clause 100. The committee proposes that the entire sub clause is deleted. The justification is that it is redundant because clause 58 of the Bill is sufficient.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question for the deletion of sub-clause (3).

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, we have withdrawn (s). The committee was proposing deletion of the entire sub-clause (4). The justification was that the intention of the provision is provided for in a new paragraph introduced under clause 100(2) (s). However, now that that has not happened, I request to withdraw this particular amendment and the sub clause stays as is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question that clause 100 as amended do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 100, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 101 

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we redraft the entire provision to read as follows: “Amendment to Cap. 49. The Stage Plays and Public Entertainments Act is amended-
(a) in section 1 by substituting for paragraph (a) the following:- 
‘(a) Commission means the Uganda Communications Commission established under the Uganda Communications Act 2012’.” I do not know whether I am moving ahead of time. I seek your guidance, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Was that part of the intention of this law, to review that Act, the Stage Plays and Public Entertainments Act?

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, basically, what we are doing here was to –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, it is within. Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Paragraph (b): “by substituting for any reference to ‘council’ in that Act, a reference to ‘Commission’.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 101, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 102, agreed to.

Clause 103, agreed to.

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We had stood over clause 1 because there was a particular definition, the definition of “public broadcaster”, which we had not taken a vote on because we said we need to deal with the main clause before we deal with this one. I put the question to the amendment on the definition of public broadcaster. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, I seek your guidance. I remember when we were beginning, there was a provision relating to the title of the Bill. Have we reached there or shall we do that later?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The title is the final thing we approve. There is a proposal on commencement. Learned Attorney-General, can you now bring back the issue of commencement.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I stated it then. It was part 11 but that proposal that you made and I paraphrased is supposed to come just before 67. The date of publication of the entire Bill is the effective date of commencement of the rest of the Bill; that is my understanding. I do not know whether there was another proposal made. 

However, in respect to part 11, which is on page 45, just before it begins there should be a clause saying that this part shall come into force by a statutory instrument made by the minister. This is a question of drafting, but it means that when the minister makes a statutory instrument - The committee was proposing two months –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: They were proposing that the tribunal will be established one year after. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, you and I agreed that it is better to provide that the entire part comes into force by statutory instrument made by the minister. That means that when they are ready, the sector minister will make a statutory instrument bringing this part into force. It may be one month – it is more flexible. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So the issue is where you place it; do you place it under this Act? 

MR RUHINDI: You place it under this Act, either at the beginning of this part or at the end of this part because it is more related to this particular part. The draftsperson can actually find the best place for it. The rest of this law comes into force on the date of publication in the gazette, unless the minister also wants to make a provision for its commencement, which I do not think is the case.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other jurisdictions, it is put at the commencement page, which precedes section 1. So, it becomes section 1, commencement. The provision would then be something like, “The Bill shall come into force on publication except part IV, which shall come into force upon a statutory instrument being issued by the minister.” So that it is at the beginning and you know what part is being referred to. 

MR RUHINDI: That is also perfectly okay, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, would you like to propose that, so that we have it at the beginning?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, immediately after part I, preliminary, there should be a commencement provision to the effect that “This Act shall come into force upon the date of its publication in the gazette except for part 11, which will come into force as the minister may by statutory instrument prescribe.”  

MS KABAKUMBA: I would like to add, “in any case, not more than one year.” He had left it open and that is what the committee was complaining about. We should give it that one year.

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the minister should be given at least six months in which to operationalize this law. 

MR RUGUNDA: Mr Chairman, it is the intention of Government to operationalize the tribunal as quickly as possible. The one year given is the maximum; I know Government will act much faster than that. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So we put the improvement of a time limit of one year within the commencement of part 11 of this Act. I put the question to this amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2, agreed to.

Schedule 3, agreed to.

Schedule 4

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, we had actually deliberated on this one – the issue of national values. We would like to propose that under Schedule 4, minimum broadcasting standards, we add the words, “and national values” at the end of paragraph (a) (i). The justification is: to make it all inclusive.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We rejected “national values”. We did not pass it. Did we? We talked about moralities. So I will put the question to Schedule 4 as it is. I put the question that Schedule 4 stands as Schedule 4 of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 4, agreed to.
 
Schedule 5

MR BAGIIRE: The committee would like to propose that Schedule 5 reads as follows: “The rate of gross annual revenue payable by an operator to the Commission under Section 75 shall not be less than two per cent and shall not exceed 2.5 per cent.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “Shall not be less than two per cent and shall not be more than 2.5 per cent”; you think there would be any incident where the Commission can decide to charge 0.5 percent?  

MS KABAKUMBA: I need some guidance. The chairperson is proposing that it should not be less than two per cent and more than 2.5 per cent. Why “not more than 2.5 per cent”? The other one was open; we said “not less than two per cent”. We should be consistent and not set the upper limit.

MR BAGIIRE: The global practice has been that the highest levy has been, I think, two per cent for the last 15 years or so. By saying that we are not exceeding 2.5 percent is basically putting it categorically clear to the operators that if indeed it is to increase, it will not go beyond 2.5 per cent, which I think is a fair thing to do.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 5, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 6, agreed to.

The Title

MR BAGIIRE: The committee proposes that we amend the title of the Bill, “The Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority Bill 2012”, to read, “The Uganda Communications Bill, 2012”. The justification is that UCC is a well known international brand and indeed, it already caters for both communication and broadcasting. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is to amend the title of the Bill to read, “The Uganda Communications Bill, 2012”. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.24
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto. I put the question

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.25
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority Bill, 2012” and has approved clauses 1 and 8 to 103 and also schedules 1 to 6 and passed them with some amendments.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, the minister has repeated exactly what we deleted. We agreed that it is “The Uganda Communications Bill, 2012”. 

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: I salute the vigilance of my brother. The Bill is, “The Uganda Communications Bill, 2012”. Vigilance accepted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF WHOLE HOUSE

7.26
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, I have a point of procedure to raise. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can’t it come after I have finished with this brief process? Please proceed, honourable minister. 

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS BILL, 2012

7.27
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Communications Bill, 2012” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Communications Bill, 2012” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS ACT, 2012”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. (Applause) To the chairperson, congratulations for a job well done (Applause).  If it was in the ordinary course of things, the volume of amendments would have rendered the Bill a difficult matter to handle. However, I am glad that we have been able to go through it and nobody raised a motion that this Bill should be returned, because the amendments would have warranted a return of this. They were very many. I am glad we have been able to finish it. I will alter the Order Paper to allow for Bills First Reading.

BILLS
FIRST READING

SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2012

7.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2012” be read for the first time.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we have the requisite things? It is seconded by the Minister of ICT and the Attorney-General, and the Chief Whip.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, in accordance to Section 10 of the Budget Act 2001, I beg to lay the certificate of financial implications thereto.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That Bill is what concludes the operations of the last financial year. It stands committed to the Budget Committee for expeditious handling so that we can deal with these matters and conclude the budget process. 

Honourable members, I have an announcement to make and a decision to communicate. The officers of Parliament have finished tabulating the figures for the budget, which should have been ready for supply, but the budget does not balance. I am therefore directing that the Budget Committee should meet to harmonise the figures tomorrow. This meeting should take place tomorrow in the Conference Hall of this Parliament so that we can harmonise this together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, staff of Parliament and respective chairpersons of the Budget Committee. They will meet accordingly and report so that we supply on Friday morning and appropriate on Monday morning. That is the direction from the Speaker. Time of the meeting will be 9 O’clock. Thank you.
This House is adjourned to tomorrow 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.31 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 6 September 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
