Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Tuesday, 17 September 2019

Parliament met at 2.52 P.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have one matter to communicate. I have a ruling to make in respect of a motion that was moved here by hon. Molly Lanyero for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to extend District Quota Policy for award for Government scholarships to other lower institutions of learning.

Honourable members, you recall that on 12 September 2019, hon. Lanyero sought to move a motion for the above resolution to urge Government to extend District Quota Policy to the lower institutions of learning. 

The motion seeks Parliament to resolve as follows:

The Ministry of Education and Sports and all their responsible Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies begin applying the criteria of district quota for admission of Government scholarships for these tertiary institutions with effect from the academic year 2019/2020. I think we might have to amend the commencement period.

Secondly, the Ministry of Education and Sports provides updates to the House on the status of Government scholarships on an annual basis including, but not limited to, laying on Table the list of students on Government scholarships in all institutions of higher learning and other tertiary institutions. 

    a) Article 93 bars Parliament from proceeding on a Bill or motion except where the Bill or motion is introduced on behalf of Government, which makes provision for imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge other than by reduction;
    b) The payments, issue or withdraw from the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda of any money that is charged on that Fund or any increase of the amount of that payment, issue or withdrawal;
    c) The composition or remission of any debt due to the Government of Uganda or the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda any monies not charged on that Fund or any increased amount of that payment, issue or withdrawal;
    d) Composition or remission of any debt to the Government of Uganda;
    e) Upon a motion including an amendment motion to the effects of which would be to make provision for any of the purposes above;
Parliament is barred from proceeding on that motion or Bill, which makes provision for those unless they are brought by the Government.

I am aware that Government has in place scholarships for students who intend to pursue studies in tertiary institutions. However, unlike public universities, where this quota system is applied, the quota is not used during admission to public tertiary institutions.

The motion in my view is intended to urge Government to now begin applying the District Quota System to the lower institutions including technical colleges, institutes, nursing training institutions, Primary Teachers Colleges, National Teachers Colleges and agricultural training institutions, among others.

In my view, she is not seeking additional funding but she is seeking to utilise the existing funds to be applied to the districts quota.

Therefore, my findings are fortified by a number of decisions from the High Court. Male Mabirizi vs Attorney-General, Consolidate Petition No. 2,3,4 of 2018, Mwesigye Wilson vs Attorney-General and Parliamentary Commission- Constitutional Petition No. 3 of 2011, Constitutional Petition No. 2 of 2018 and others. Court considered that only the content of the Bill in terms of whether a Bill makes provisions in any matter prohibited in Article 93 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Therefore, hon. Lanyero may proceed with her motion. It will be put back on the Order Paper next week. Thank you very much. 

There are matters of national concern. Hon. Genensio Tumuramye - two minutes.

2.58
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. On 27 August 2019, Kashongi County experienced heavy rains with hailstones, which destroyed crops including banana plantations, cassava, animals and homes. This rain affected four parishes including Kitura sub parish, Rwanyangwe, Kabuswere and Bweza. In all, 657 homes were affected. The rain caused severe damage to the homes and most of the people have suffered food shortage as a result.

My prayer is that the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should provide supplies and even iron sheets for the affected families. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is urged to urgently go to Kashongi County to address the issues raised, resulting from the damage caused in that county.

2.59 
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance that concerns the people of Kapelebyong County. In a space of about one month, we have lost three people; Otuko Michael Ojok who drowned in Ajelek Bridge, which has been over flooded for one month.

In Achinga Bridge, which has also been over flooded for one month, we lost Okello, son of Otaba. Madam Speaker, in Milimili Aketa swamp connecting Kapelebyong District with Usuku County, we lost Etyang Onyole while he attempted to cross to the other side to the market.

Besides those bridges that caused the death of these people, two sub-counties are cut off. In Achinga, people cannot go to the sub county headquarters and they cannot cross to the health centre III in Achwa sub county.

Madam Speaker, the bridge –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Your prayers.

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, we have experienced heavy downfall coupled with heavy flow of water from Karamoja region. Our prayers are:

Help us contain the water. Secondly, we need an emergency road unit from the Ministry of Works and Transport to help us work on the roads, which have been swept away, stopping vehicles from moving to and from the district.

We also need emergency seeds because the crops are rotten and the gardens are smelly. We are not sure of what to eat tomorrow. 

Lastly, we need emergency joint assessment by ministries to ascertain what each ministry can respond to. 

Otherwise, my Chief Administrative Officer and the technical team are trying their best but they cannot move because most of the roads have been washed away and are cut off. 

Madam Speaker, those are my prayers on behalf of the people of Kapelebyong County. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the matter appears to be inter-ministerial. Can we request the Prime Minister to convene a meeting of the ministries concerned? I do not know who is responsible for stopping the water from crossing from Karamoja to – Is it the ministers in charge of environment, relief and agriculture? They should come and address the issues in Kapelebyong. Thank you very much.

3.03
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent importance, which is the insecurity surrounding me. 

Last year, around October, I noticed people trailing me. Before that, since 2011, I had a police guard in Mbale as well as Seeta, where I stay. However, from the time I started noticing people trailing me, these policemen were withdrawn. I have tried to request for the police guards to come back but all in vain. 

What I noticed is that the Deputy Police Commissioner (DPC) then, in Mukono, who gave me the police guard in 2011, is the same one who withdrew them last year. He is also the same DPC that has been brought to Mbale. 

A month ago, again, I noticed people trailing me in Mbale and I went and reported them at the police station. By the time I went to report, that was now the third time they were trailing me. We even went as far as giving the police the car number, which was trailing me and they said they would follow it up and get back to me. When I asked them why they had withdrawn my police guard, they told me there was no manpower. 

Two weeks ago, a letter was dropped at my home threatening me with death, if I did not avail Shs 400 million.  (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude. 

MS NAKAYENZE: Madam Speaker, I moved to the DPC and I asked for security again but he was reluctant to give it to me. It was until I engaged the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, who talked to him and told him to give me security, that after three days, they gave me a police guard, who was again withdrawn after three days. 

This has caused a lot of anxiety in my home. Whenever I say something, they tell me that they are waiting for orders from above. I do not know who this “above” is. 

Since I have come to this august House, I need help because everybody in my home is living in fear. It seems there is a deliberate move to see that I am insecure. I had guards who were withdrawn. When I asked for my former guard, I was told that I had no authority to decide which guard I should have. The one they withdrew is threatened that he is going to be imprisoned for coming to guard my home, yet he was authorised by the same DPC. 
Madam Speaker, I am now scared and I am living in fear with my children and family. I do not know where to go next. Though I know God is protecting me, it has run out of hand. All the times I have had a problem and run to the DPC, I have been told that they have no manpower, yet even the guards I had were withdrawn. Why is it that they cannot give me the guard I want? 

For your information, Madam Speaker, they have again transferred the very guard that I –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers? 

MS NAKAYENZE: Madam Speaker, my prayer is that I need a police guard of my choice both in Seeta and Mbale, not dictated by the people who want to harm me. If I am given a police guard of my choice, at least I know that as much as God is protecting me, I will be safer. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true that sometime back, hon. Nakayenze came to me and expressed worries. However, I thought that somehow things had settled but it seems it is happening again.

I will invite the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Prime Minister and the Chief Whip so that we have a meeting to discuss how we can support the honourable member. I will convene the meeting possibly tomorrow so that we discuss how to support the honourable member. Thank you. 

3.09
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Monday, yesterday, when I was coming from the islands, I met a big team of teachers in Namayingo District intending to demonstrate over non-payment. These teachers of Namayingo have not been paid for the last two months. When we sat with them, they said that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not yet released money to pay them. 

It is my humble prayer that since the minister is here, he should come and air out the issue of why the teachers of Namayingo have not been paid for the last two months. 

THE SPEAKER: Are the Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or Public Service in position to address this issue? I do not see the Minister of Public Service here. Can we ask the Minister of Public Service to come on Thursday and explain to us about the non-payment of teachers’ salaries in Namayingo District? 

3.10
MS ROSETTE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance on the current stock out of cotrimoxazole and test kits for viral load and early infant diagnosis.

While I appreciate Government efforts that have been put in the fight against HIV, it is unfortunate that currently, across the country and in over 28 districts that have been sampled, some of these health supplies are out of stock for a period ranging from two to six months. 

We know that without test kits, health workers cannot do much. When they fail to do their duty, not because they do not want but because they do not have what to use, it jeopardises the fight against HIV/AIDS. Our dream of having a Uganda and a world without HIV/AIDS is compromised.

Madam Speaker, allow me to mention that in Mbarara, in all the four health facilities that were sampled, these medicines and health supplies were out of stock. 

This rapid assessment was done by a coalition of health civil society organisations under the umbrella of Uganda Coalition for Access to Essential Medicines. These are my prayers: 
First, that the Minister of Health comes out and informs the nation of the status of stock of Septrin, which we know when -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MS KAJUNGU: Madam Speaker, the first prayer is that the Minister of Health should brief the nation on what is going on.

Secondly, that if the problem is with the budget, can the Minister of Health ask for a supplementary budget, specifically ring-fenced to cater for HIV/AIDS test kits and ARVs for anti-diagnosis?

Finally, it is time for the country to fast-track the AIDS Trust Fund because we cannot continually and forever depend on the development partners. Development partners have played their part but as a country, we have not played ours. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.   
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, is this a countrywide stock out or it is about Mbarara?

MS KAJUNGU: No, it is in 28 health facilities across the country, Mbarara inclusive.

THE SPEAKER: We will ask the Minister of Health to come and explain to the House whether, indeed, there is a stock out of the essential drugs and what they expect to do to alleviate the situation. This should come in on Thursday. 

3.14
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise an issue of disaster that befell my people. On Tuesday last week, there were heavy windy rains that attacked Kiriki sub county in Kween District. 

The wind destroyed nearly the whole centre. It destroyed 55 grass thatched houses, 194 semi-permanent houses and six permanent houses. The roofs were blown off. Therefore, I request the Office of the Prime Minister to come to the rescue of these people. They had foodstuffs that they had just harvested but everything was destroyed.

I would like to ask Government to provide food and iron sheets for them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. The Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is asked to go and support the people of Kiriki sub county in Kween District. 

However, on a different note, I would like to know from the Government - meteorologists have predicted that there will be very heavy rainfalls from now until December. What plans does the Government have for the population? Every week, there is something happening about the rainfall. 

Rt hon. Prime Minister, what is the Government doing about the predicted very heavy rainfalls from now until the end of the year? What would you advise Ugandans to do?  

3.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, this requires a formal statement to brief Parliament about the arrangements that Government has done, which I am unable to give right now.

THE SPEAKER: This is quite urgent because every week, there are issues coming up about the heavy rains and destructions.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, some of the programmes have already been put out like saving our wetlands, which are working as sieves when we receive much rain. The second is about the National Tree Planting Day, which His Excellency, the President, launched for us to save our environment. We know that when rains come and they find the ways for the stormy water blocked, the problem is escalated. 

The programme is wide and that is why I requested that probably, we need to come back again with a comprehensive information paper to this august House. However, this does not mean that we should ignore the very urgent issues, especially where, for example, a bridge is broken or where people’s gardens have been affected and where houses have been blown off. We shall not wait for the trees to grow. We shall come in form of disaster preparedness to make sure that we save more damage to the crops and human beings.

THE SPEAKER: I would be happy to hear about the detailed plan of the Government on this issue. Does the Minister of State for Water and Environment have something to say? As she comes, join me in welcoming students and teachers from Danielsen High School from Bergen, Norway. You are welcome. Thank you very much. (Applause)

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, it is true that floods are an indication of our catchments not being well protected. As I speak, we have just concluded a meeting with the Ministry of Education and Sports. Tomorrow, I will be meeting the Prime Minister. We are coming out very vigorously; we will take on more ministries because this is going to be an inter-ministerial plan to launch “A go green” agenda, which is not going to leave anybody behind. 

We have chosen to use schools because just only in primary, we have 10 million children. If we use these schools and start this programme, we will be able to address this issue.

Secondly, schools have a very strong linkage with the communities. Therefore, we would like to address this because we know that it is a concern and we are taking it on seriously. I have already met with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and I will be coming to you soon so that we all move as a team to address this issue. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, minister, we will wait for your plan; we will be here.

3.20
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There was heavy downpour and strong winds in my constituency, particularly in Kichwamba sub county, in Bigando parish. Roofs for two schools and a building for one of the cooperative societies were blown off.

Furthermore, the roofs for the 11 resident houses were blown off.  It is a total disaster in Bigando.

I would like to ask the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, to address this issue of the schools because children have nowhere to learn from yet, today is a learning day. I request the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, to extend support to them in form of iron sheets. The same support should be extended to the 11 resident houses whose roofs were blown off and the local credit and savings’ building.

Secondly, in the intermediate, I would also like to ask the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to extend at least tarpaulins to the communities whose roofs have been blown off so that they can be housed somewhere, including food.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is urged to go urgently to Busongora to address the disaster there. In respect to the schools, in a few weeks’ time, the children will be sitting their exams and they will need somewhere to sit. I hope it can be addressed quickly.   

3.22
MR PETER MUGEMA (NRM, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. I received with grief, in our municipality, the news of the death one of our girls, Georgia Kisakye, 32 years old. She had gone to Saudi Arabia to work as a house maid. 

The reason I picked interest in this case is that on the death certificate, which accompanied the body, it said that she died of cardiac failure and heart related issues. However, on examination of the dead body, when we received it from Entebbe, it had burns all over it. The head had been shattered, one of the breasts had been taken and even the labia appeared to have been removed -(Interjections)- I will lay on Table whatever I am saying. They had even opened up the whole body and I think some of the parts had been taken. 

I beg to lay on Table all the pictures of this girl. These pictures show that her body was shattered and burnt beyond recognition except for the face. I beg to lay. 

To my surprise, many such incidents are happening. Even last week, we watched a similar incident on NTV. 

I beg the line minister to compel a company called Shukran Habib Consultants Ltd to give us a detailed account of what our people go to do in that place. There is a possibility that those companies are dealing in human parts. At the same time, they are taking our girls and boys for granted. 

The minister should take keen interest in this and compel the company to first close its doors and we make a thorough analysis of its operations. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is here. I do not know whether she has anything to say at this stage. 

3.25
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Janat Mukwaya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry I was delayed. I was trying to find out the company from hon. Mugema but he has not given it to me. 

It is sad that this has happened. I will get the details so that we find out what exactly happened.

Normally, when post mortem is done, the body is opened up to establish the cause of death – (Interruption)

MR MUGEMA: Madam Speaker, I am talking with a lot of zeal and information since I have a medical background. Hon. Mukwaya, you are my “mum”, a veteran that fought for this country. You would have used your integrity to see these pictures and look at the body. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you should conduct yourself with decorum, please. She will see the pictures. 

MS MUKWAYA: What hon. Mugema should recognise is that I am a mother who has gone through the labour ward not once. That means that I know the pain that every parent goes through they lose a child. 

I was only responding to the fact that the body was opened up. I said that in normal post mortem practice, they open up the body. I also submitted that I will get the report from him and come back to Parliament and make a statement because I am hearing this for the first time. 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your indulgence. The manner in which hon. Mugema brought the matter could have been a little comical but it speaks to the gravity of the challenge. 

I am inclined to believe that the issue of labour export in this country, if not properly handled, could be the biggest failure of our times as leaders. Not once or twice, this matter has been raised on this Floor and somewhere, somehow, orders have been given by the Speaker but the orders either fizzle or somebody does not follow up. 

Madam Speaker, as way of seeking your guidance, is it not time that Parliament deeply, more than ever before, interests itself in this matter? 

Last week, I was watching television and I saw three bodies being offloaded from the Middle East. They said two were from Kuwait and another one was from somewhere else. 

There could be a bigger problem and we will never be forgiven if we do not go to the root of this problem. Can we be guided on how best we can deal with this, once and for all? 

Madam Speaker, I remember one time, you ordered that export stops and investigations be done and reports made on individual companies and their operations. This was never done. The minister has explained that they have a procedural arrangement of – 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude

MR MPUUGA: My challenge is that we are likely to be hovering over this over and over and going nowhere. Is it not about time that Parliament moves to investigate this problem and solves it once and for all? It is no longer labour export; there is a bigger problem and we are glossing over it. I need to be guided. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Peter Mugema for bringing up the latest version of what is taking place in the Arab world against Ugandans. 

This is not an isolated issue. We have been lamenting here of the Ugandans stranded in the Arab world. Sometimes, we wonder whether Government is sensitive. Just the other day, as hon. Mpuuga put it, three bodies were brought back, reportedly that the Ugandans fell sick while in Kuwait and they eventually died. When you listen to the relatives, they had spoken to the deceased while in Kuwait, who were not complaining of any sickness until they lost contact with them and eventually, they got the sad news that they had passed on. 

There is something fishy taking place against Ugandans in the Arab world. In 1974, it took the whole Cabinet of Israel to come and rescue the natives of their country because they had been put in a safe custody around Entebbe Airport. We are ferrying Ugandans to where they are being killed. Do we have embassies? Honourable minister, we have been lamenting in your presence here. There is even seemingly no communication between Uganda and the countries where Ugandans are dying from.

Madam Speaker, it is paramount that the minister comes up with a comprehensive statement, first of all, explaining how Uganda has been corresponding with the other countries where Ugandans are being –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Government does not have missions in every country. There are countries where we do not have representation and, therefore, even monitoring from afar is a problem. Anyway, we shall discuss it. We need a formal discussion. 

3.32
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of Ugandans suffering in the Middle East is not coming to this Floor for the first time. We summoned the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. She came and we told her about the testimonies of girls who had returned from those countries and the minister could not accept it. She even told us that when she is in Saudi Arabia, she shares food with those people and they are all doing well. However, we keep getting information from our people who are suffering in Jordan, Saudi Arabia and many of those countries. Government has not taken this issue seriously.

I advise the Government to borrow a leaf – go to the International Labour Organisation in Geneva and look at the agreements. Other workers are not treated the way Ugandan workers are. Even Kenyans are treated much better. Look at the Philippines who have got more than 10 million people working abroad. They are treated differently. However, Ugandans are being treated like slaves. They are being killed and this Government is just looking on and not doing anything at all. 

I have got a picture from a girl from my village who is in Jordan. They have taken away her passport and she is suffering. They keep sending pictures to all of us here. The Government should act and rescue our people. Nigeria went and rescued its people from South Africa but this Government is just looking on as our people suffer in the Middle East. These people are suffering because the Government cannot create enough employment for the people. People leave this country because they have no jobs and this has also increased –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: This matter just came up as a matter of national importance and so, we cannot really debate it fully today. We need a formal motion so that we have a focused debate and give it sufficient time. At an appropriate time, I will allow a motion.

MS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, two weeks ago, you ruled that all these issues should go to a joint Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and another committee and I am appearing before the committee. Therefore, this new information should also go to the committee as I also do my research. I am preparing to go to the committee as you directed.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let the committee receive the information. They will have to come back and report to us anyway so that we debate the report. Thank you.

3.35
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 53(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I would like to inform the House that tomorrow, this Parliament is going to hold a thanksgiving prayer in compliance with a resolution which was passed on 29 May,      2019. 

Members will recall that it was resolved that a thanksgiving prayer be held to thank God for restoring the health of our Speaker. (Applause) We feel bad that we have not been able to do it because Parliament got very busy with the budget process and the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC) preparation activities. However, we have realised – as Christians and God-fearing people – that if your life had not been spared or if you were crippled by the sickness, even this CPC would not have been held. 

Therefore, we are extremely grateful to God that we have been given this opportunity to host the entire Commonwealth in Uganda. If you had not been there, it would have been difficult. As the Bible says “God first and the rest can follow”, we feel that Parliament should put God first. We should hold this thanksgiving prayer tomorrow at 7.00 a.m. so that when the CPC itself takes place, we would have given honour to the Lord.

I ask all the Members to participate in that prayer meeting because all of us are involved. We are praying for the institution of Parliament, we are praying for Government and we are praying for the success of CPC. Therefore, I expect all the Cabinet members and institutions, including the Judiciary. 

Madam Speaker, I have observed something very unique today. I think both the whip of the Opposition and that of Government need to be congratulated today because the participation has been very impressive and I would like to give special recognition and thanks to the two whips. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the venue?

MS OGWAL: The venue is here. We are the hosts and the prayer has to here in our home. You must have seen that there is something going on at the South Wing Parking entrance. That is where the venue will be. It will be able to accommodate all of us. Please, do not fear that we will not have enough space. We have also prayed that there will be no rain. I do not think anybody will fear that there will be rain. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, assemble at 7 o’clock for the prayers so that we can quickly go into other work. Thank you very much.

LAYING OF THE REPORT TO PARLIAMENT FROM THE 10TH CONFERENCE OF SPEAKERS HELD IN MIDRAND, SOUTH AFRICA

3.40
PROF. MORRIS OGENGA LATIGO (FDC, Agago County	North, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Between the 5th and 7th of August 2019, the Rt Hon. Speaker Rebecca Kadaga joined the Speakers of Africa for the 10th Conference of Speakers and this meeting was held at the Pan African Parliament headquarters in Midrand, South Africa. The theme of the meeting was: “Towards durable solutions for post-migration to accelerate integration and development in Africa: the role of national and regional parliaments.”

In her characteristic efficient way, the Speaker prepared a report of her participation in that conference and as all of us know, the Speaker cannot lay her report at the Table. I am privileged to have been requested to lay the report on her behalf. 

However, before I do so, allow me on behalf of my colleagues of the Pan African Parliament, to sincerely thank the Speaker. She has consistently participated in all the conferences for the Speakers and she has ably represented us. Therefore, on behalf of all of you, I would like to thank the Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, it is my honour now to lay on Table the report from the 10th Conference of Speakers, held in Midrand, South Africa. I beg to lay.

AGREED MINUTES OF THE THIRD SESSION OF THE JOINT MINISTERIAL COMMISSION (JMC) BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA AND THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The report is available for Members to study and use. Thank you. Can the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives lay on Table the Agreed Minutes of the Third Session of the Joint Ministerial Commission (JMC) between the Republic of Uganda and the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia? Let us go to item four.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IRREGULAR RECRUITMENT OF NON-NATIVES ON THE QUOTAS OF OTHER DISTRICTS DURING THE RECENTLY CONCLUDED RECRUITMENT EXERCISE BY UGANDA POLICE FORCE

3.44 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, I saw this morning that we were on the Order Paper to make the statement, which the Clerk has just read. However, I would like to apologise; I do not have that statement now.

First of all, when the decision was taken by Parliament for us to come and make a statement here on Thursday, the ministry was not informed.

Secondly, of the two ministers the ministry has, one was in Moroto and the other was on his way to Kigali. So, this morning, when we were informed that we were on the Order Paper, we called the police leadership and tried to get the extract of the debate from the -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to tell us his position before you can comment.

MR OBIGA: Thank you. We called the Police leadership to try to ascertain the issues, which were raised by Members. As I said, we have not got the specific issues regarding the recruitment. 

However, we understand that Members were concerned that people who were not residents or natives in their areas were recruited into the police force. That means that for us to make a statement here, we need to bring the list of the people who were registered in each district so that we can ascertain whether they are natives or residents.

Madam Speaker, the ministry is in the process of preparing that statement. I would like to therefore, beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that since we want to have a comprehensive statement with the full list of people who were recruited, including possibly some of those who reported to the centres – because we have a list of people who reported to the recruitment centres - we are therefore, asking for time so that we make the statement on Thursday.

Thirdly, there was a decision of Parliament, as communicated by the Speaker regarding the reporting of the people for training. Yes, the communication by the Inspector General of Police (IGP) for the recruits to report was made on Wednesday. So, by the time Parliament took that decision on Thursday evening, that communication had already been made and some of the recruits from upcountry had already started arriving. However, the reporting process is not the completion of the recruitment. There is another screening, which goes on at the reporting centre. One is that people –(Interjections)– listen. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR OBIGA: One is that the academic papers of the people will be ascertained again. Also the origin of those recruited will be ascertained to find out whether they are the natives we are talking about. The medical condition of those people will also be ascertained. So, the training will not start until all that process is completed in about a week or two.
Madam Speaker, on Thursday, we shall be tabling the position here and Members should access that list. That is the request, Madam Speaker. We want to give people correct information. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you requested for the information, which the minister is looking for. Let him bring the lists for all the districts so that you can crosscheck whether the people who are there are from those districts or not. Let us give him time until Thursday to bring a comprehensive list. The matter is deferred to Thursday and Members should get ready with your information so that you can challenge him. 

RE-DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 184 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baryayanga is not here. Let us go on to the next item. 

RESPONSE TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. ROBERT NTENDE ON THE STATUS OF PLEDGES BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF INDIA, HIS EXCELLENCY MODI NARENDRA DURING HIS ADDRESS TO THE HOUSE ON 25 JULY 2018, NOTABLY; BUILDING A CONFERENCE CENTRE IN JINJA IN MEMORY OF MAHATMA GANDHI AND CREDIT EXTENSION TO UGANDA TO ESTABLISH COTTAGE INDUSTRIES

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister for General Duties but as the minister comes, we have Mr Gerima Mustafa. Mr Mustafa, please, stand up. He walked from Parliamentary Avenue to Arua on foot to raise awareness about the dangers of cutting down the shea nut trees. You are welcome. He comes from Arua and he is represented by hon. Atiku and hon. Mourine Osoru. Honourable minister, can you respond on the issue of the pledges by the Prime Minister of India?

3.51
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Karooro Okurut has been delegated to perform the functions of the Prime Minister but she has requested me to read her statement. I beg that you allow me to read the statement in response to the issues as they were raised by hon. Robert Ntende, regarding the visit of the Prime Minister of India, during the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament.

Madam Speaker, you recall that during the visit of His Excellency, the Prime Minister, the following offers among others were made:

1. 	The construction of electricity line and sub station of $141 million and $64 million for agriculture and dairy sector development and I would like to respond as follows:

To finance importation of industrial machinery for agricultural value addition; on the advice of the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs requested the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to develop a concept paper regarding the utility, value and areas of operation to be funded by the line of credit but there is no response to date.

THE SPEAKER: Please, come again on that issue, I was reading thorough the Order Paper.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, on the line of credit to finance importation of industrial machinery for agricultural value addition; on the advice of the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs requested the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives - because it is the ministry in charge of the machinery - to develop a concept paper regarding the utility, value and areas of operation to be funded by the line of credit, which was promised by the visiting Prime Minister but no response has been received yet.

THE SPEAKER: No responses from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reviewed these lines of credit in light of Ugandan National Debt Strategy and concluded that it was not prudent to contract this credit as it would adversely affect the national debt situation. That was advice from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development regarding that facility. 

2.	On the offer of 88 vehicles for both military and civilian youth, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is in constant contact with the Indian Government and tendering for these vehicles had been concluded and delivery is expected early next year, which is two to three months from now.

3. 	On the offer of the Barberton Cancer Therapy Machine to the Ugandan Cancer Institute, the machine arrived in the country. It is under installation and will soon be launched.

4. 	On the Mahatma Gandhi Cultural Centre at the source of the Nile, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs handed over the project to the responsible ministry, which is the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.

	We are, however, informed that the Local Government in Jinja has failed to avail land at the source of the Nile as required by the donor.

5. 	The National Convention Centre; India offered to build for Uganda a world class convention centre named after Mahatma Ghandi. Uganda had to provide unencumbered land in Entebbe for that project. 

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has failed to provide the land. I do not remember the acreage because this centre would include many facilities but there has been no progress on this project.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has advised that urgent action be taken as further delay on the implementation may cause withdrawal of the outstanding offers.

I would like of thank hon. Ntende who raised these questions because it has awakened us who are in charge of monitoring in the Office of the Prime Minister, to push the ministries that are supposed to provide for the facilities required to implement the offer given to us.

I would like to request that I inform the Rt   hon. Prime Minister to make sure that the requirement from Jinja, for example, where we need land - even if it means calling the Local Government from Jinja to discuss the matter, let this be completed as soon as possible so that we do not miss that offer at the source of the Nile. (Interruption)

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the minister that 10 years back, I was in India, where I attended a meeting. The Government of India gave the Government of Uganda a piece of land to construct the Uganda High Commission.

Up to now, they have not and the offer has expired. I am now hearing another one from the same Ministry of Foreign Affairs. That was the information I wanted to give you because it was not the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development that gave land in India. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I appreciate the information by hon. Hanifa Kawooya but we are talking about the Government of Uganda providing land to build those two facilities; the one in Entebbe and the one in Jinja. Have you finished minister? Hon. Ntende, is there a supplementary? 

3.59
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Government Chief Whip for reading the statement.

The statement about Jinja Local Government not availing land has a lot to be desired. With other members of Parliament, I interacted with the Local Government of Jinja. The land is available and if the Government wants it even tomorrow, they are free to verify it.

Our ambassador to India is a former Mayor of Jinja. When I talked to him after raising this matter, he also confirmed very clearly to me that the land was available and the Indian Government was willing. He asked me three times, “when will the promised pledge be implemented in Jinja?” His hands are tied.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I direct the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development to ascertain whether there is land and report here on Thursday. Also the land in Entebbe, we want to know if it is there. 

It would really be deplorable for a friend like Prime Minister Modi to give us so much and we do not use it. Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, I would like an assurance that on Thursday, you will come here and confirm the existence of that land and how much it is. 

MR MUSUMBA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I would like to raise a matter of procedure. On 03 September 2019, I was away but I looked at the Hansard and hon. Kabatsi answered my question on Foot and Mouth Disease in an unsatisfactory way. She attributed the part, which I had talked about Mr Mulindwa reintroducing the disease as being handled by the Ministry for Security. She did not address the lack of vaccines and acaricides. 

So, I would like this matter reintroduced on the Order Paper. It is now two weeks from when she responded but this matter had been around for more than a month from the time I had initially asked the question. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I will ask the Clerk to study the answer on the Hansard and see whether the question was not well answered. If it was not, she will put it back on the Order Paper.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF ROADS IN AGAGO DISTRICT RAISED BY HON. FRANCA AKELLO

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This statement is presented in response to a matter raised at the 23rd Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament by hon. Franca Akello concerning the poor road network in some parts of Agago District, particularly Kilak Corner-Moroto via Abim, Lukee Bridge-Patongo-Kalongo-Bulugi section between Lukee to Kalongo and Adilang-Lira Kato-Lapono-Paimol-Omiya Pacwa to Namukora.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport has a clear record of the state of these roads. The roads in reference were under term maintenance, which ended in the Financial Year 2017/2018 and were planned for framework contract Phase 2, which has delayed in procurement. 

The ministry is also faced with inadequate funds following the reduction of the National Road Maintenance Fund this financial year despite the increasing maintenance backlog.

From the foregoing, these are the interventions that are planned for each road section:

    1. Kilak Corner via Abim is planned to receive grading, drainage, improvement works and spots graveling using Force on Account under Kitgum Station in Quarter Two, which is beginning a few weeks from now.
    2. Lukee Bridge-Patongo-Kalongo and Bulugi section is currently receiving grading, drainage improvement works and swamps filling using Force Account under Kitgum Station in this quarter.
    3. Adilang-Lira Kato-Lapono-Paimol-Pacwa-Namukora is planned to receive grading, drainage improvement work and spots graveling using Force on Account under Kitgum Station in Quarter Two.

The Ministry of Works and Transport, under its mandate, is committed to ensuring that all roads are well maintained in motor level conditions. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

4.06
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for, at last, coming out with the statement. It is true that there are some spot works being done especially on Lukee, kalongo and Bulugi. 

However, I would like to let the minister know that most of these maintenance works are done shoddily. For example, the current work going on in that road is just grading. When you simply grade without murram and it rains, whoever wants to risk passing that road gets stuck on the road. Therefore, as you plan activities of spot services like that, there has to be some budget for murram as well. 

With that feedback from the minister, I await the performance of the budget for Quarter Two as the minister stated. Thank you.

RESPONSE BY  MINISTER ON THE FATE OF TEACHERS MISSING OUT ON SALARIES DUE TO LACK OF NATIONAL IDENTITY CARDS 
 
THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Public Service is not there.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER ON THE INCURSION OF ELEPHANTS INTO OYAM DISTRICT AND THE SUBSEQUENT DISRUPTION OF LIVELIHOODS, DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY AND LOSS OF LIVES RAISED BY HON. ALUM SANTA OGWANG

THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is absent.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER ON THE DESTRUCTION OF OVER 40 GRASS THATCHED HUTS AND BUILDINGS AT ORISAI PRIMARY SCHOOL BY HAILSTORMS RAISED BY HON. A DAVID BALA

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is not there.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER ON THE MURDER OF A ONE SAMUEL OPIO IN NGORA BY UNKNOWN ASSAILANTS RAISED BY HON. DAVID ABALA 

THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Internal Affairs is not there. 

Honourable members, I have received a request from hon. Syda Bbumba that we handle the loan request before we go to the Bill. I do not know if you have any problem with that. Can we handle the loan request first?

MR MUHEIRWE: Madam Speaker, Rule 186 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provides for the select committees. In the month of February this year, the Member of Parliament from Zombo and I raised a matter of an eviction in Kigorobya, Kyabasagazi Village and a select committee was put in place. It was supposed to take only 45 days to report but up to today, we have never seen that report. People are already out of their homes and the sugarcane is already growing and almost flowering.  I am rising on that matter so that you guide us on the next step to take. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will ask the Clerk to ascertain the status of that activity and I will advise you tomorrow. 

Can we now go to the – we had already started on the Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018. We had received both the majority and the minority reports and I invited you to go and read them during the weekend so that you can submit from a point of knowledge on that issue. So, the Floor is open for debate. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you listened to both reports. (Member rose_) No, you cannot. You already made your minority report. Wait for Members to comment.

4.11
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I read through this report and I have three issues that I would like to comment on. One regards the issue of - there are two reports concerning the secretariat. I would like to concur with the decision of the committee. 

When I looked at the functions of the Board, I realised that majority of the functions are more of day-to-day administrative work. If we leave it with the secretariat manned by a department of Government, it may not discharge its work effectively.

Therefore, I am of the opinion - and I would like to ask my colleagues - that we support the committee position that the secretariat be retained and adequately equipped to enable it to carry out the day-to-day administrative work. 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, I also note that what we are doing is to take down the physical planning role or work up to the sub county level. That means that we are going down to the village level and leaving much of this work in the hands of sub county chiefs. I am not sure whether these sub county chiefs have been or are going to be adequately trained in physical planning in order to handle the kind of work we are assigning to them.

Madam Speaker, my fear is that - I have looked through the report, scanned through the Bill itself and I do not see any safeguards, which are provided to protect the ordinary citizens from the usual practice of high handedness of civil servants whenever they are implementing Government policies.

It is still fresh in our minds, why Government had to scrap Graduated Tax because of the way civil servants were collecting it. The ordinary person was very inconvenienced and it had become a burden to the citizens of this country. That is why there was a lot of resistance. 

I see a similar situation coming up in this law because we are now delegating a very crucial responsibility to civil servants at low levels without requisite skills and technical competence to enable them to carry out this responsibility. I do not see anywhere in the Bill, a safeguard where the people can have a recourse in a situation whereby they find themselves at the wrong end of the civil servants. There is no where they can -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for you to conclude.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Board being instituted is only to handle appeals from the committees. However, there is nowhere in the Bill or in the report of the committee, where it is provided for the ordinary citizens who might be aggrieved by the decision of the sub county chiefs to take recourse to. I find this as a very serious omission that we need to address in this Bill.

Finally, Madam Speaker, another issue I realised is that - and I do not see why the report is silent about it - there is a provision where they are now asking people to go for civil litigation in case they have a fear or feeling that their rights may be injured. My dilemma is that we are now legislating to the point that you go to a court and you do not need to provide proof.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to seek a clarification. I was in the House, when we debated this Bill and I heard the Prime Minister himself supporting that we do not need the authority. However, when I read through, I see as if the provisions are still there. Therefore, I would like some clarification so that we can flow together. 

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I do not think he actually said that. I asked him about the position on mergers and no mergers and I told him that this House has never received information about that issue. He then said that they were still thinking about it and so on and so forth – yes, that is what he said.

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Urban Development) (MR Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I have since perused the Hansard, which recorded the proceedings on that day and I realised that the minority report, in the statement that was made before this House, its major point of departure and all contention relates to the creation of the secretariat.

I would like to say that this Bill is consistent with and follows the decision of the Cabinet. I have with me the Cabinet minute stating categorically and approving the Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018 to provide for the creation of the secretariat to facilitate Physical Planning Board, headed by the director, to enable the Board to effectively perform its functions and enforce the law.

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay this on Table and bring it to your attention. This is the directive I have and it is the one I am following. I beg to lay.

4.19
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for giving me the opportunity. However, I am worried and I would like to begin from that point because last week, the Prime Minister, Rt hon. Rugunda was very clear on this matter.

That is why we should do away with the issue to deal with an independent secretariat because first of all, it is disarming the local governments in this country and yet, we are operating a decentralised system. This is going to emphasise only the centre and nothing at the sub county and district, which is a problem.

My view is that we must build capacity of all the districts or local governments in this country. Otherwise, this type of arrangement is going to disarm them and at the end of the day, we shall lose. Remember the entire country is a planning area and if we are talking about a secretariat and board here - I am not in support of that element because that independent secretariat will mean we are creating a power centre.

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, in this country, we have many issues regarding the resource envelope. Creating an independent secretariat means budgetary issues, which means you need a lot of support. This will create problems. We should delete it and support the rest. I agree with the rest but not this one.  Thank you.

4.21
Mr Solomon silwany (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the creation of the secretariat.

I have seen a lot of duplication when it comes to the creation of secretariats and authorities. If we continue doing this, we shall not go far because we have a ministry that is established with ministers, workers and the Permanent Secretary. When we create a secretariat and another within it, this will expand and increase public expenditure. 

As a country and Parliament, we should start to be cautious and careful on these numerous creations that we are making. It may be something that came from Cabinet but I feel it is not right. It is something the House cannot support and so, I do not agree with it. 

I was not here when the Prime Minister was speaking and I do not know whether he rejected it. However, as a Member of Parliament, I do not agree with the creation of another secretariat or authority.

4.23
Mr Raphael magyezi (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. I have a few comments.

Firstly, on the terms and conditions of the Board, I think it is not wise to leave this completely at the discretion of the minister. There are certain things that should be embedded in the law, like the number, composition and qualifications of those will be on the Board as well as their duration. This should be specified in the law.

Secondly, on the relationship between the Board and the local governments, I appreciate what the Members are saying. However, as long as we agree that there should be a Board, then we have to give it a secretariat. To me, it is neither a contradiction nor a duplication. The problem I see is usurping the powers of the local governments. To me, that is what is not acceptable. 

We can have a secretariat and a Board but in terms of approval of the plans of the local governments, can we leave this to the councils so that the Board and secretariat concern themselves with approval of the National Physical Plan?

In terms of the appeal, why do we say that if you have a complaint at the sub county, you must come to the national level? This can be handled by the district. There should be levels at the local governments. Honourable chairperson of the committee, this is something that you need to streamline.

Under the functions, we need to seriously streamline the functions of the Board vis-a-vis those of the local government councils.

Finally, there is strengthening physical planning at the lower local government. In the law, sub counties are given a function of wealth creation, economic planning and now physical planning. There are two things that we need to do: Firstly, we need to have an economist at that level. We have staff but we are now talking of a community development officer and the sub county chief. We need somebody specialised at that level.

Secondly, we need to give them funds. I see the proposal that the planning will be done at the cost of the local governments. This is an additional responsibility, which should come with additional funding. I support the committee report and thank them for the good job done.

4.25
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Bill is timely and it was long overdue especially for those of us who are about to enjoy city status. We want to properly plan our cities and would not like them to be like Kampala.

I have a few concerns regarding the Bill. In my opinion, the Bill assumes that the lack of physical planning in this country was because we did not have an institution to implement the laws.

One of the critical problems of poor physical planning in this country is the issue of land tenure system, which we have not resolved. Therefore, I do not know how the Bill intends to deal with development planning when the issue of land ownership is a major hindrance to organised planning in Uganda. 

The second concern I have is in relation to merging social-economic planning together with physical planning. The National Planning Authority in this Bill will only participate through a member who will be seconded on the Board. I am not sure whether that is enough to ensure we merge both physical and social-economic planning. One of the challenges the National Planning Authority has had is that their mandate was quite limited in terms of extending their expertise in ensuring organised physical planning.

Thirdly, I am not sure whether this Bill benchmarked with other countries. I will give an example of the National Planning Commission in South Africa. This is decentralised up to provincial administrative level. You would see that the spatial development plans the provincial development commissions have developed in South Africa are extremely good and it does not cause any sort of confusion in relation to spatial development planning.

In summary, this Bill is creating another institution but it is not critically looking at the causes of the lack of physical planning in this country.  Thank you.

4.28
Mr Daniel muheirwe (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Kikuube): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I thank the committee for coming out with this thorough report. I also thank the proponents of the law especially now that we are seeing a lot of urbanisation in our areas.

I have, however, seen some limited concentration on sanctions and I think we are also mixing issues where we are going to see blame being shifted. We have created very many centres. I can see the roles of the Board are not separated from those of the urban councils. They are also not separated from National Environment Management Authority (NEMA). At the end of the day, we are going to see people keep shifting blame. I am worried we may find somebody saying, “That is not my work.” Therefore, how are we going to separate the different roles?

My other concern is about compensation.  You are aware that there is some property that may be in existence before these physical plans come into place. In case it happens and my building already exists, how are we going to compensate this road that is passing through my piece of land? 

I need some clarification on those few items. Otherwise, we need this law so that we have planned cities.  Thank you.

4.30
Mr NATHAN nandala mafabi (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we are making a big mistake. A few days ago, we said that Uganda has a lot of authorities, boards and these have cost implications on the taxpayers’ money.

In the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, there is a department for physical planning - I wish hon. Werikhe was here. This physical planning department is in charge of the physical planning up to the lower level. Development does not only happen in cities or towns but also in villages. There are places which are gazetted as wetlands, forests and even roads. There is a way in which you can manage that.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it would be wrong for us to come here and say we want to create another board. That means every department in Uganda must have a board - a board for economics, a board for geography; is that how we want it? 

Here, however, physical planning is vital in every centre. Therefore, what do we want to achieve? We do not want to have taxpayer’s money being wasted on plans. There is the National Planning Authority; they know what to do and every sub county knows what to do. Therefore, I think, what this would mean is that every district should have its own physical planning committee, and so should every sub county and even parish. So, for anything to be done in their areas, that committee is the one that should deal with it, and cities should do the same.

However, we come here and say that we want a board with an authority and a secretariat. In fact, when you talk of an executive director, it means that there should be an authority because an executive director must have an authority. Therefore, what problems does the physical planning department in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development have? Why are they not implementing the plans they are talking about?

When Kampala City Council had a department of physical planning, a whole road was closed in Nakasero and nobody complained; people just made small noise and kept quiet. Therefore, the problem is that people have the wrong mindset - that they can build in wetlands, on road –(Member timed out.)

4.33
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this effort. Whereas I am an advocate of national physical development plans and regional cities or regional governments for that matter, I am constrained not to agree with this. This is because of the piecemeal and ad hoc manner in which we are approaching a very important subject, which is in line with the National Physical Planning Act, 2010 which makes the whole county a planning area.

I expected hon. Baryomunsi and my muzukulu to bring the whole integrated multi-sectoral national physical development plan. I did raise this when we were discussing the Roads Bill a few months ago. We are scratching part of this effort. Tomorrow, there will be housing. Why don’t we do it in an integrated manner? 

Right now, even in the Albertine area, we have a problem. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has struggled to help the energy and the oil and gas sectors but they have usurped the powers of the local governments. Physical planning is a decentralised function. Under devolution, physical planning should be right from the lower level. So, why then do we have this? Is it a policy reversal? 

I would like to urge that sanity prevails and we look at this in totality, in an integrated manner - roads and the physical planning itself. For us who advocated for regional cities and regional governments, this is part of the mandate of our regional governments. Now you are creating another authority at the centre. This is again against the spirit of rationalisation and mergers. Why are we creating more cost centres at a time when we agreed in the “kisanja hakuna mchezo” three years ago that we are going to do mergers and rationalise?

I thought the honourable minister would concede that you have a very important national physical development plan -(Interjection)- Yes, I will take the information.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, hon. Mukitale, for giving way. I just rose to give you information. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is in the process of completing a national physical development plan. We shall soon be coming here with it. However, that should be differentiated from the Bill. 

We have the Physical Planning Act, 2010, which is in place and which establishes physical planning committees in the local governments and the National Physical Planning Board - it exists. However, the challenge we have found is that the board, under the current law, has remained weak. Therefore, the proposals which are in the amendment Bill are aimed at strengthening the National Physical Planning Board so that there is a functional umbilical cord between the national board and the lower level physical planning councils or boards.

Therefore, the intent of this amendment Bill is to strengthen the existing National Physical Planning Board so that as it is, it has capacity and is able to link and superintend over the local government planning committees. That is the intention. However, the national physical development plan shall be coming soon to Parliament. Thank you very much.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, it is good the minister has conceded that what is primary is being held in the ministry and Cabinet and they have brought what should be secondary. Speaking from a planning background, planning comes first and the law comes later. It is planning, it is the policy and then you bring in these boards. However, we are moving in reverse order and that is why you are complicating the rationalisation study which has been made.

One of the arguments concerns Parliament, who made all these laws of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and these many road sectors. We are now being blamed for having made so many laws, making it difficult to go back to what is supposed to be the right thing.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that Government goes back and reorganises themselves. I have looked at your document from three consultancies; you have done a very good job but you have kept it to yourself. Parliament is not aware. We are even suffering with these multiple land acquisitions because you have not brought on table what you should have brought ten years ago. 

Honourable minister, kindly, if you love this country, if you want to save money and you want us to have multi-sectoral integrated planning, bring the national physical development plan first, then these other things will follow. Thank you.

4.39
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the proposal by hon. Mukitale that Government withdraws this Bill, goes and completes the national physical development plan, and then comes back when everything is in place. 

I used to sit on the Committee of Physical Infrastructure. The department that is responsible for urban planning in the ministry is itself non-existent. It used to have a budget of less than Shs 200 million with a director and no vehicle. Those of us who represent urban areas - and I disagree with hon. Magyezi who wants every area to plan for itself; then you have no country! 

I will give you a personal example. In Wakiso District, people who are responsible for issuing permission to build will ask you whether you want a field permit or one for an office. You give them Shs 100,000 to secure the one issued for the field. After that, you can build day and night and they will never come to check on you. For the office permit, you pay Shs 200,000 but it has its own limitations. You simply cannot have a country where every village plans for itself. 

There are countries that you visit in the Middle East such as Dubai, Qatar and Abu Dhabi, and you look at the lights they put on their streets. They will decide to put white lights on a particular street. Even when one is flying over these places, you will see a coordinated road. We cannot have Kira with its plan and Mukono with its own. 

I actually wanted to support the stregethening of the board. The only problem is that you have not finished the national physical development plan. My view, Madam Speaker, is that Government withdraws this particular Bill and brings a comprehensive Bill that addresses all these issues. 

You know how much you pay the councillors that are supervising these individuals. In Kira, for example, you will find a factory in a residential area and a lodge near a church and a taxi park; it is complete chaos! To address this, you need to decentralise planning with the budget and staff. However, my colleagues in the ministry are trying to do it in a casual way. Today you bring one –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Conclude. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you. Today you bring one law and then tomorrow, you develop the physical plan and then bring another Bill. 

You can go to all the areas in Kampala, Wakiso and all the other towns; this country was planned. I remember when we were approving the loans for Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID), I was on the Committee on National Economy. We went to Tororo, Soroti, Jinja - the old towns have a plan. What you have added will need to be demolished. The reason you are doing this is because you now want every councilor to have power; for example, the councilor for Kyaliwajjala. Some of these individuals who are supervising physical planning did not go beyond primary one.

I would like to, therefore, persuade the ministers - This has actually delayed. Tourism does not mean having animals in Kanungu. There are towns you go to visit because of their physical planning and you sit and admire them. The trouble here is that people think tourism is just animals; these towns can attract money too. If you have a disaster in Kira today, to weave through the roads, and others are on trees, in order to rescue a person, you will need a helicopter. Physical planning is necessary but the way you are trying to do it, it is like you are going somewhere so you are in a hurry to bring something, throw it in our faces and then go and complete your plan and then return. 

I would like to persuade the ministers; we once had the Kampala City Council that hired a British company at a cost of US$ 9 million to do a physical plan for Kampala and it was completed. The British company asked them if they wanted a lakefront view city or one that starts on the main road. It was not even planned and then we passed a loan for flyovers. As we are finishing roads, we are destroying them. The people that are going to come after us will be surprised that the Uganda of the 60’s and 70’s was fairly planned but the Uganda of our time – I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Can I be protected from hon. Waluswaka, please? He brought a report here, to which we are reacting.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Waluswaka, allow Members to comment on both your report and that of the committee.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak immediately after the last speaker. 

For three and a half years now, the political leadership and technical leadership in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development have been studying this: Why is it that there is poor physical planning and its attending consequences of encroaching on protected areas, reserves, public spaces, wetlands, forest reserves, interruption in drainage water flows, slums, yet this was not the case during the colonial days? It is this study that has resulted into this Bill.

We have identified one of the causes of this as there being a lacuna in the law. The Constitution provides that physical planning, for example in the districts, town councils such as Kira and Kyaliwajjala, and in municipalities, will be the responsibility of the local governments. That is in the Constitution. That is why those local authorities have district planners, town council planners and municipal planners. They recruit their own people within the framework of their personnel structures. 

However, these people are at low levels in terms of hierarchy and they are subject to patronage control from their superiors. The political leadership of the mayors, councillors, the chairmen of the town councils, the chief administrative officers all sit, suppress and influence what the municipal, town or district planners do. 

The Constitution, on the other hand, also provides that the centre - we in the ministry - will be responsible for coordinating the plans –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable minister. 

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, the Constitution provides that it is the centre which will be responsible for coordinating the plans made by the local governments to a regional plan and a national physical development plan. Hence, we have the Directorate of Physical Planning. This is their work. 

As we speak today, however, from the time of its establishment, the established positions in that directory have only come up to something like 51 per cent; the personnel is lacking. The evidence of this is in the policy statement, which we laid before this House. The physical planning –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Personally, I do not understand what the minister is struggling to explain. He is confusing two things. He said that the structure of the 2010 Physical Planning Act subjects the physical planners at the lower level to the influence by politicians and other powers, and that they do not have power to make decisions on their own. He also said that there will be a board and a secretariat, which will be the coordination centre for the plans at the lower levels. 

I would like the honourable minister to put it in context. Is he in order to insinuate that the thin secretariat at the headquarters will actually solve the problems at subcounty level? Is the honourable minister in order, Madam Speaker? 

The secretariat will be based at the headquarters here in Kampala. This secretariat is not going to be reflected at the lower level, meaning that the physical planner in the municipality or in a town council or even at the district will still operate under the influence of the politicians. Is the honourable minister in order to explain what he is not supposed to explain? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you explain further for the benefit of the honourable member?

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. All I was trying to do is to give a background to how we arrived at the Bill presently before you. I am saying that the Physical Planning Act, which established the Physical Planning Board, provided for a board that is like a desk in the director’s office. This board is made up of nine members and it is part time. It does not have a budget, it does not have an account, it cannot recruit staff and it does not have staff, not even a coffee-bearer. It does not even have equipment. It is, therefore, incapacitated in terms of doing its work. 

Madam Speaker, many of the Members heckling there have been given the opportunity to say something, including hon. Mukitale, who is a senior –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us listen to one another. You may not agree but at least, listen.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you. I can understand hon. Nzoghu because he needs to know a lot more about how physical planning should be done in this country. Hon. Mukitale, please, allow me to finish with this point.

Madam Speaker, I am saying that the board we have – 

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to assist the minister, honourable member? He is asking for clarification.

MR KAFEERO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My honourable colleague, hon. Nzoghu, was seeking clarification. The local physical development plans generated from the grassroots are subject to approval by the district physical planning committees and are later on forwarded to the Physical Development Planning Board for approval. By strengthening the board and giving it technical people who will scrutinise those physical plans before approval by the board, we will cure all the gaps that are at the grassroots since they are approved.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like you to remember when we were receiving the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme report; we were told that one of the municipalities opted to build a bus park instead of roads. It was their choice.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, this Bill is seeking to close the lacuna in the law where we have plans whose implementation is not supervised. We have three stages. We have planners that make plans and these planners are recruited and managed by the local governments. However, even where the plan exists, there is weakness in the implementation of those plans. Furthermore, even where the implementation has been done, there is no enforcement to ensure that what is set out in the plan is what is translated on the ground.

The purpose of this Bill, therefore, is to ensure that we address the two missing links - the implementation of a plan and the enforcement. You cannot do that under the current arrangement. You need a legal framework that gives you the muscle to do so, and you also need an institutional framework. That institution cannot be the director of physical planning who is a policy person –(Interjection)- No, I will not accept any clarification; Madam Speaker, I am clear. (Laughter) 

We need flexibility in hiring people, and that is the purpose of these amendments. I would like to explain to the House. If we are going to have people who ensure that people who start building at night – People start building on Friday afternoon and on Monday morning, they are already in the house and they have built in the wrong place. Under the current arrangement, even if you told the Director of Physical Planning that there is a problem there, he does not have the capacity to respond neither does he have the mandate to do so. The purpose of this Bill is to ensure that we do effective enforcement. 

4.57
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the way the minister is presenting, - maybe he is just going round - I think his issue is that he lacks staff to do the work. You should have come here with the structure of how many people you want, so that we allow you to recruit. You should also attach the budget of what you require. I do not think a board member is going to run around looking for the staff throughout the country. 

I think you need staff. If you have a shortage, like you have said you have 51 per cent, present your work plan including your budget and the number of people you want. Thank you.

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING)(Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me put it in simple language. In 2010, this Parliament passed the Physical Planning Act and it created the National Physical Planning Board, which we have found to be weak in its current capacity -(Interjection)- Yes, the law makes it weak. That is why there is a lot of proliferation of slums in our urban areas. The intention of this amendment Bill is to strengthen the existing National Physical Planning Board by looking at its functions. 

When you look at the Bill, one of the functions which we are proposing is that the powers of the board will include issuing guidelines, directives or instructions to physical planning committees for the proper conduct of physical planning and urban development. Now, the National Physical Planning Board is not sufficiently empowered to direct or guide –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Wind up.

DR BARYOMUNSI: The National Physical Planning Board is not sufficiently empowered to direct or guide the local physical planning committees. In the amendment, we are saying that we need to empower this physical planning board. 

We are proposing, for instance, that the powers of the board shall be to order the demolition of any building or structure constructed in contravention of this Act. In other words, if a mayor of a town council or municipality, because of political considerations, does not support the physical planners there, the board at the centre does not have enough powers to intervene. However, we are saying that Parliament should strengthen this board at the centre to intervene in such matters so that plans that have been initiated by the local physical planning committees can be supported by the National Physical Planning Board. 

Unless we are saying –(Interjections)– Just hold on; I am clarifying. The intention of this Bill is to basically strengthen the National Physical Planning Board, which exists. One way of strengthening is to give it a secretariat which will handle the day-to-day administrative support of this board. I hope I have clarified to you and you are now in a better position. 

5.01
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at this country, you can see that the planning is so disorganised. We talked about our industrial hub being Jinja, so that you can have electricity in Jinja zero-rated for most factories. However, all factories now are actually paying the commercial rate for electricity and they are established anywhere. They are actually a threat to people who reside around them. Someone just comes out of nowhere and starts a factory and then all the people who are staying around there must go away. If they do not go away, they suffer the health hazards. In that spirit, I think that a national physical planning law is a good thing. 

There are two positions here. There are people who are saying that we do not need the board because that is an extra bill on the citizens. There is also the position of some other Members like hon. Ssemujju Nganda who say that there is no need to rush. 
I think the board will need three tools: the law, the policy and an action plan in form of the national physical development plan. If we constituted the board today with some of these tools lacking, what are we solving? We are saying, go slow and let us look at the law comprehensively. I support you, but what is the rush going to cure now? 

The argument here is that in the district, the committees are subject to control by local political heads and so on. However, even here, there are people who are powerful in this Government who have put up structures in wetlands as the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) is watching. So, that argument may not convince me. 

I will support the argument that points out that the whole country is not planned and organised, and even say that the citizens should foot the bills because this is a justifiable cause. However, why the rush even when some of the tools are lacking? 

5.03
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you because you give attention to pertinent issues which concern this country. 

I wrote this minority report with pain. The ministers who are talking were not there when the Prime Minister was talking. If you asked the Clerk to replay what the Prime Minister said, they would not be saying this. 

Honourable minister, why don’t you borrow a leaf from the Ministry of Water and Environment? They support districts. There are even regional water offices. Even the lands ministry built regional land offices. The other time, we discovered that the best built land office is in Rukungiri. Although they are from the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC), they monitored the construction very well. Now the minister wants to leave all these established zonal offices and set up a minute thing in Kampala. 

Hon. Musumba, you talked about jobs. You are working to create jobs for people who went to school and not to solve the problem facing Ugandans. 

Members, I would like to request – I do not want to agree with hon. Ssemujju that we just abandon the Bill. There were some gaps. I would request that we go with the Bill, but there is a proposal for an executive director. Members, an executive director will not work alone; there will be a finance director, human resources director, director for transport and many others, and they do not get little money. They get paid in the region of Shs 50 million. This is what the ministry and the minister want to put this country through. 

I request Members to accept that we go on with the Bill - the board members are there - but we strengthen the department. When we are talking, even hon. Bahati is afraid to mention the bill which will go the finance secretariat because it is too much. Ministry officials are even saying that we are chasing them. 

MR NSAMBA OSHABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Waluswaka, for giving way. I would like to remind this House that at one point, the President wrote to us and was against the establishment of authorities of this nature. I keep wondering how this Bill then came through Cabinet to this level when the President himself refused and said it is not proper to keep creating agencies of this nature. That is the information I wanted to give. 

5.07
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngara County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. We are trying to look for a way of cutting costs for the benefit of this country. That is what this Government said they are trying to do. 

Last week, I was in this House and the Prime Minister was very clear. I wish there was a way to play back the tape so that we can hear what Ndugu said here. Now there is a shift and it is confusing us. We are moving this way and that way. 

I propose that the ministers here, who were not in the House last week, pack their papers and go back and reorganise and then they can come back when they are organised. At the moment, nothing is clear. This is causing embarrassment to us as Members of Parliament who support this very important program. This Bill is very important. 

I know Ngora is going to become a city one day but we need to plan now. We should be planning for a proper city now that will not be in Kampala; we shall take it to say, Karamoja. That should be done when we have a proper law and proper arrangement. The current arrangement that my minister is trying to defend may not help us. 

We must protect the image of this Parliament. I remember when the Ministry of Health brought something about laboratories, we rejected it here. Government is aware that we must cut costs. Agreeing with this arrangement would put this country in trouble. 

Madam Speaker, I would be happy if you ruled right now that this thing should be taken back. Thank you. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I do not know why we are spending so much time on a matter that starts with the purview of Cabinet. I have laid before you Cabinet instructions saying that I bring this Bill here – (Interjections) - It is here. You can disagree but that is the position.  

Madam Speaker, yes I was not here on Thursday because I had the permission to be away, but I have since had the opportunity to look at the Hansard. The way the Government operates is that if the Prime Minister did not want a Bill to be here, yesterday, which was Cabinet Day, there would have been an instruction to withdraw that Bill, but there were no such instructions. 

Secondly, when you, Madam Speaker, asked the Prime Minister, there was no answer he gave, which stated categorically that the secretariat or any part of this Bill should be stopped. I will read the Hansard – (Interjection) – Madam Speaker, let me be protected from hon. Waluswaka because we are here to debate, not heckle. I have a copy of the Hansard and I beg to proceed -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have a practice in this House. The report was brought to this House, we have spoken to it and the mover is explaining his part; that is how Parliament works. So, let him finish what he is explaining.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Page 9,854 of the Hansard says – that was after hon. Waluswaka had presented the minority report - “The Speaker: Thank you, honourable members, for both reports. Prime Minister, there is something that is bothering me. This issue of mergers or no mergers has never come to this House yet now it is being used to take positions in this House. Where are you? Are you going to merge the agencies or are you not? When will you come here? Where do we stand?” 

The Speaker wanted to know. She said that the matter has never been presented to this House and she asked where we are; are we merging the agencies or not? When will we come? Where do we stand? – (Interjection) - I am the one holding the Floor, please. The Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, answered thus: “Madam Speaker, I am glad you have raised this very important point. The Government is carrying out a thorough exercise of rationalisation of parastatals with a view to significantly reduce them. I agree there has been some bit of delay but this has been caused by Government and Cabinet being as thorough as possible so that we do a perfect job.”

I have read that answer and I have failed to find anything in that answer that says, “the secretariat in this Bill is withdrawn.” Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from hon. Isaac Musumba. He has told Parliament that he is about to complete the national physical development plan. The completion means he will know which plans and how many personnel he needs to implement it, which at the moment he does not know. In fact, I do not understand what this strengthened board will do without a plan. 

Therefore, I am seeking a clarification on whether it would not be necessary to first complete the national physical development plan so as he knows all the requirements in terms of personnel and the budget and then he comes to tell Parliament, “This is what I want”. The preamble here – I am not sure whether it is a preamble or an introduction of one of the reports - says that although the Physical Planning Act is new, they have already found problems. I have a feeling you will have problems with this amendment you are proposing immediately after you complete the national physical development plan because at the moment, you do not even know what the requirements for that plan will be. 

I would like you to clarify and tell us that the physical development plan you are doing for the whole country will not need anything else and that this one is sufficient. I am going to support you the moment you answer that question.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, since I need his support, may I have the opportunity to answer that question. The point is that we know for a fact that the plan that is being made will have to be implemented. We also know that appreciation of the plan – We are in the final stages and we already have a draft plan that is only pending Cabinet approval. The plan, which is there, will need implementation. What we are doing now is ensuring that as the plan progresses, the framework for implementation is put in place by amending the law. That is what we are doing.

Having said that, I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker. After I read the Hansard – as I have read now – I looked at rule 79(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, which talks about anticipation. I seek your guidance on whether when we have something that says “it is out of order to anticipate”, we can continue discussing this here.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, we are listening to a very important subject matter. We have Vision 2040. The population of this country is expected to double in less than 12 years from now. The national physical development plan goes beyond this board because it looks at the future of this country in terms of dealing with the demographic challenges, economic zones, direction of the cities and industrial parks in every zone, multi-modal transport system where you are going to have the roads, railway and water transport systems. So, what we are spending a lot of time on does not address the bigger picture.

Madam Speaker, this information is with the ministry and the experts there are wondering if we are serious as Parliament because they have a very good document. The ministers know what is in that documents and how we have challenges in land acquisition, paying money to date to acquire land for the pipeline yet this could have been integrated corridors, which the Speaker and the committees have been demanding for over and over. The answer is in that physical development plan and not in this board that the minister is pushing for very fast, so that you can have latitude to hire people.

Madam Speaker, we would not lose much if you gave us a whole morning to look at the bigger picture of the national physical development plan, because we do not only need land for housing or buildings but we are talking about multi-purpose land-use planning. Honourable minister, can you please allow this country to move from the quagmire we have had in terms of the land sector, so that the next cities like Arua, Jinja, Mbale and Mbarara do not suffer what Kampala has suffered in terms of expanding without a structural plan? The answer is not in your board but in the national physical development plan.

Madam Speaker, I request that you give us one morning of a working day and we go to the Conference Hall and listen to all stakeholders and we come and engage on this matter. I thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think we are speaking about two different issues - (Interjection) – You have just spoken, so give me a chance to speak.

We have just brought proposals to amend an existing Act of Parliament to strengthen the framework of implementing these plans. We have said there is a process of drafting this plan. Madam Speaker, those are different processes. What we are requesting for from the Speaker can happen - we shall have a workshop to interact on this plan – but it should not stop the amendment of the law. The two are different and we should not confuse them.

Madam Speaker, the process of developing a national physical development plan is a separate intervention. What we are doing now is to strengthen the governance structures within the law in order to implement these plans. The two can go on concurrently. In other words, even if you finalise the plan, there will still be need to strengthen the law in order to make the board strong - (Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I would like to request you to tell us whether we have an approved physical plan. If we do not have, that explains why the board that was created is redundant because it had nothing to implement. Can you please clarify in simple terms so that we do not waste a lot of time?

DR BARYOMUNSI: As I answer this, my advice would be that the Members should read the existing law to see what it provides. The question is: Is there a national physical development plan? Yes, there is a draft plan. However, under the Constitution and the current Physical Planning Act, the local governments are empowered to develop plans. The law also says the National Physical Planning Board, which already exists, coordinates this planning. 

We are, therefore, saying that the current law has a weakness because the current National Physical Planning Board does not have enough powers to do that work. That is why we are saying we strengthen the powers and functions of this board but at the same time, complete the enactment of the National Physical Planning Board. The two can go concurrently. Even if we complete the process of the national physical development plan, we shall still need to strengthen this board if we are going to implement this plan and the subnational plans. 

Madam Speaker, there is no contradiction in having Parliament pass this law and complete the development of the national physical development plan.

5.24
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the ministers have stated, we do not have a national physical development plan currently –(Interjection)– We can only have it when it is approved and laid here on the Table. That means you cannot go into implementation and enforcement when you do not know what to implement and enforce. (Applause) This is logical. A national physical development plan gives general guidelines on what to do and what not to do. 

Madam Speaker, I have a problem in my constituency, and I know it has never been incorporated in that national physical development plan. Whenever we get landslides, there is a permanent pathway where the storm water passes. If the national physical development plan had identified that and properly demarcated it, people would not be building there and enforcement would be done because we would have known the problem. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, we do not know our problem, yet we are moving to implementation and enforcement. I do not know whether we are being logical or not. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.26
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened carefully to the views on both sides on whether we need a secretariat. 

We have the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the National Coffee Development Authority. As long as we establish a board, an authority or a commission we must give it the necessary technical staff for accountability and implementation of its policies, and a budget. That seems to be clear to me. Unless we say the law of 2010 erred in establishing a board, then we put the entire aspect of physical planning under the ministry structure.

The Directorate of Physical Planning is responsible to the Permanent Secretary and the Permanent Secretary is responsible to the minister. However, within the ministry’s structure, there is a board, which has a budget and which needs accountability and staff for implementation. Madam Speaker let us be consistent. 

Is this proposed law solving the problems of physical planning? I have had the opportunity of being a planner in a district. Within our planning unit, we had a physical planner and I was an economic planner, and we had statisticians, among others. The problem of poor planning or failure to implement the plans is being shot offside by the minister. I know that some town councils and municipalities have benefitted from physical plans developed by the Ministry of Local Government. However, the plans are on paper; you see them on charts and they are not being implemented.

The problem of lack of staffing has to be addressed. You cannot address it by taking the powers back to centre. The problem of corruption also must be addressed both at the local and national level. You cannot also solve it by establishing a board. That is different because you are shooting the problem offside.

The problem of poor financing of the planning function - Madam Speaker, I thought the minister would come to us and propose strengthening physical planning through the budget and implementation. We seem to be having very serious issues to agree with the honourable minister. When you say these local governments have staff of a lower capacity, you cannot solve that by taking the function back to the centre. What you do is put the right staff at the local government.

Madam Speaker, I think the proposal by hon. Mukitale makes sense. We should go a step back so that we can discuss exactly what we want. Honourable minister, you are telling us that there is a draft national physical development plan but how was it developed without the input of the local governments physical plans? Are we talking of the national planning function top-down or is it bottom-up? If you have already done it at the national level, what will be the impact of having the local government plans built from subcounty to the district? 

Madam Speaker, we need to have very serious discussions where we shall seek views before we proceed with legislation. Otherwise, I totally agree that the role of the centre is to coordinate, supervise and give assistance to the local governments. If we are establishing a board that is going to do physical planning for all the subcounties and towns, we shall not manage. 

We have to be consistent with the Constitution. Physical planning in the districts and subcounties is a function of local governments and we must strengthen it. If you want to do something at the centre, identify your niche but do not go back into the local governments. Rather than rushing into the next step of the law, can we take a step back and look at these principles and agree on them? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I invite hon. Amoding, I would like to restate the principles as written here in the Bill: “The objects and principles of this Bill are to amend to the Physical Planning Act 2010, Act No.8 of 2010 - to provide for the functions and powers of the board; to establish a secretariat of the board; to provide for the appointment of the executive director and staff of the board…” - please listen; I am reading the objectives – “…to streamline the composition of physical planning committees; to provide for the offences and deterrent penalties for the contravention of the Act.”

Those are the objectives of this law. It does not include implementing the physical development plan. It is activating Act No.8 of 2010.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, for those of us who have very strong views, as hon. Mukitale suggested, give us maybe two days to have another discussion with the minister and then come back when we have harmonised our positions.

5.32 
MR MORRIS OGENGA-LATIGO (FDC, Agago County North, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was a Member of Parliament when the National Planning Authority was established. I have also been very actively involved in the planning processes for this country. 

When I hear the minister saying that they are going to draw up a national physical development plan, I wonder who the advisers of the minister are because what you see as physical in this country is composed of very many things. The urban people will do their urban planning, the roads people do their planning but the common framework will be the vision and the national development plans. I wish there was evidence that this was happening.

I am an agriculturalist and also involved in land. The most fundamental thing that we need to have as a law in this country is a very clear land-use plan. That will underpin all other physical planning because all the physical planning will be on land. As long as we leave the issue of land open ended, just forget it. You can have your plan but what will you do when you do not have a legal framework to ensure that plan is translated into something physical on land? 

These boards are creating jobs; unfortunately, it is the young who need jobs, not the old, but the young people cannot be board members. Let us find another way of creating jobs for the young people, not for those who have eaten enough in this country and need to retire and rest. Thank you.

5.34
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start with what hon. Sabiiti and hon. Magyezi said. When hon. Latigo mentioned that he was around when they established the National Planning Authority, I remembered hon. Musumba spearheaded that law. I thought he was coming back with the idea that he has also got plans for land use, for management of the roads and others. 

The issue is not the law. If you established a committee of Parliament and you never gave it authority to work, it will never work. If you have that small board or whatever you call it in lands but you have not given it authority, then it will not work even if we gave it the law or money. There are so many committees in this country which exist without a law; for example, every ministry has a staff management meeting every week. What they decide is what they implement in the ministry, and it goes on well. I do not know if that is in the law; it is not. 

The problem we have is that people want to create boards and committees maybe for other things. However, if we love Uganda - Everybody wants physical planning because we need properly planned agriculture, roads or whatever you want. However, if we do not allow it to work, it will not.

I asked the physical planner in my district what he is planning for. If you go to a district and you are looking for a land officer, they are never there. That is why people issue land titles without inspecting the land for which they are issuing the land title. 

I do not think that we need to do anything. Let us have the national physical development plan here. The draft has existed for long. When this law came in 2010, the idea was that it was going to address the issue of poor planning at all levels. They said that the board that was going to be established would have architects and lawyers. They mentioned everything and were happy that it was going to work. (Member timed out)

5.37
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the Members for the submissions so far made. This debate has come in timely, when the country is about to roll out a number of regional cities and yet we have the capital city in the state in which it is.

Many of us have travelled and seen what other countries have done in as far as physical planning is concerned and the benefits to those countries. Some of you will argue that some of those are well-to-do countries. However, recently we returned from Chicago but as you land in the city, it is covered with green. What lessons do we pick from those countries that have done proper planning?

I would like to agree with the submissions made by hon. Mukitale and hon. Ssemujju in regard to us chronologically taking the right steps to address the misfortunes that were bestowed on this country in as far as failing to implement the framework we have put in place. The Physical Planning Act which was passed in 2010 has not been implemented. If you go to the rural areas, people are still utilising land in a manner in which their great grandparents were using it yet the world has evolved. 

Today, we are facing climate change threats. People have settled in the wetlands, which are supposed to be protected. People have encroached on forest reserves, which are supposed to be protected for the benefit of the entire country. Where is the national physical development plan in this aspect?

Hon. Musumba, my brother, I remember yesterday we had a discussion and I had pledged to support you. Yes, it is true we need strong institutions to enforce whatever laws or policies we have put in place, but there is need to address how we transition in making sure that everything is formalised so that everybody embraces whatever law we are passing here. 

If the framework is – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR ATIKU: If the framework is not going to bring on board each and every stakeholder, then there is need for us to be very cautious and careful because we have reached a time when we should not overlook any measures. 

I concur with the suggestions of colleagues that we get each and every stakeholder on board. Let us move slowly but get everybody to support this process for us to have a law that will enhance proper planning and development in this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am proposing that since the views are still very divided, can I defer the debate on this matter so that we can speak on it again next week? It will give you a few days to be on the same page. Therefore, the debate is deferred to next week. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO EUROS 101.88 MILLION FROM THE UK EXPORT FINANCE (UKEF) FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOLAR-POWERED IRRIGATION AND WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM PROJECT

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (MS Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, wait a bit. Let the minister move before you can report. Honourable minister of finance - Honourable members, are the ministers leaving?

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, we have been discussing Bills – This is why I said that maybe the ministers mobilised for this. Are the ministers in order to just leave? Some of us go for health breaks but Madam Speaker, you stay here. However, ministers after their discussions just go. Do they think you and us do not have time? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development must return so that he can also support the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on this issue. 

5.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion to allow Government to mobilise resources –(Laughter)– through borrowing of up to € 101.88 million from the UK Export Finance for the development of the Solar-Powered Irrigation System and Water Supply System Project for the entire country. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Let me now invite our committee chairperson to report on that motion.

5.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to € 101.88 million from the UK Export Finance for the development of Solar-Powered Irrigation System and Water Supply System Project.

Before I go further, permit me to lay on the Table the following documents: 

    1. The report that I am going to present, which is duly signed;
    2. The minutes of the committee meetings; 
    3. The brief to Parliament and the project summary presented by the Ministry of Water and Environment;
    4. The Certificate of Financial Implications;
    5. Confirmation of availability of Government counterpart funding; 
    6. Clearance by the National Planning Authority; 
    7. The term sheet for the project; 
    8. The framework contract;
    9. The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Republic of Uganda represented by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and M/s Nexus Green Limited of the United Kingdom;
    10. The addendum to the memorandum; 
    11. Clearance by His Excellency the President for funding of the solar system;
    12. Maps and property schemes status of the medium and large scale system;
    13. Maps and property scheme status of completed, ongoing and planned small scale irrigation schemes in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

The request to borrow was referred by this Parliament to the committee on the 12th of August this year. I would like to thank the members of the committee for the effort they put in while scrutinising the report. 

We used the usual methodology of examining the request. We also held meetings as indicated in paragraph 2.1. We had documentary reviews; 13 documents were reviewed and they are contained in paragraph 2.2.

Background

The agriculture sector, as you all know, is important to the economy because it employs 70 per cent of our population and it contributes 25 per cent of our Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Almost 78 per cent of our people depend on subsistence farming, which means almost 99 per cent of our people depend on rain-fed agriculture. 

We need to commercialise agriculture in order to increase the GDP and make it commensurate to the number of people it employs for it to be profitable. Commercialisation of agriculture requires a lot of effort geared towards mitigation of climate change, which is the biggest problem to farming now. 

Irrigation technological adaptation is one of the key ingredients to improved agricultural production and productivity. Water demands for irrigated agriculture are expected to grow exponentially in the coming years as climate change perpetuates unreliable rainfall patterns.

In Uganda, a mere one per cent of potential irrigable land is under irrigation. This is because it requires high investment which most of our people cannot afford. The National Irrigation Policy of 2018 targets the expanding of irrigation infrastructure in order to increase the total agricultural land under irrigation from the current 14.4 thousand hectares to about 1.5 million hectares by 2040.

According to the World Bank, irrigated land is twice as productive as rain-fed cropland. Currently, the agricultural production in Uganda is overly dependent on rain, but the current adverse variations in climate change have made it difficult to depend on rain-fed agriculture anymore. The few farmers who are irrigating their farms are using mainly diesel pumps.

The feasibility assessment for the replacement of diesel water pumps with solar water pumps issued by the Ministry of Mines and Energy of Namibia, furnishes overwhelming evidence that for small to medium sized wells, a solar photovoltaic pump (PVP) is much cheaper on a life cycle cost basis than diesel-powered pumps. 

Madam Speaker, under paragraph 4, we looked at the compliance with approval guidelines and the scores for this request are well over 50 per cent. This project is well aligned with the national planning framework and clearance has been issued by the National Planning Authority to that effect.

In addition, the project is consistent with the Public Debt Management Framework that prioritises borrowing for works and transport, agriculture, water and energy sectors.

Madam Speaker, paragraph 6 addresses the performance of projects under the water and environmental sector. According to the review made, they are slightly better than other sectors. However, they are also performing below average. This is mainly due to acquisition of land for infrastructure projects, which is a big problem.

Madam Speaker, the Solar Powered Irrigation and Water Supply System Project intends to develop 920 water supply systems for both domestic use and irrigation countrywide, utilising financing from the UK Export Finance. This will be implemented through the Ministry of Water and Environment over a three-year period. A typical system shall entail the following components:  transmission pipeline, pumping to storage tanks, using solar energy, etcetera. 

The project envisages benefitting majorly the youth and women as these are the groups usually tasked with fetching water. It will empower them economically through increased production from irrigated growth of high value crops. 

Project goals

The goal is to improve the quality of life and livelihood of the population through enhanced agricultural production and increased access to safe water.

Project objective

According to the loan proposal, the overall objective of the project is to establish solar powered water supply systems.

The project components are covered under table 3. These components include: urban water supply systems for domestic use, rural water supply systems for domestic use, and small scale irrigation systems. As I have already stated, a total of 920 systems will be established across the country and will be spread out democratically to all the districts of Uganda. The anticipated outcomes of the project include increased access to water for irrigation for improved agriculture.

Project sustainability

To ensure sustainability, each component will also ensure capacity building of beneficiary communities for operation and maintenance of the systems. 

The total project cost will be €113.432 million, out of which Government of Uganda will contribute €11.556 million. The balance of €101.876 million is what we are seeking to borrow from the UK Export Bank.

The loan terms are covered under paragraph 9. Table 4 gives the loan terms in a summary form.

Economic and financial rate of return of the project

According to the project profile, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is €86,457,189 which is 22 per cent, generated over a period of 20 years. It is, therefore, recommended that the project be implemented since the EIRR is greater than the standard 12 per cent.

Effect on the debt

Of course, we all know this is going up. After this, it will now be at 41.8 per cent according to the December figures. This debt is still sustainable as the present value of the debt as a percentage of GDP was 31.7 per cent by December last year.

Observations and Recommendations

1. 	The committee observed that the President, in his letter to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, dated 26 October 2018, noted that the agreement to order for 3,000 pumps  spread over three years, that is, 1,000 pumps per year, was on condition that the supplier will set up a manufacturing plant within the country within that time.

	The committee recommends that the President's conditionality be put into account in the process of securing this facility. It must be imbedded in the agreement.

2. 	There are scattered interventions in different parts of the country with regard to provision of irrigation technologies. The committee recommends that Government urgently prepares an irrigation master plan that will guide further investments in an integrated manner.

3. 	The committee observed that Government has a number of interventions in safe water for domestic use and minimal effort has been made on irrigation. 

The committee recommends that Government procures more projects exclusively focused on water for production, considering that we all boast of Uganda being an agricultural country and also, there is also a lot of potential for Uganda to feed the continent.

Madam Speaker, the committee therefore recommends that the request by Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to €101.88 Million from the UK Export Finance for the development of Solar Powered Irrigation and Water Supply Systems Project be approved, subject to the recommendations herein. I beg to move.

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable chairperson and members of the committee. Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum number of members. You are free to make your comments.

Honourable chairperson, can you let us know the areas where it is going to operate from? Many parts of the country do not have electricity, so we would like to know who is going to benefit.

Ms bbumba: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Among the documents I laid on the Table is a complete list of how these are going to be distributed throughout the districts of Uganda. All the districts are going to be covered –(Interjections)– yes, Madam Speaker - except Kampala.

6.00
Mr gilbert olanya (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad I have heard the chairperson saying that all districts are going to benefit. I would like to find out how different this project is from the ongoing irrigation projects. In 2015, the ministry went to Amuru and sited the areas for irrigation. The land was given but up to now, the project has stalled. I would like to find out from the chairperson if this is the same project we are borrowing the money for.

Secondly, weather forecasts have always disappointed our farmers. I do not know if the department responsible for weather forecast in Uganda is still operational. I ask this because in many instances, they give a report to farmers and it happens to the contrary. 

Therefore, if Government could be serious and set up the solar power irrigation scheme and put it to proper use, I think it will help our farmers.  Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable member, was the irrigation scheme that you have mentioned under agriculture or energy?

Mr olanya: Madam Speaker that is what I would like to find out from the chairperson. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries went to my district and sited the areas in 2015. I would like to know if that is the same project for which we are borrowing the money.

6.02
Prof. MORRIS ogenga-latigo (FDC, Agago County North, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson for the report.

Madam Speaker, I am a farmer and when I sit and hear how much money is being borrowed and I know what is happening to farmers out there, it is painful. This country is the best in terms of reliability of rainfall in East Africa. What are we doing with the rain, for you to go and collect rain which has been gathered in the soil or the river, when you have ignored all the rain that falls every day?

Today, in raising matters of national importance, more than five Members of Parliament reported the problem of too much rain, but we are borrowing about one hundred million Euros for irrigation. Something is grossly wrong with us.

Do one simple thing; create an agricultural bank where people who would like to do agriculture will go and borrow and the country will benefit. When you hear about every district benefiting, what does it mean? It will be like the cows that were given out in my constituency. I wrote an article in the papers castigating the President about it because when the Friesian cows were bought, they were given to party functionaries and Local Council III (LCIII) chairpersons. Within a month, half of the cows had died. I can guarantee you, borrow this money, supply this equipment and I will come back within a year and ask how many are functioning. We will be wasting money. 

I beg that we go back to planning our agriculture more thoroughly and taking the necessary steps to make sure that the potential that God has given us is utilised maximally. Money will not do anything but doing the right thing is what will create a difference. This is about money; it is not about doing the right thing. I reject this loan –(Member timed out)

6.05
Mr james kakooza (Independent Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we need to take a step back on the drawing board. If you are saying that you are going to promote irrigation water for production, you must identify the people you would like to supply. You cannot say that you are borrowing money for the whole country to get involved. Not everybody is involved in getting that water for production. Let it be budget support and we identify people who need the water for production. If you want to promote the GDP level, let us identify people who are involved in agricultural production commercially.

What you are talking about now is borrowing for the whole country, but you do not have the people you have identified who need the water for production. If you put money in the African Development Bank (ADB) - I am a farmer and I know the drought we have in my area – I will borrow that money at the lowest interest rate and increase my production capacity. You do not need to have the whole country to look for this water.

Madam Speaker, I have a project, which was put up by the Ministry of Water and Environment, worth Shs 6.5 billion; we fetched water from Lake Kachera. It is supplying six districts. It was from a calm lake and people are getting water. Do we need to borrow all this amount of money? Identify people involved in commercial farming, give them money at a lower interest rate and you will get what you want. You do not need much.

About 70 to 80 per cent of this country has water. We have Lake Victoria, Lake Kyoga, River Nile and water everywhere on the land. Have you utilised that water? Instead of putting our energy to borrow that money, why don’t we utilise this water to extend to those farmers who are in those areas?

When you go to Masaka Road, there are people who are growing beans throughout the year. They do not even need to wait for the dry season. They fetch water from Lake Victoria but they are not provided with facilities to get the water into their farms. Why go to borrow for solar panels?

As the Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we need to go back; what do we need to do? If you would like to increase the GDP ratio for the country and increase production, identify people and give them money and they do what you want –(Interruption)

Mr aogon: The information I would like to give my colleague is that even when we grant this money, most times when it comes to giving it to people who deserve to get it, you never see it go there. I cried here in the financial year 2016/2017 that people of Kumi and Teso were eating termites because of the drought there and we did not have food. However, when we talk about irrigations – we have provided some money towards that before but how many projects do we have in Kumi, for instance, under irrigation?

Therefore, this money is always misallocated. Those who are not supposed to be irrigating are the ones who are irrigating and those who are supposed to irrigate do not irrigate. Therefore, I reject it. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I have no problem with the loan, but we should go back to the drawing board and say we borrowed this money; we put it in the bank - (Member timed out.)

6.09
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am one of those people at crossroads. I am one of the persons that need water in this country but also I am one of the persons who do not agree with unnecessary continuous borrowing.

Madam Speaker, of recent we passed here a loan for extending power to sub-counties but up to now, I have not seen in my area any sub-county that has gotten power. We do not know where that money has gone.

Secondly, recently in the Rwenzori area, we had Gen. Salim Saleh starting a programme called Agri-led. In the process, we were also asked to submit requests for water and irrigations. We made several meetings and submitted. We were informed that Government was providing this money through a loan from China to give the whole of Rwenzori region water, including solar power.

However, the request I see here is saying that the loan is going to provide water for the whole country including Rwenzori, which has another programme. Where will the money coming from China and meant for Rwenzori go if there is also this loan which is coming?

Therefore, there are chances that we may get this money for a loan and it will be diverted to something else. Can we, therefore, get clarification especially on this issue of Agri-led, where the Rwenzori region is going to get water for solar power and other programmes from a different loan and this one? How are you going to implement two programmes on the same projects that we have already budgeted for, specifically in the Rwenzori region?

MR ANYARACH: Thank you, colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, we passed a loan that all sub-county headquarters be connected to power. The budget was provided. Now it turns out that some other sub-county headquarters were under some other arrangement of World Bank including Erussi Sub-county; my own sub county.

Now, this is now providing money for the same sub-county twice under this loan yet we already got money for it. Now here you are telling us this one is for World Bank project. Now, where does that money go?

6.14
MR GERSHOM SIZOMU (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the idea of solar-powered irrigation because our people need water for farming and domestic use. However, we have a lot of water resources in this country - lakes, rivers and rain as Prof. Latigo said. What we lack is the technology to get water to the people.

In Bugisu Sub-region, we probably need more of gravity flow irrigation than solar. We do not have enough gravity flow irrigation. Not every part of Bugisu Sub-region is covered by gravity flow. For those areas that need solar-powered irrigation, there is need to establish a repair and maintenance plan before we approve this loan because these machines will break down. I have an experience in my own village where we have a solar powered pump but breaks every time and it requires a lot of money to maintain and repair. We do not want a scenario where we shall have borrowed money, we have this infrastructure all over this country but they function for a few months and they break down.

Therefore, my question to the committee and the minister is: what plan do we have for maintenance and repair of these solar-powered pumps? What plan do you have to continue with the gravity flow in places that require it and in places that only require maybe pipes and reservoirs so that water from the rain or rivers can reach the local people? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Ongiertho comes, I have been reminded that this loan was a request from this House that the country should be covered. So, I just want to give an update. If you look at your report annex 4, those are the new forthcoming schemes. They are three sets of districts, which they proposed. The completed ones are on annex 5. There are a number of districts, I think they are 44, then the on-going are 32. Therefore, they are quite a series.

6.17
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to start from the point of thanking the Government for ensuring that my village has a bigger dam, as we speak, which was done two years ago; I am grateful for that. 

As we speak, the people from my village and the neighbouring places are utilising the water there. They are being supported by the ministry and the department of agriculture within the district. They are puling water to different people’s fields, which I thought is very good.

My problem is about land holding in our communities. I would imagine that if we were borrowing a loan like this, it would be most appropriate, if we were talking about larger land holdings – and we know that H.E, the President has been moving throughout the country educating people on how to avoid land fragmentation.

As a family, probably instead of dividing land for the different persons maybe you utilise it as a whole and maybe that can give you a better outcome. So, for me I would not mind the borrowing if the land holdings were good enough for that kind of irrigation; as long as we still have holdings where somebody has half an acre or three quarters of an acre - I am not sure this solar powered irrigation is going to be commercially viable. That is my problem. Thank you very much. 

6.19
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The truth is our farmers need irrigation to get out of the rudimentary mechanism of agriculture that we use. 

In 2017, when the Ministry of Water and Environment came here and requested to borrow and implement 136 irrigation schemes, I took time and followed this up. I made sure that at least I get something from the 136 irrigation schemes because they gave us an assurance then that every district would get. Indeed, they gave me an irrigation scheme in Kalwana Subcounty, which is my home subcounty. 

Madam Speaker, my expectation was that this irrigation scheme was coming to serve the village. What was put there was a 20,000-litre tank, which could only serve two acres. It hurts me because I remember how that loan was procured here. It pains me that even drip lines in the two acres have never worked. It pains me that we are here; we want to approve another loan, which will be utilised in a similar manner. Somebody can come to Kalwana Subcounty and look at that project. Even the stand which hoists the two tanks is about to collapse. 

Madam Speaker, it is my humble appeal that before we approve this loan, we need to get a report on the performance and the results of the previous loan that we approved here so that we take an informed decision. We are committing taxpayer’s money, so we need results out of this so that we do not just sit here, approve things and this money is misused. 

We can hold this. I beg that we request for a report on those 136 irrigation schemes – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to complete. 

MS NSAMBA: I have information, Madam Speaker, that they never even constructed the 136 irrigation schemes but constructed about 25.

Madam Speaker, let them bring a report here and tell us where they are and probably the Committee on Natural Resources can go and investigate where the 136 irrigation schemes happened. Thank you very much. 

6.23
BRIG. FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the principle; especially the irrigation. 

I remember, like you rightly noted, Madam Speaker, we were clamoring for the covering of the whole country in terms of irrigation, though I do not remember the date. However, we had requested that the whole country carries out irrigation across the board. 

At that time, we were even talking about comparing Uganda to Rwanda; how Rwanda was doing it and how the President was using up the jerry can. That is when we requested for an extensive irrigation system.

Besides that, Madam Speaker, my support is also premised –(Interjection)– yes, when he talked about bottles, you said that does not work and we need a more comprehensive and technical irrigation system. 

The chairperson told us that one of the conditions the President gave was bringing the factory here. That solves part of the problem of job creation. In my observation, that would partly be a good approach and initiative. 

The other point was the counterpart funding. As a country, we already have funds to support this project so I think that we should go ahead and borrow this money. 

However, Madam Speaker, the most important point, in my opinion, is the unpredictable rain patterns. The professor talked about having too much rain but today, in some parts of Kampala, I can see that we have a lot of rain. 

Though, where I come from in Gomba, I had wanted to establish a mother garden for coffee seedlings, but I was told that they could not dig them. This is because up to today, there are no rains, and this is September. We used to have rains in August but today we are coming to almost the third week of September and we have no rains. We can no longer rely on our rain patterns, so we need the irrigation schemes. 

Madam Speaker, my only caution, like other members have talked about, is the beneficiaries of this project. We also need clarification on the percentage of the districts already covered and the performance –(Member timed out.) 

6.26
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In principle, I would like to stand here to support this loan because our farmers are in dire need of irrigation. 

I remember, about one or two years ago, we had serious droughts, especially in my region, Busoga, in that we even reached an extent of asking neighbours for help to reach the next day. We had that saying in our area. The situation was bad; there was no food and the drought was too much. Therefore, in principle, I would like to strongly support this loan on behalf of our farmers. 

However, this business of coming and saying that the loan is for the whole country is so ambiguous. That is the ambiguity where I find a challenge. You cannot say that the loan is for the whole country. Let us be specific on which areas are going to benefit from it. For example, are you going to go to every subcounty in Karamoja? You are going to Bugiri in my constituency, Bukooli Central, are you going to go to every parish? What is the “whole country”? That is where I find a challenge? 

However, in principle, I support this loan because our farmers have been going through a lot. Hon. Ogenga-Latigo talked about rainwater harvesting and some excess rains in Uganda. Sometimes, it is true, but we do not have that capacity to harvest rain, and it is not in every area. The professor should have known this. It is unfortunate that I am talking when he is not here. We do not have that capacity to harvest rain, so we need the irrigation systems in the village. 

My issue is for the minister to only sort out the ambiguity, Madam Speaker, of saying that the “whole country” will benefit from this. I know that will not work in the whole country and it will not be efficient and effective. I beg to submit. 

6.28
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to support this loan and to thank the committee for bringing it out because we really need it. Last year in Kanungu, we had serious hunger, which left people ashamed of what they did; eating mangoes and cooking paw paws for children was terrible. 

However, when I look at us having this solar-powered irrigation,  it is what makes me not to understand because I thought the power we have and the dams we are constructing can be enough for us to have the power and use for this purpose.

Secondly, hon. Silwany was saying that we do not have the capacity of harvesting water. As a country, I believe we have it and it is cheaper than this solar-powered irrigation. However, I would like to suggest that instead of using solar power, we should look at electricity because I believe that this solar power is not reliable after some time, we shall not have anything on the ground.

Last year, I remember the ministry put for us some mini irrigation in Kanungu and the project was left there after being destroyed by the elephants. I hope when we pass this money, it will do the needful and will not be misused like what we have been seeing. 

I would like to thank the committee again because we need water supply like in my district, most of the sub-counties do not have water. You find a woman having come from the garden, she goes down in the mountains looking for water and she has to go back and fetch the firewood. Hopefully, this water will be taken to Kanungu because we are doing badly, especially due to the mountains. Climbing the mountains when looking for water, if you could get an opportunity and look at those women, you can even shed tears; it is terrible.

Honourable minister, I hope after this, Kanungu will be remembered so that we solve that issue. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the beauty about solar power is that the sun is there 24 hours a day; every day, 365 days. That is the beauty about the solar power.   

6.31
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join colleagues to say that this loan is a good loan that should have even come yesterday. 

However, like many have said, is it every sub-county and every parish in the whole country? What would be the coverage? Many times, our farmers have been requesting for support as far as irrigation is concerned. I would have loved that as we get this loan, let it be a pilot project going across the whole country. Let Government also move very fast to support our farmers by proving opportunities for duty-free irrigation equipment such that those who cannot wait for the Government facility can be able to install these facilities within their gardens. By doing that we shall be able to cover the whole country.

The committee chairperson has talked of the whole country but we also need to inquire about the number of people that this solar equipment will cover. In my constituency, I am privileged to have a solar-powered irrigation system that was provided by some development partners; the Danish-Iveco. It is covering about 120 farmers. 

However, due to the technology that we are not used to, it has not been able to benefit those people because of the conflicts that arise; everyone is trying to tap the water on their own and this has led to the collapse of the whole system.

In this case, what Government provides is okay but enabling these farmers to tap the opportunities themselves through subsidised costs, would be good and it would go across the country; people would be able to connect to wider areas rather than what might only remain to benefit a few people.

Lastly, I would also like to call upon Government, water is abundant in some areas but it is not equally available in certain areas. We must move very fast to ensure that we protect water sources because the moment we rollout full irrigation across the country, we might again find another problem, which may lead to many water sources drying up, especially in areas that are water-constrained. Let the Ministry of Water and Environment also move ahead to protect the few catchment areas such that there is continuous supply of water, especially in areas that desire this irrigation. 

Madam Speaker, I support the loan.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I invite hon. Amoding, join in welcoming in the stranger’s gallery Ms Ann-Marie Bomista and Mrs Bridget Curtis from the Odo BHF Bank, Germany. They are here to observe our proceedings. (Applause) You are welcome.   

6.35
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Kumi Woman Representative, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I stand to support the loan because I come from a poverty-stricken region. It is good for us to say that this money is not good at this time. However, there are places, which are perpetually in hunger, they do not have food and we know them.  

To date, the statistics indicate Teso sub region as the poorest followed by Karamoja, Busoga, Bukedi and others. When we have such an opportunity, we cannot sit back and say that we are not going to speak for our people. We need this loan so that the people in such places that are always crying of hunger can be addressed through this loan.

We know that a lot of water comes from Mt Elgon to Teso Savanna Land, Mt Moroto to Teso region but there is no catchment. We were talking here with hon. Angura that this water, which is wasted if this solar power now comes and it is able to power this water to the gardens of the various farmers, it would be a very welcome proposal.

Recently, a factory was launched in that region and we were expected to supply that factory with about 24 tonnes on a daily basis. That means that we need to plant 1.8 million seedlings, which are nowhere to be seen. The factory has failed and it cannot even kick-off. These are the farmers, who need such kind of irrigation if they are organised and this water is supplied. Teso is a region that has sunlight from January to December. Why would we not take advantage of this day in and day out? 

Therefore, I would like to say that this loan needs to be taken. However, equal opportunity policy must apply. Madam Speaker, there are regions in this country, whenever a loan is borrowed, they must benefit. If you want other parts of the country to follow suite in terms of equalisation of development, then we must be able to use this opportunity to also develop those regions that do not have that opportunity. Every day, I move in the villages and there are two things that do not miss out from the communication of the people that we representative one of them is hunger. They are planting and they are hungry and they do not have food.

As the minister is addressing this question, we would like him to respond particularly to the issue of Teso; whereas, we need this loan, how are you going to ensure that this kind of loan works in such land segmented areas? Our farmers are not together are in amalgamated pieces of land and they are not organised in their land use processes –(Member timed out.)     

6.38
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and committee chairperson, for processing this loan. As a Member of Parliament for Bulambuli, I, 100 per cent support having a loan to support irrigation.

Madam Speaker, I need to be protected from hon. Nandala-Mafabi who is attacking me -(Interjections)– yes, he is my brother but seated on the opposite side. 

Due to climate change, I feel that we needed this loan as early as yesterday. In most cases, we are having extremes. We have too much rain in a very short period and too much sunshine. For example, right now in Bulambuli, I have over 15 rivers crossing my constituency but within a very short time, you find the area is completely dry. Moreover, we are just adjacent to the river.
 
I feel that if the solar-powered irrigation is approved, I am convinced that we shall be able to grow crops and feed Uganda as a whole. However, in many cases, we have passed loans here, like the one that was passed to construct the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road but for a very long time, this loan has not been utilised yet the loan has been attracting interest. 

Therefore, I would like to get a clarification from the minister and from the chairperson: how ready are they to utilise this loan and to ensure that it is not going to attract interest to the detriment of Ugandans? Thank you. 

6.40
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For a long time, we have been talking about expanding the productive capacity of this country. In that line we have been demanding that our budget is directed towards this area. I am happy that today we got a proposal that alludes to this; and that is the right way to go because this country has been producing one or two crops a year. With irrigation, we will be able to get three or four crops a year. This means that the GDP of this country is going to expand. And as the GDP expands, we will solve the problem of the debt to GDP ratio. That ratio is going to be enhanced. We shall be in business because the GDP will be expanding exponentially because the loan is productive; that is what we need to do. 

However, having said that, for a long time, this House has been demanding for the irrigation master plan from the Ministry of Water and Environment. In fact, one time, the House had said that the budget for this ministry would not be passed without it presenting the irrigation master plan. That was about four years ago. 

Today, that master plan is not in place. So, how are we investing our money without a plan? There is an old adage that says that failing to plan is like planning to fail. Are we not destined to fail this project if we do not have an irrigation master plan? What are we doing to ourselves? 

The minister needs to convince the House why we should pass an irrigation loan without an irrigation master plan, which we have been asking for, for a long time. The chairperson alluded to this when she said that these conditions must be met. 

I would like to submit that the ministry should be required to present the master plan before we pass this loan because we might end up throwing the money away, which is not good at all. (Applause) We need to know how the money is going to be utilised. We need to know how the water is going to be – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute, chairperson of budget committee. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: We need to know how the water that we are going to pump is going to be conserved. Recently, it had to take Gen. Kasirye Gwanga to intervene to save a forest that belongs to Government. He had to use his gun to shoot those vehicles –(Member timed out.)

6.44
MR EMMANUEL SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. 
I stand here to support this borrowing because we have been asking for it for a very long time. You will appreciate that many of our wetlands are being destroyed because people are looking for water. That is why they go and cultivate the wetlands. 

It is my hope that with the passing of this loan, the wetlands will be saved. So, I will expect the honourable minister in charge of environmental protection to make sure we protect the wetlands. With irrigation in place, people should stop using the wetlands for farming. 

However, I also have one worry in mind. Yes, with irrigation, production will go up but the problem we normally have in Uganda is that we do not plan for the markets. Where shall we put all this excess production that will be in place? 

I remember at one time, people produced a lot of maize and we had nowhere to sell it. Now, with the irrigation in place, we are going to produce so much but we might fail to find where to sell what we will have produced. 

I, therefore, would like to ask the trade ministry to start looking for markets. Otherwise, we may fall in the trap of producing too much but with nobody to buy what we will have produced. 

With irrigation, I also expect us to be able to feed all the areas of Uganda because it is a shame to hear about people starving in say, Teso or Karamoja when we have food somewhere else. Why don’t we plan in such a way that if we have food in the country, all the people of Uganda are fed? We should not be having people starving somewhere else when we have food in one area. 

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Government, for the steps they have taken to introduce irrigation. However, as my colleague pointed out, while we implement this programme, let us make use of the rain water. We always have floods. Why don’t we make use of that water? Again, for example –(Member timed out.)

6.47
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support this loan.  However, it would be necessary that we get full information on what will be adaptive to particular areas. Which kind of schemes are we talking about? When you, for example, look at the Bugisu sub-region, you realise that most of our area is hilly and what is applicable to us is the gravity flow schemes not these solar-powered systems. The solar-powered systems could apply in some areas in the few lower zones of Bugisu but as you may know, Bugisu, like Kasese and other areas, is largely mountainous. So, I would perhaps insist that further analysis and studies be done on what is applicable in which particular area. 

Secondly, we have challenges of floods. I do not know whether the ministry has taken serious measures to come up with solutions to these floods. For example, Teso region is always affected by slow onset floods, which keep piling for a long time, and this will obviously destroy the system we are talking about. I know that there is a very big problem of silting – some of the dams are affected by silts. Therefore, we really need to have analysis of these challenges. In Bugisu region we have River Manafwa which is always flooding and destroying whatever structural measures you try to put in place. 

Therefore, I would like to know what the ministry is planning to do to reduce the challenges of flash floods and slow onset floods so that these irrigation schemes can be of use to Ugandans. However, I would insist that gravity flow schemes from mountainous regions be put into consideration alongside repairing those, which are already there because we have some gravity flow schemes which have broken down. Those are my comments. Thank you.

6.50
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support this loan. This loan should have come yesterday but it is good that it has come today. Irrigation is one of the areas that this country has neglected totally. We know that 30 per cent of this country is covered by water but we are not using this water to benefit our farmers and ourselves. 

The other time I was telling my constituents that River Nile is produced in Uganda and it flows up to Egypt, but we have never used the Nile to benefit Ugandans in terms of agriculture. However, that water goes to Egypt and Egypt benefits more than Uganda – which produces the Nile.

This loan is worth supporting and I only request that Government distributes these irrigation schemes equitably to benefit most of the districts, especially the cattle corridor where there is a lot of drought. I request members to support this loan so that irrigation is put at the centre stage of our planning in this country. If we are to benefit from this irrigation scheme, we as a country should put irrigation as a priority like we have done with the roads and other areas. If we put irrigation as a priority, we shall solve a lot of problems in terms of getting water for our crops. Thank you.

6.52
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support this loan. Although there have been lots of arguments that we have a lot of rain and the rest, the challenge we have been experiencing these days is that when it begins to rain – as members have said – it even destroys crops. In West Nile, this is supposed to be the season for beans, but it is raining every day and the leaves of beans have turned yellow. Therefore, the rains have become more destructive. 

When it begins to shine, the drought is long. For example, our first season begins in February but from February up to July this year there was no rain. Therefore, I support the idea of getting solar-powered irrigation schemes.

Madam Speaker, even if there are issues of rivers, it is not possible to pump water to other levels. Therefore, solar is the most appropriate. My challenge here is that many times we move to approve loans in Parliament when Government is not prepared. Ideally, the Government should have gone to identify the districts in which to install these solar systems. Government should have identified the beneficiaries and the beneficiaries should have already been trained. 

Sometimes we get money when we are not prepared, and we get penalised by being made to pay a lot of money. The minister should have come and say, “We are taking this number of districts and in this particular district the area is this and the beneficiaries are these”. However, this has not come out clearly and I do not know whether putting all the districts here is a strategy to convince members. Ideally, specific areas should have been identified.

Madam Speaker, the challenge of drought or too much rain is an issue of climate change and climate change is as a result of the failure to manage our environment. I do not know whether it has become a policy that all factories must be established in wetlands. When you travel to the north, you find that factories are being established on most of these wetlands around Nakasongola and Luweero yet these wetlands are supposed to be reservoirs. When it over rains, the water is supposed to go and settle in these wetlands and it is the same water that the sunshine would hit to form rain. However, because these wetlands are being tampered with when it rains, from the top of the roof the water –(Member timed out.)

6.55
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make a contribution to this matter. I support this loan, but I have a lot of reservations. This proposal is too good to be true and real. Why am I saying so? It is because they are saying they are going to irrigate the whole country. Of course, this is the message everybody wants to hear but what about the modalities? The minister has not come out clearly to tell us how this project is going to be accessed.

Not every Ugandan can access this and that is the truth we must be aware of. To say that we are going to irrigate all parts of Uganda is welcome, but I am afraid – of course this is good for mobilising support but when it comes to real implementation, I highly doubt that the whole country will be at peace.

Madam Speaker, there have been some proposals here before; let the ministry come out with modalities. We can approve it, but we want to see the modalities that we are going to use to access this money.

Secondly, if you find that it may not be possible for all Ugandans to access it, why don’t you put this money in a bank and allow some progressive farmers to access it at zero interest rate so that the few can access, and benefit the rest of Ugandans other than coming and saying we are going to give all Ugandans when I know that in my constituency it is not going to be practical?

Madam Speaker, what makes me get even more worried is that I have seen an annex of a list of completed irrigation schemes and No. 43 is a place called Mulanda, which is in my district and neighbouring my constituency but the villagers have been asking, “We see a water mass, there what is it for?”

Madam Speaker, all along I did not have an answer and it is only today, I have realised that it is - (Member timed out)

6.59
MS NAOME KIBAAJU (NRM, Sheema County North, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the loan but with some reservations. These Government projects and programmes come with problems. I will give you an example. 

Recently, in my constituency, the Ministry of Water and Environment installed water tanks from the ordinary sources of gravity water. However, locals were told to pay a sum especially in those areas where the water sources were found.

Madam Speaker, a month ago, people walk up in the middle of the night and cut the pipes and tore the tanks and water started flowing freely. We actually realised much later that the problem was not the people but it was because we had not brought them on board to educate and sensitise them on how Government operates.

We are now bringing the solar systems. Some of them have seen them but others have not. I think those who have not seen the solar systems need to be educated and brought on board especially where there is a fee to be paid.

As I was telling you, in my constituency, every jerry can of water will be costing 25c but the locals said “No, we cannot pay 25c. These are water sources. We have always fetched water from these sources and Government has brought a payment”. Therefore, as I approve and support the loan, I would like to caution that when these programmes are brought on board, the masses should be sensitised so that people understand them before they are implemented. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.01
MS GRACE NAMUKHULA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the loan because water in Namisindwa all run to Tororo. 

Madam Speaker, we have large families and small landholding. Women and children are forced to fetch water for the second and third season to be able to irrigate their land. We fetch this water downhill to go and irrigate some of the food crops. However, I think technologies will differ. For us in the uphill, we may need another technology and those in downhill may need a different technology. What I would like to know from the minister is whether this system is going to be paid for or it is free for the people of Uganda?

Recently, in Namisindwa, we got a project for water from Lirima. In the past two years, we were getting water free but in the third year, Government said people should pay for the water. People said “the water has been free, it passed through our land and we were never compensated like other projects.” Madam Speaker, we went on strike and the minister came and cooled down people but we are still at war.

Madam Speaker, we have been breaking – because we want water for irrigation, we usually break the national water pipes to be able to irrigate some areas. I am therefore praying that we look at sustainability. You will give us projects but if it they are well planned, we may not be able to sustain them. Otherwise, when we do not know that we are going to pay for a project from the start and later you ask for us to pay, we can become a problem to the same project that is supposed to help us.

Madam Speaker, I support the loan and thank you. 

7.03
MS BETTY AWOR ENGOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This project is welcome because it is aligned with the National Development Plan of this country.

I have a concern which is about the implementation of the project. In Apac District, majority of farmers are engaged in subsistence farming; about quarter an acre, half acre or one acre. So, are these famers going to benefit from this project? We need to know this.

Madam Speaker, that is my only concern. Otherwise, the programme and the proposal are good and I support it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.04
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to support this loan but for certain reasons, I will not. The reasons are the following:

Madam Speaker, I am one of those on record in the Hansard for stating that we needed more resources for irrigation but I never knew that we were going to change from China to borrow from the United Kingdom.

My problems with this loan are based on policy. As a country, how do we define our position in relation to fighting climate change? Are we following the approach of adaptation or mitigation? The cheaper one is mitigation. Let us work to restore our environment so that we are able to deflate the impact of climate change. 

Madam Speaker, if we are borrowing this money to plant more trees, reinstate forests and generally conserve the environment, I will be one of the first to endorse this loan. However, we are borrowing money simply to adapt to climate change when the main cause of battering the environment -

There was a time I mentioned here that the north has become the net producer of charcoal for this country. I expected a statement from the Minister of Water and Environment but there is nothing. Up to now, they have continued to cut trees in the north yet we are borrowing money for irrigation. Where are you going to get the water to irrigate when you are not protecting the environment and the sources of the water?

Generally, climate scientists have predicted that East Africa will be having heavy rainfalls. This is going to be quite in a longer period of time and this is scientific. We are going to be receiving a lot of rain but the issue is: How do we manage this excess rain amidst a situation where we are producing enough hydropower?

Madam Speaker, I thought we would be thinking of how we can use our excess hydro energy to start powering some of these irrigation schemes -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR ACIDRI: Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that I thought as we increase our ability to generate power, part of the energy should be used to pump water for our agriculture. However, I see we are now moving into solar.

Madam Speaker, if we are going ahead with this loan, I would like to humbly caution those who are going to implement it to make sure that there is a lot of security. Otherwise, in this country, there is a lot of destruction of such facilities. Thank you.

7.08
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representatives): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the loan. When the solar-powered irrigation is put in place we will need to sensitise the community going to use these facilities.

I call upon the agriculture ministry to move around, especially in the cattle corridor, to sensitise the cattle farmers to grow feeds, which they can reserve and use when the season is bad. In the last seasons a number of cattle died because they lacked grass. Although there was water, they could not get enough grass because of sunshine.

I am sure that if this project is put in place, it is going to help many people but at the same time if Government is promoting modern agriculture, then we need the solar system to help our people access water at all times so that we promote agriculture in this country. Thank you so much.

7.10
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The idea of having solar-powered irrigation is a very fantastic one. I believe that every Uganda would be happy to hear that there is a programme beginning to promote solar-powered irrigation and empower people.

We have stood here on most occasions, either objectively or otherwise, to either agree or not - we need water for irrigation in these places but what research has been carried out to know whether, for example, in Bugabula South in Kamuli, where a farm is - Madam Speaker, when you were empowering your people in Kamuli District, you began with the leaders to lead by example. For example, you gave me two cows like others but how many still have them? Some of us used the two you gave us to multiply because we were ready for that programme.

As Government, have we carried out research to know that when we set up the solar-powered irrigation system, for example, in Bugabula or Kitayundwa, it will empower people and that the projects will go on or we are going to waste that money?

Madam Speaker, we do not need to first borrow money to set up a case study. Given the time we have been here, we would be having reference points so that when, for example, one goes to Busoga, there are model farms to look at. This would help us to borrow basing on what already exists. However, we are going to borrow, inject and at the end of the day it will collapse. 

Madam Speaker, you have a solar-powered project in Buyende and I am sure you know how you have suffered with it. You put in your own money to repair those generators. Even after Buyende was curved off as an independent district, the generators still pump water to the people there as well as Kamuli.

How prepared are we, as Government to ensure that when we set up these programmes there is money to do maintenance? We shall allow the loan to be passed or not but I know -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know that at the end of the day we shall come back here - as accountability failed in other programmes, it will still fail in this one because it is a tricky time. People are waiting for this money in their own way because it is not measurable.

Let them tell us whether this money is going to cover, for example, Busoga and Bugisu so that next loan can help to cover Buganda and Acholi. The other will cover western and another region so that we look for that money and make sure there is accountability.

Otherwise, telling us that the manufacturer is going to come and produce 1,000 solar panels and then another 1,000, what will happen after producing the 3,000? Where will the market be since people will be used to free ones? It must be a measurable project and in position to know what will happen next. Thank you.

7.14
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for presenting this report. I come from a drought disturbed zone called Ngora in Teso and I have no reason to object to this loan. Although there are quite a number of issues that I needed to be helped to understand and one is that I would like the minister to tell me why Labwor Irrigation System in Kasilo, Serere District has never worked despite Government putting in a lot of money there -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for bringing the issue of the former Labwor Irrigation Scheme, a Government facility on 976 hectares of land, but which to date, despite a number of officials coming to visit that place, the last visit having been done in 2017, no single coin has been put there. Instead Government was busy selling that land. We took it to ourselves to stop it.

I am wondering why it is not part of those to be revived using this loan because that should have been the starting point. It is not that Government has put in money; it has not put any single coin to the former Labwor Irrigation Scheme, which was for citrus fruits.

MR ABALA: Thank you so much, my good friend and elder in politics. (Laughter) I would like to inform my elder that those officials who left Kampala to Labwor did not fly free of charge. A lot of money is paid for their visit to those areas. That is why I am concerned as to why Labwor is not here. 

One thing I would like to understand is: according to this report – see paragraph 104 - there are eight irrigation schemes in Ngora but where are they? Are they functioning? I am a Member of Parliament for that place and I am in Ngora every weekend. She has to tell me before I support this one. In Serere, they are talking about eight I need to know where these eight are located.

The minister should tell me - let us not talk about the entire country but choose areas. In my opinion, let us look at eastern and northern Uganda for the beginning  covering Busoga, Bugisu, Teso, Karamoja, Acholi, Lango and west Nile because those are places that are seriously bothered by poverty.

I would like the ministry to tell me when they are going to de-silt the dams in Teso. There are so many dams that were constructed those years but unfortunately as we speak now, the water comes and goes – (Member timed out.)

7.18
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee. I stand to support the development of solar-powered irrigation and water supply system project.

There are areas in this country with chronic food insecurity which calls for relief all the time. Relief food is not sustainable. We need to encourage our people to grow their own food because the relief food comes in very small quantities. It is not meaningful. Just early this year, Karamoja received the food supplement but it became disastrous. For us in Karamoja, we want to be assisted to grow our own food. 

Karamoja has a lot of sunshine. I think this solar-powered scheme would do very well in that sub-region. Of course, there are other areas also with enough sunshine which need this technology.

We have only one rainy season in Karamoja and I believe when this project is extended to that sub-region, people will be able to plant crops throughout the year and will solve the problem of food insecurity.

I am concerned about the list that was provided to us on page 12. The committee has talked about interventions in 13 districts where there are some technologies. When you look at Annex 4, you find that some of the 13 districts that already have interventions are again appearing. I do not know what justification the chairperson has for that. 

We want equity. This list should be revised so that the proposed areas for this loan can have more sites. Let those areas which already have interventions be excluded from this loan for purposes of equity. 

I have looked at the proposed target areas under Karamoja and all the districts, but Karenga is not there. This district was operationalised in July this year and the report of the committee was prepared in September. I expected that they would have an updated record and therefore, capture Karenga. I do not know where you have put the district, madam chairperson. You should clarify that. Karenga also needs to benefit from this -(Member timed out.)

7.21
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I get disturbed when people continuously, even when they understand what is wrong, fail to do the right thing. In my opinion, we must not pass this loan. We should hold back. Let the team go back and bring a master plan for irrigation so that it is auditable, and we know how to track where this money is going.

Otherwise, we are wasting the resources of this country. It is like running on a road where you do not know the destination. That is totally dangerous. It is just like driving a bus filled with passengers without brakes. What are we doing?

I think there is a mess. We need to come back to our normal senses and do something. Sincerely, if we do not have a master plan, how shall we know the places which need this irrigation badly?

You were presiding, Madam Speaker, when I was crying here about people eating termites in Kumi. We passed a loan after that but the money has never reached Kumi and yet someone is writing here that we have six projects in that district. Can I have a list of those projects if they are there? 

Hon. Abala is my neighbour. We are ever in the village every weekend. Where is the list for Ngora District, for instance? Tomorrow they will say that these Itesots are lazy. They do not want to do agriculture. They want to drink. The problem is that you are not implementing the money where you take it.

We all pay taxes, but do we all benefit from the taxes? It is a question – when it comes to issues of being equitable with the distribution of resources, if I was to whisper to you, there are people who repeatedly benefit from these loans while others just watch in the periphery. Our work is just to pay the taxes whereas others use them. Is that the way we are going to go as a Parliament? It will be bad for us to only say “aye” every day without considering what is correct for Uganda. 

When do we have monetary and evaluation reports for these projects? We need to know how the loans have performed in terms of physical monitoring and to check on the ground how many of these projects have performed, the value for money and their viabilities. We are talking of irrigating; what is the viability of this project? Maybe you want to irrigate for tomatoes which are for Shs 200 to Shs 500 and yet you have put there a project of millions of shillings.

What are we doing? I would like to agree with Prof Ogenga-Latigo. That is a learned friend although he is not a lawyer. The sensible thing, in the long run, is for us to put an agricultural bank in place so that those who are serious with agriculture can go and borrow money from there. How do we arrange and know who is going to benefit from the loan?

Are you going to just think and dream about whom to give the loan? You go and sleep and dream about someone who used to be good to you and you give him the loan. What will happen to those who are not good to you? That will be a problem.

Madam Speaker, I disagree with this loan because it is only a burden which is not showing results for us. 

This is the time for us –(Member timed out.)

7.25
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, first, I would like to say I support the loan. When you talk about Green Energy, solar is a part of it and we have abundant sunshine. 

The only challenge I was discussing with hon. Abala is that the water project they constructed is just for a rich person’s farm. 

Honourable minister, if mistakes were done – I was trying to peruse through the existing ones, and I did not see anything in Kamuli. When you start a project, you start with the Speaker. Some of us have not got but when you go to her district, you will see it. However, I see nothing here for her.

I hope this time, honourable minister, your engineer will start from Kamuli because the Speaker may not speak for herself. That is why hon. Kibalya comes and gives – 

For me -(Interjections)– no, I am not looking for anything. We are the ones to speak for the Speaker because she is not supposed to speak here. They will say she is sectarian and tribal. For me, I am nationalistic on this matter. (Laughter) 

Having spoken on Kamuli, on the issue of the list of names, honourable minister – the Minister of Works and Transport is distracting the Minister of Water and Environment. We have very many problems with roads; first leave the Minister of Water and Environment alone. (Laughter)

Honourable minister, since you have brought the numbers, you bring your technical people to propose the sites so that the Members of Parliament prioritise. There are tendencies where these technical officers see that, for example, hon. Waluswaka is competing with hon. Okupa who is in power, but they will work on hon. Waluswaka’s site to see how powerful hon. Okupa is. 

Let the members who were elected by the people prioritise the sites. Otherwise, do not do things contrary to what the members are saying. 

Honourable members, I think we pass this loan on condition that the minister brings the proposed list to the respective Members of Parliament for approval. This is how we are going to end. 

However, on the issue of the factories, let me hope the factory will not be placed in Kampala. Why can’t this factory be placed - (Interjection)- Butaleja we do not have - yeah for power. This time let us be nationalistic, Ngora you have some fruit factory. Let it go to Moroto. It fails -(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: You have made your point.

MR WALUSWAKA: If the worst comes to the worst then we go to the first industrial city of this country -(Member timed out)
 
7.28
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand in support of this loan. For solar-powered engines or projects, I have seen it work very well in some other countries like in Mongolia or China.

I was thinking that if this loan could be used in bringing the factory like in Karamoja whereby these assets or machines are made in Uganda, so that we can use our own, that could do a good job better than what we are going to buy from other countries.

However, I am in support of the loan because I also see that in my area of Bugisu region, we have mountains and we have God given powers like the gravity water coming from the mountains. We have a lot of water coming up to Bunyole and sometimes it is too much.

Therefore, if we have dams made up in the mountains; if one is filled then it can fill another one like the way they do in Egypt. Therefore, we do not need much of these solar-powered systems. Perhaps the lower lands need them.

Therefore, if they are giving equally to all districts, we might need very few because we have got gravity water. How shall we benefit much from this project? We need real calculation that Teso might need so much because the place is arid. However, for us we have water and we need these areas to be- For example, the money which is supposed to be given in this project or machines or solar energy systems should be divided equally with the other districts as other members proposed. I support these solar irrigation systems in Uganda because if we do this, our country will be moving to the so-called middle income economy in the world.

It is a new project that we have to adhere to it. Let us not fear that we shall lose money. We have to try because we have been moving from old age, middle age and then modern. We have to agree and we sign for this loan so that we can also modernise our country. Thank you very much.

7.31
MR NANDALA MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will start by advising all Members of Parliament to go and look for a book called “Economic Hit man.” I would like all of you to read it.  (Interjection)-it is like a novel, you will enjoy it.  Some of you are historians who even like story telling.

Having said that, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the following regions are the poorest; as we are talking about the GDP of Uganda which my mother hon. Bbumba talks about very well. As a chairperson she should have look at what is best to these poverty-stricken areas. Of course I will mention them, those which are above 40 per cent; it is Busoga, Bukedi, Teso, Elgon and Karamoja which is above 60. And we must address the matter.

As a Committee on National Economy, kindly look at it; is Karamoja’s poverty because of water, so that we decide that all this whole money goes to Karamoja? Is Teso the problem - we need to do that and we are even ready to avail some information and free advice.

Madam Speaker, the problem we are having is that we borrow money but we do not utilise it. There is this issue of rural electrification where there is one man who has been fighting to permanently stay there and has been there for over 20 years. That rural electrification is placed where loans have even expired, we are paying commitment charges interest for non-utilisation of loans yet there is no rural electrification –(Interjection)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much. I have just been attending a joint sector review which is taking place right now in Munyonyo. What the member of talking about loans expiring even before they are implemented is important. The information I would like to give is an emphasis that we are wasting a lot of taxpayer’s money.

MR NANDALA MAFABI:  Madam Speaker, the reason I am bringing that so that I come to this is that such a place where everybody came here and said that “we want power”. We gave him money and he has done nothing. These are people who should be charged for corruption because why don’t you utilise the money to do what it is supposed to do yet you hear they are being given further contracts.

Madam Speaker, this issue of water; I am the person who came here and asked why Government does not bring any money they want to borrow and we approve at once; we sit and leave them to work. They want to bring money in piecemeal and I do not know why.

Now, we are saying that you want €105 million and we are going to give it to you. What is your absorption capacity? We give you this money here today and you take 10 years before you can absorb it. What will be the implication? We have lost the water, we are paying charges and you who has delayed it have made us lose what could have contributed to the GDP which is my mother is fond of talking about every now and then.

Madam Speaker, I would like to get a commitment from Government; hon. David Bahati my brother is here. You must tell us today, if we gave you this money today, how long it is going to take to implement this project? You must tell us. And if we are to give you - because you have come up with very good figures, I happen to get the file and I was reading.

Do you know what they have done which my brother there spoke of? Every district is covered but you do not know where you have covered. Therefore, when you come here you must support quickly but it might take another 10 years before they come to your place.

I am talking through experience. Madam Speaker, you will remember that in 2004, we approved here a loan to do technical schools in Ministry of Education and Sports in every district and landing sites. Has it ever been done? However, when it came here, because every district was covered, we did it very fast. Unfortunately, we never got it to date.

Madam Speaker, having said that, I would like us to call members - no let us give hon. Bahati and hon. Kitutu an opportunity to have this money -(Interjection)- because she is in charge of water and she is my sister, she will not get angry. However, -(Laughter) However, they must commit to us on how long this project is going to take to be implemented.

Madam Speaker, I was consulting and I am told there is a place where it has been a successful story. When you saw me walking, I was trying to consult. Otherwise, I was one of those who were going to object. Having got satisfied that there is a success story, we want this story to be replicated within less than a year if possible because if it takes long, we would have lost.

Now because we have all seen this loan in every district, there must be a serious oversight to all Members of Parliament. I am not agreeing with hon. Waluswaka that we should approve the places. You may approve a place of water when there is no water. Therefore, -(Interjection)- yes. There are people who have gone to school, studied and have identified their places. We have no problem let them do the identification.

However, our interest is that they must make sure the project is implemented on time. As Members of Parliament, we should play the oversight function to ensure that the project is done as agreed.

Madam Speaker, you can direct that the terms in the agreement be laid here because it will clearly state that this project is going to be implemented in this period so that we are sure about it. If we do not get that and forget, we will be held liable tomorrow. This is the taxpayer’s money. We need to put it in good use.

Borrowing does not mean it is free money. It is just postponing payment but it is your money. It is postponement in collecting taxes but you will definitely collect it. Therefore, I will support the loan on condition that I am assured of the timeframe so that this loan does not expire like others have.

Finally, there is this man in rural electrification - people are talking about pumping water using power - in fact, Madam Speaker, you have capacity to call him and he stands there to answer questions. The man is the most inefficient person we have come across in this country. He is being protected by some colleagues here in Parliament but this is a man who should have gone to Luzira. If you have money but you do not utilise it, you will have deprived the people of Uganda that resource. You who have done it will have abused office. He must go to Luzira as quickly as possible but –(Member timed out.)

7.39
Ms Cecilia ogwal (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very restrained to talk in support of this loan, and particularly after looking at the report. 

We are talking about water for production and we are all excited about irrigation and you know that I am a farmer by passion but not by name. So, I would definitely have supported this loan yesterday; not even today. 

However, let us look at the components of this loan. There is the phase one, which will take about 166 systems each costing 126,000 Euros and it will go to supply water for domestic use. The second, which is again for domestic use, is 378 at the cost of 90,000 per system but we are left with 376 at the cost of 120,000 per system for only irrigation yet we are talking about spreading this system all over Uganda including Dokolo. Are we being sincere? No, but I think somebody is trying to flavour it with the words “spreading it throughout” so that we as Members of Parliament get excited that even the Badokolo will take when in reality, it is not true.

Therefore, I am not very convinced in the way this water irrigation scheme is going to be spread out as water for production. That is one objection.

Secondly, we recently looked at the status of debts in the country and we were horrified at the high propensity of our country to borrow but we are not conscious at all about the costs that this country incurs in servicing the loans.

As a result of that, I would wish to pursue the proposal, which was given by the chairperson of the Committee on Budget - Government pledges to bring to this Parliament, a master plan for water for production or irrigation. We would wish to have that plan, discuss and peg it to whatever loan that we are going to borrow so that we know it will be specific. 

Otherwise, the way this one is being done, nobody will know how much has gone for irrigation and where. It is just a bluff. I think we have to be serious and ask the Government to first of all give us accountability on how they have utilised the loans we have passed here for irrigation before and thirdly, they must be able to translate this into water for production. 

Therefore, because of these fundamental issues, I find it very difficult to support this loan. People know that I am a development banker myself. I understand that one cannot give a loan unless they are convinced of its feasibility and viability but here we are just approving loans because it has been brought by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Madam Speaker, I stand here to reject this loan in Jesus’ name. I would wish the ministry to come here to clear all the issues I have laid down then I will be the first one to approve it; I will even second the motion.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you seeking clarification or have you a question? Do it very quickly.

7.44
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, we did a solar-powered irrigation in my sub-county. The challenge with it is that the source of water has to be identified and different districts have different sources. There is surface and underground water.

With underground water, you are to site and you will be told where the water is located. The moment you take the technology down there, what they call capacity production per day, the period of time must be defined. 

Here is the point: six months after we did the solar-powered system, the water dried from its pot underground. You cannot extend more pipes down because the technology has its own limitation.

What is lacking in the specifics, in what they have brought to us, is that if you are talking about Nebbi District, probably you are going to do solar-powered irrigation by pulling water from the surface and there we can talk of the basins of River Nile.

Let us go to Moroto or Karamoja Region. If you are saying that the source of the water is going to be underground, are you telling us that the capacity yield per day in a given period of time vis-à-vis the water table of Karamoja area - if you put it in Nakapirit or Moroto, after how long will that yield actually go minimal that you cannot go beyond the technology to pull water? This is what is lacking in this because you will not go uniform in the whole country. If they can answer this question, then we will be ready to go. Short of that, after six months, water will have dried in a district; four months in the other and then another because you are using surface water. So, they should explain to us the challenges of different districts in terms of sources of water.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to ask the chairperson. When you had taken up the chair of national economy, you set very strict conditions for approval of these loans. One of them was proof of performance. Are you and the committee satisfied that the previous loans have performed before we take a decision?

7.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you have correctly said, when the committee started its work, we realised that quite a number of loans were not performing. We went ahead to identify the causes for the slow absorption and the following were identified:

First, Government always delays to provide the counterpart funding and that is a problem. What we have done to solve the problem is that when we are approving a loan, Government must give an equivocal commitment. We must see that counterpart funding is ring-fenced in the budget. Therefore, that one is more less getting solved.

The second problem is the long bureaucracy in procurement in infrastructure projects. This is being addressed through the amendment of the Procurement Act, which I understand is in process.

The third reason is land acquisition. This one is a cost enhancer. Most of these projects are expensive because of the existing land law. There are compensations and the requirement to settle all compensations prior to implementation of the projects and these take a very long time.

I think that is the reason why Government had come up with the Land (Amendment) Act before they shied away from it. It is necessary because unless we do that, implementing infrastructure projects is going to be very expensive.

Madam Speaker, on land acquisition, Government is making multiple compensations for different utility projects. We have made strong recommendations that Government through the planning - I am happy that we are discussing physical planning, we should have central corridors where we pass all these utility projects such that when Government compensates say for a road reserve, it is enough to take electrical wires, water pipes and cables so that in one settlement, we compensate for all these.

However, what has been happening now, you compensate for the road reserve and the following day along the same route they compensate for electricity - you know people are very clever, I think they have some new business knowledge. When you go back to compensate for the second time, you will find that they have constructed graves in that area and graves attract a lot of compensation. Then you compensate for non-existent graves in the same area you have contracted for.

Therefore, we have come up with very strong recommendations to Government. Madam Speaker, I would like Parliament to support us and make it a condition and give Government a time frame in which to come up with a clear policy on the central utility corridor. This is going to be one way of reducing the counterpart funding and expediting implementation of the projects.

The other reason is weakness on the side of the Government in terms of lack of preparedness.  However, we have resolved that one. When a loan comes to us, there are certain things that must be in place. There must be a feasibility study. They used to get loan without feasibility study.

We insist on getting draft agreement in place. Therefore, if these are in place, the absorbing capacity, of course other minor weaknesses notwithstanding, we certainly improve.

Having said that, I would like to state that it is expensive when we have approved a loan here and it is not absorbed in a timely manner, since what we expect as returns, we will not be achieved in the specified time. 

Secondly, there will be some charges like commitment fee on non-utilised amount. This is usually a small percentage, but it is still a cost.

Commission and interest are charged on amounts when they are dispersed. I wanted to correct that impression. People talk of interest; this starts accruing when the loan is dispersed. What is committed and is not dispersed it is commitment fee, which is charged.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, if we come out strong on Government to implement what we have recommended, in the loan procurements guidelines, we will be able to improve the absorption rate.

However, they also have weakness, sometimes, they come to borrow money and because they were not ready, they borrow very small amounts. The project may be half-way done, when the money runs out. Like it has happened for the Kampala Water Supply Project. They have had to borrow three times before the project gets completed. Therefore, I think we really need to be firm with Government and call them to make sure that they perform. 

On the monitoring and evaluation, over the last three months, I would like to thank the members of the committee. We have been deeply involved in monitoring. We started with desk monitoring, we have been calling ministries and go through all their loans and look at the status and get reasons for their non-performance. What we wanted was to complete the desk monitoring such that when we go out, instead of handling them piecemeal, you go to an area, there are power lines, water lines but you go to look at one, it becomes expensive and time will not be adequate.

Therefore, we decided to complete for all the projects and then when we go out, we handle all of them in a particular area. That is what we are currently involved with, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, when you are looking at a loan, there are many things, but there are some key facts we look at. Its contribution - my brother Nandala Mafabi says I always talk about GDP; its contribution to GDP, social economical contribution. We consider those very important. What is it going to add on our development and how is it going to change or improve the quality of life of our people?

Usually we take those as the most important and then we consider the rest. Madam Speaker, on this we have come up with a very strong recommendation for the Government to come up with a master plan for irrigation. We have instead resolved that we are not going to approve any more loan for agriculture and water until they come up with that master plan.

The reason is that we are pretending that Uganda is an agricultural country when we are not producing anything. You cannot say that 78 per cent of your population contribute only 25 per cent to your growth and we say that this is the main employer. We are crying of unemployment because agriculture, where most of our people are involved, is not producing enough.

Therefore, we really want to put a lot of pressure on Government to see that the agricultural sector - of course this irrigation money is very little. We want many more things like a positive harvest. Somebody talked about markets. We have a problem of fake inputs. We do not have high quality seeds. Our people are not sensitised enough.

There is that mind set where people think that somebody who goes into agriculture is a failure; that is also a challenge, which we need to address if Uganda is going to be a true agricultural country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 33 members have spoken on this subject. I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, House adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.57 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 18 September 2019 at 2.00 p.m.)





