Tuesday, 17 September 2013

Parliament met at 11.37 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting. I want to begin by thanking all the Members and the staff and other government officials who worked to make the visit of the Chairman of the Chinese National People’s Congress a success. He arrived yesterday and is still with us. I really want to thank you very much for that work.

Secondly, the Executive Director of UNAIDS, Mr Ssedibe, had wanted to address us this morning but because we had already agreed to meet, the meeting has been postponed to 2.00 O’clock in the afternoon. So, I am reminding the Committee on HIV/AIDS, the Committee on Health, the Committee on Gender, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and Members of UWOPA to be in the Conference Hall at 2.00 O’clock so that he can address us for about one hour. So, let us be there. It is very important that he meets with us.

Thirdly, hon. Members, in relation to one of our Members, I want to welcome back hon. Obua who had been involved in an accident. We have been missing him and we are delighted to see him back. (Applause) 

Fourthly, hon. Members, relating to hon. Gen. David Sejusa, UPDF representative; you may recall that on 29th of April, he sought my permission to be away from Parliament for three weeks. I granted it commencing on the 30th day of April 2013. The leave ought to have expired on the 21st day of May 2013. Then on the 24th day of May 2013, through his lawyers, Luzige, Lubega, Kavuma and Co. he wrote to me informing me of his intention to extend the leave of absence from the House on the ground that he was still on official duty.

I have written to him and say that: 
“You made further requests for extension of the official leave for a period of three months, that is, from August through the lawyers.

Now, recognising that you have been away not on parliamentary duties and before granting your request for extension, I contacted the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF) to establish the status as regards to the official duty.” 

The CDF has written to me to the effect that as far as the UPDF is concerned, Gen. Ssejusa is not on any official duty of the UPDF. So, he is neither on parliamentary duties nor on the duties of the UPDF. I, therefore, have written to say that I have declined his request for extension of leave. I have not seen sufficient cause justifying the extension of the leave of absence from the House as required under Rule 101. I want to read Rule 101 sub rule (2):

“Leave of absence may be given by the Speaker to any Member who shows sufficient cause justifying his/her absence or who is away on official or parliamentary duties.”

My records now indicate that he has been absent from the House without the permission of the Speaker for more than 15 sittings of the House. Under the circumstances, I note that the continued absence of the hon. Member is in contravention of Rule 101 (6) of the Rules of Procedure, which provides that: “Except with the permission of the Speaker, a Member shall not absent himself or herself from fifteen or more sittings of the House during any period when the House is continuously meeting.”

“I am now constrained to invoke my powers as Speaker under Rule 101(7) of the Rules of Procedure. I hereby give you a warning about your continued absence and require you to attend Parliament at the next sitting.”

This is the letter I have written to Gen. Sejusa. I am required to inform the House, so, I have done so. Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE ON THE CORRIGENDA ON THE BUDGET ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, Budget Committee - they are still in the meeting. Next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

 THE FINANCE BILL, 2013

THE SPEAKER: It is just a second reading. Can’t any minister do the second reading? Hon. Rukutana, I know you used to work in that ministry. It seems we are unable to proceed.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is very disappointing. As we are all aware, the House is sitting today and tentatively the Order Paper has been distributed. For a Government in place to have three items on the Order Paper unattended to is of great concern to the people of Uganda, more so, as we are looking at a very critical issue of the teachers. 

I seek your guidance that as we reconvene, we want that assurance from Government that they will take this Parliament seriously with its business and we do not have a repeat of this because it is quite embarrassing for a sitting Government to have no ministers to respond to all the three items and yet, we have a lot on our Table and we are time barred to pass the budget. I seek your guidance that the government gives us that assurance.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am aware that hon. Omach is meeting the Budget Committee but there are four other ministers from the Ministry of Finance to read the Finance Bill to support the budget. 

11.47
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Madam Speaker, for item 3 and 4, the presentations are supposed to be made by the chairpersons of the committee. The Ministers of Finance are still in a meeting with the Budget Committee and the Committee of Finance, actually, trying to make sure they complete the report, which they have to present here on your directive, Madam Speaker, and this House. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek your guidance on a procedural matter. I know the Chief Whip of that side is not for only the ministers. The chairpersons she is talking about are people that she is supposed to have whipped to be here and ready for business. 

Is she, therefore, procedurally correct to stand here and tell us that the chairpersons are not here and because this is not business for the ministers, we should continue to delay and waste more parliamentary time, without her side? Has she failed in her duty of whipping the Members of Parliament on her side who also double as chairpersons of those committees by virtue of being Members of her side?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we are not making progress. The work we have requires both the Ministry of Finance and all the chairpersons of the committees. So, I think let us leave them. I will adjourn the House to tomorrow afternoon and I do not want to hear excuses tomorrow. Let the Budget Committee complete their work and let the ministers complete their consultations. 

House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock, tomorrow afternoon. 

(The House rose at 11.49 a.m. and adjourned to Wednesday, 18 September 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
