PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - FIRST MEETINGTHURSDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA5650STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTuesday, 20 September 2022five years and be eligible for re-election for a further term of five years.”  Pursuant to Article 51(1) of the Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community, the five-year tenure of the current Fourth Assembly of EALA, which commenced with its inauguration on 17 December 2017, will elapse on 17 December 2022, paving way for the election of Members of the Fifth Assembly of EALA. The election of Members to EALA will be guided by Article 51 of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community, rule 12 and Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. Rule 9 of Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure provides for the establishment of a 20-member verification committee to verify the nominees and ensure compliance with Article 50 of the Treaty and rules 4 and 5 of Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure. On 7 September 2022 - I think it is better I read the letter of the Speaker, which she wrote to political parties . It reads: “From: The Speaker’s Chambers, 20 September 2022, To: All Members of Parliament. Nomination of Members to the verification committee for nominees to the Fifth East African Legislative Assembly IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 29TH SITTING - FIRST MEETINGParliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I welcome you, honourable colleagues, to today’s sitting. If you have checked on our Alfresco, we have uploaded the “Uganda Human Organ Donation and Transplant Bill, 2022” report, which we shall handle next week. This is a very important and technical Bill. I urge all of you to read both reports; the main report and the minority report. Read through so that we can have a constructive debate on the Floor. It is very important for you to do that. As you know, the electoral process for Members of the Fifth East African Legislative Assembly is underway. The nomination of candidates commenced yesterday and it will be closed today at 5.00 p.m. For proper context, I draw your attention to Article 51(1) of the Treaty for the Establishment  of the East African Community, which provides that, “Subject to this Article, an elected Member of the Assembly shall hold office for 5651THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022Following my communication to all party whips represented in the House, on 7 September 2022, seeking nominees to the verification committee for the forthcoming elections to the Fifth East African Legislative Assembly, the following Members were designated by the respective whips. Pursuant to Rule 9 of Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the following Members are hereby nominated to constitute the verification committee whose work will be guided by Article 50(1) of the Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community, rule 12 Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. The verification committee is required to report back by Thursday, 22 September 2022. By copy of this letter all whips are accordingly notified.Anita Annet Among, Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda.” The proposed Members are: 1. Hon. Mwine Mpaka, Chairperson2. Hon. John Baptist Lokii3. Hon. Bosco Okiror4. Hon. Henry-Maurice Kibalya 5. Hon. Anywar Ricky6. Hon. Jackson Atima 7. Hon. Aisa Agaba 8. Hon. Irene Linda9. Hon. Nakazibwe Hope10. Hon. Robina Rwakoojo 11. Hon. Laura Kanushu12. Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo13. Hon. Charles Bakkabulindi 14. Hon. Okot Boniface15. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi 16. Hon. Asuman Basalirwa17. Hon. Geofrey Okello18. Hon. Patrick Ocan19. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba 20. Lt Col Dr Jennifer Alanyo.Colleagues, I now want to put a question that the Members be approved. (Question put and agreed to.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the election of Uganda’s representatives to the Fifth Assembly of EALA will be held on Thursday, 29 September 2022. Guidance for the elections has been issued by the Speaker and will be circulated in due course.Can someone close those windows? Please, I am still communicating. Why the rush? I do not know; am I proceeding well, honourable colleague? (Laughter)Honourable members, this is an announcement by the Government Chief Whip: “During the interim Executive Council meeting of the Parliamentary Anglican Chaplaincy, held on 8 September 2022, it was resolved that a general meeting of the Chaplaincy be convened to, among others, endorse a substantive Executive Council and also deliberate on the matters concerning the chaplaincy.” You are hereby notified that the said meeting will take place on Thursday, 22 September 2022, in the Parliamentary Conference Hall starting at 9.30 a.m. For further information, you can contact Hon. Hamson Obua, interim chairperson. Honourable colleagues, I have read media reports, quoting the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health, about the case of Ebola in Mubende District. And after reading these reports, I called on the Minister of Health to prepare a statement for this House so that the country and this House can be updated in a timely manner. Later on, after receiving reactions to my communication, I will be requesting the Minister of Health to present that statement. Any reactions? Hon. Silwany?2.24MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I rise to, first of all, thank you for your elaborate communication this afternoon, to us the 5652STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTMembers of this Parliament. And I thank you for organising the elections of Members from the Republic of Uganda to the East African Legislative Assembly. However, most of us are on official duty sometimes; out of Kampala or out of the country. I would like to implore you to call upon honourable members next week, during the period that we are going to have the elections for the East African Legislative Assembly, to come and be available; and  Members should not travel during that period so that we conclude this.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are already communicating. MR SILWANY: No, I was requesting, Mr Speaker, that you add it to your communication. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, it has also been brought to my attention that committees are always in the field when there is plenary. And many Members of the committees in the end come and say, “Rt Hon. Speaker, we missed out on A, B, C, D; we were in the field; our chairperson organised this…”I want to put this clearly, as a directive to all committee chairpersons and to the Clerk, that no clerk and no committee chairperson should take committee members to the field when we have plenary. This will only happen upon special clearance by the Presiding Officer, or on special assignment by the Presiding Officer. And all committees, which were going to the field tomorrow, their business is hereby cancelled.We need to do work of this House, you process reports; you must remain here and listen to reports from other committees. Otherwise, you cannot only be here when we are processing your business but you cannot be there to process business for others. So, Clerk, cancel all travels for committees to the field.  Thank you. 2.26MS LAURA KANUSHU (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In reaction to your communication, regarding elections to East Africa Legislative Assembly (EALA), I wanted to bring to the attention of this House and to your attention, Mr Speaker, that Article 50 of the East Africa Treaty, which talks about the categories of people that parliaments must include – and the word is “must” there, Mr Speaker – and it talks about political parties, gender, shades of opinion and special interest groups. Mr Speaker, this morning we received a petition, whose copy I know the Speaker has. As Members of Parliament, we had a meeting and I want to bring to the attention of this Parliament that this specific article mentions these categories. Therefore, we must, as much as we can, make sure that special interest groups are represented. I am not talking about independents – please I want to be on record – I am talking about special interest groups. I want to say that women fall under gender, so they are already covered under gender. I also want to refer you to the case of Anita Among of 2012 where the court was very clear when it said, “….elected members must, as much as feasible, represent specified groupings under Article 50 of the East African Treaty.” I am also aware that a group of Ugandans are going to court if we do not make sure that all these categories are covered under the EALA representation. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Laura Kanushu. From the nominations we have received so far - and we had, I think, received 20 before I came to this House – I saw candidates of the various special interest groups. So, I leave it to you, colleagues. I cannot make a decision for you. Yes, Hon. Ssemujju?2.29MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a way of a reaction to your [Mr Silwany] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5653THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022Communication, I want to draw your attention and the attention of Parliament, to Article 107 of the Constitution. Among other things, this article says, “A President can be removed due to, among other things, physical incapacity.”I saw the African presidents on a bus attending the funeral of the Queen. Our President was not there. The other day, he even missed a family function to give away his daughter. And because you gave us the Constitution when we were swearing in, I want to find out from you, Mr Speaker, whether our President is okay. (Laughter)I am raising this because this Parliament removed the age-limit constitutional provision - when you have a President of advanced age, you may need to be checking in order to comply with Article 107 of the Constitution. (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ssemujju has raised an issue, and for the first time since I have known Hon. Ssemujju, I notice that he is missing President Museveni. (Laughter) Anyhow, if you could have watched the same screen, you would have seen the President in Bunyoro recently; you would have seen the President in the NRM Caucus, meeting his troops; and you would have seen the President in Apac, launching the distribution of land titles. I think what I am going to do, honourable colleagues, is to assist make an appointment for Hon. Ssemujju Nganda to meet the President so that he can confirm fully. (Laughter) Colleagues, we have to move on. Yes, Hon. Alex Ndeezi?MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, mine is a point of procedure. On 17 July this year, I raised a matter of national importance in relation to the mismanagement of one of the strategic institutions for special needs education in this country, that is, Mbale Secondary School for the Deaf. The Speaker guided and directed that the minister provides a response within six days. It is now two months and three days, no response has been provided by the minister responsible for education and sports. Mr Speaker, I place before you the following prayers: 1. That a declaration that by not respecting your directive, the minister is found to be in contempt of Parliament; and2. That is a declaration and demand that the minister provides a response now or within two days. That is all. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Education and Sports, we need that response this Thursday. Colleagues, matters of national importance - I hope, colleagues, when we are coming here you always read the Order Paper. We have an agenda to complete. By the time we leave this House, we shall be adjudged depending on how we have covered our agenda.  It is like going to a meeting and you stop at Communication from the Chair, for the whole meeting. So, I would want us to move. Yes, Hon. Atkins?  2.34MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Speaker, for this very important opportunity and for your very distinguished leadership. Mr Speaker, our rules are very clear: the moment you are in that seat and you make a directive, Government has no option but to pursue and executethat directive. Mr Speaker, about two months ago, you directed the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come back to this House and explain why DRC and Uganda border, especially Rubiriha-Mpondwe border, continues to be the only border in Uganda still closed. 5654STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTI did inform this House that the livelihood of your people in that Kasese community entirely depends on trade. The border continues to be closed and as a result, their sons and daughters cannot go to school. What is happening in my community is that they are rounding up school kids - because they cannot get fees - and then dump and pile them into my office. Therefore, is it procedurally right for the ministers to continue disregarding your directive?Regarding the fish that is being impounded, yet the same is being allowed to be sold in other markets in other communities, you directed, Mr Speaker, that the line minister should come and inform this House. So, the procedural issue is: How long is this going to continue when your people in my community are starving? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It does not have to be me, honourable minister, to judge you and say, “You did what”. The Member needs an answer. You promised that the border market would be opened.2.37THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Ms Harriet Ntabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my brother, Hon. Katusabe, who happens to be my brother in-law and someone with whom I come from the same area and a friend.We have been struggling together to bring order at the border in Mpondwe. I want to give information to this House that we got a very big grant from the Great Lakes Trade Facilitation Project, which put a huge facility at Mpondwe Market. The construction works for the market has been completed and already been handed over to the ministry, technically. The political handover is going to be done by the President, because it is going to include the two countries; Congo and the Republic of Uganda and of course, other countries which are neighbouring.The fish - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, the Member is not talking about handover. The Member says they need the market open. Simple!MS NTABAZI: Most obliged.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it possible to have the market opened?MS NTABAZI: It is very possible and we are in the high gears of opening it, not later than a month.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, kindly meet colleagues from the affected area. Bring them on board and in not more than one month, like you have promised, have that market opened. Kindly update us. MS NTABAZI: Most obliged.2.40MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In previous sittings of Parliament, Mr Speaker, you ruled about the supply of coffee seedlings. We are in the middle of the season. The suppliers have close to 8,000,000 coffee seedlings but Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) is very silent. Since you are a fellow farmer, Mr Speaker, it is better for you to give us the right direction now. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, you remember, I think last week, we discussed the same issue and I promised to follow it up. Today morning, I called the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries who told me that the President and Cabinet had resolved that nursery bed operators can distribute the seedlings and will be paid later. The minister was awaiting a letter from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development authorising him to commit [Mr Katusabe] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5655THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022Government as per the law. I called the Minister of Finance,  Planning and Economic Development to also follow up on the same and the minister told me that he had written to the Cabinet Secretariat to get an extract of the Cabinet minute, on which he would base to write to the agriculture minister to commit the Government. Honourable Government Chief Whip, the Minister of Finance should tomorrow come and update the House on this matter because he promised me that he was going to get a Cabinet minute and then write to the Minister of Agriculture. The rain is not waiting for us, colleagues. We dilly-dally and go into our bureaucracy, but nature is not waiting for us. Tomorrow, the Minister of Finance should be considered on the Order Paper. Colleagues, I want to go to matters of national importance- MS AISHA KABANDA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two weeks ago, - and bear with us because the Executive is not forthcoming until we give enough pressure. Two weeks back, the Executive made a commitment to show the public that they were responding to the immorality displayed by a one Yiga, who displayed his nudity (buttocks) to the cameras to insult the public. (Laughter) The Prime Minister said they were investigating the matter, but they have not come back to us. Can we know why the Executive is not responding to that matter and what they have done to Yiga, who displayed his nakedness into the cameras? The children are now practicing that!THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I am so sorry but I am constrained to sit here and discuss people who display their buttocks. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you promised, ensure to deliver on it. But personally, I am constrained; I have other business to handle. Can we have matters of national importance?2.43MR DAN ATWIJUKIRE (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance. I know many of my colleagues have raised this issue but it is becoming very serious -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two minutes maximum, clerk.MR ATWIJUKIRE: In my county, Kazo, most of the bridges have been washed away by water. Most importantly, there is a bridge that connects two subcounties. They have no schools, no health centres. The bridge was washed away. Over 1,000 children are affected; they cannot cross to access schools. When I contacted the Ministry of Works and Transport, they were candid and told me they have no single litre of fuel. Mr Speaker, there are two things I request that we can do. We clearly state to this country the method we are going to use to get money to work on these roads and bridges. If we cannot, then in the meantime, the Government should declare a state of emergency on this road so that people stop harassing us. Let it become a position that, “We are not working; children, stay home; women, give birth in your houses,” and whoever dies should die because the Government cannot do anything. Otherwise, they are harassing Members of Parliament, thinking that we have medicine for every ill person. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you.2.45THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, we have not reached the level of a state of emergency. The truth is that the magnitude of destruction across the country is huge. We are making interventions in a number of areas. We have taken note of 5656STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTwhat my colleague from Kazo has talked about. In due course, we will communicate what we will have done.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, remember that the team we appointed have a meeting with the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister wrote to me, saying she was away on official duty, but that immediately after she comes back, she will convene a meeting with that team. That team will solve a lot of issues because these issues are coming up every day. Every day, when I am in the office, I receive about 10 issues on that same topic. I request that we give the minister and the Prime Minister time. I am going to ensure that, that meeting, indeed, takes place this week so that we get that facts and report back to the House. What you are facing is what I am also facing.Yesterday, in my constituency, we burried a woman who could not be taken to hospital to give birth because we had no road. She died while giving birth. The minister visited my area but I am told that, right now, he might not reach that area, even on foot, because it is totally cut off. We need to handle these issues urgently. Government Chief Whip, let us ensure that, that meeting is held immediately when the Prime Minister returns.2.48MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the persistent arbitrary arrests, disappearances and torture of Ugandans at the hands of the police and army who in the first place deny the allegations, but later admit due to public outcry. Last week, three people were reported missing and abducted by armed men in a vehicle locally known as “Drone”, moreover, without a number plate. They were not wearing security uniforms, but whisked away Motiv Kasagga from Wakyato in Nakaseke District, Kenneth Kavulu of BBS Terefayina and Jakana Nadduli to an unknown destination.These people were abducted from home and at night without the notice of their relatives, nor area local councils nor the area police posts. A few who are brought to court come while limping and impotent, with wounds all over their bodies because of torture. The nature of human rights violation in Uganda is against Article 24 of our Constitution, the Ten Point programme of NRM and the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Therefore, I pray that the Minister of Internal Affairs explains to the House why there are arbitrary arrests instead of summoning the suspects for prosecution. He should also explain the whereabouts of these people.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Internal Affairs or the one of security here?2.50THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleague, I have heard the concern and we sympathise with the families of those people. I am going to call the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and give us a statement. You can also give him more information about the abduction of those people. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We need that tomorrow because this seems to be a very urgent matter. 2.51MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. The Ministry of Internal Affairs cut down the production of passports by 50 per cent and also introduced an online system. I have been approached by my people and other Ugandans complaining that after the interviews, it has taken the Ministry of Internal [Mr Ecweru] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5657THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022Affairs over three months to give them their passports.An ordinary passport costs Shs 250,000 and it must take about two weeks to produce. An express passport usually costs Shs 400,000 and takes about three to five days to produce. However, to date, people are suffering.My prayers are: (i)  The Minister of Internal Affairs should explain to Ugandans why there is a low production of passports. (ii)  He should also explain why express passports take over three months. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, respond tomorrow – together with the statement. 2.53MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for requiring the minister to come and explain this. However, there has also been public outcry as to why Ugandans are being required to pay for new passports, having withdrawn their passports for which they had paid. The passport is a guarantee of a right to movement, which is enshrined in the Constitution. So, that freedom is curtailed when you tell a Ugandan, who had a running passport, that: “We have decided to change the design of our passports. You pay again.” With your permission, Sir, the minister should equally explain whether we are stealing from Ugandans by requiring them to pay, again. I know it remains the property of Government, but once I pay, it becomes my property. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister, you should also explain the rationale behind payment for renewal of passports.2.54FR CHARLES ONEN (Independent, Laroo-Pece Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My issue is similar to that of Hon. Dan Kimosho. On Friday, the 16th of this month, Laroo-Pece Division, in Gulu City, witnessed a heavy downpour which saw five major bridges being washed away. These bridges connect major access roads within the city and that is Laliya Parish connecting to Lawiyeadul Parish; Unyama Bridge connecting Unyama Parish and Labora Parish; Agonga Bridge connecting Agonga Parish to Lunaba Parish; and Pageya Bridge connecting Okeyomero Parish. Mr Speaker, a number of schools were cut off and over 600 pupils are at home because they cannot access schools. Thousands of people within the same communities from the nine parishes cannot access health services. I am happy that the minister in charge of this is around. This morning, the children were deceived that the reason why they cannot go to school is because Reverend Father has failed to talk and report this issue to Parliament.Right now, I am talking –(Laughter)- and the minister is here. The children have been cursing me since morning and through you, Mr Speaker, I will submit a copy of this petition to the minister in charge. Yesterday, a committee on – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable colleague, please. We have picked your issue. I think your people will stop accusing you of not talking. (Laughter) 2.56THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): First of all, the Reverend Father has always been talking. Mr Speaker, your guidance, in my opinion, is what we are going to go by - that we wait. However, in the meantime, I want to promise the Reverend Father and a few other colleagues 5658STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTthat what we have done in some areas is to use the limited resources to at least make some places navigable and motorable. We may not have the resources that can go into detailed work in many places but at least we are trying to make the roads motorable. For the Reverend Father’s case, we cannot afford to wait until the meeting takes place then we do a detailed intervention. We will compare notes and direct the department in Gulu to ensure that at least some work is done and the children can access school.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of staff from the Parliament of Zimbabwe. They include the following:a) Mr Prince Daniel - Assistant Clerk;b) Mrs Sarah Chimbadzwa – Sergeant-at-Arms;c) Mr Phidmore Mappwanya – Sergeant-at-Arms; and d) Mrs Marcy Mutamba - Acting Director, Human Resource.They have come to follow and observe proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)Also in the public gallery this afternoon, we have Division Clerks from Kampala Capital City Authority. They are here to observe proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)Colleagues, also in the public gallery, we have students and teachers of Jinja Progressive Secondary School, Jinja City, represented by Hon. Nathan Igeme Nabeta and Hon. Manjeri Kyebakutika. They have come to observe proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you.Hon. Basalirwa, what is that procedural issue which is burning you?MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When you look at the nature of issues of national importance being raised, it really shows that our colleagues at the Front Bench are very far from the MPs. If you were available to the MPs, some of these issues would not be raised on the Floor. You have a person like Hon. Musa Ecweru; you will call even for a year but he will not respond. (Laughter)The other day, I was calling Ssenga Hon. Anifa Kawooya; the phones are hardly on –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, it becomes difficult for this House to entertain such an allegation, without us having any evidence of knowing whether you have ever called Hon. Ecweru or Hon. Kawooya. I think we can drive our point home without necessarily imputing bad motive on a colleague.MR BASALIRWA: Mr Speaker, when I say “a year”, I am using imagery; it is a figure of speech; I am not talking about calling for a year. However, the point I am raising is just to save our colleagues. Please, be available to the Members.Relatedly, when this House gives directives, through you and there are deadlines, let the deadlines be fulfilled. This idea of Members of Parliament raising issues, the ministers are asked to respond to them and they do not, and we begin making supplementary issues, I think is really unfortunate. That is what sometimes brings the image of this House into disrepute.Hon. Atkins Katusabe has just raised an issue which has never been addressed. Hon. Aisha Kabanda has raised an issue which has never been addressed. Hon. Ndeezi has raised an issue which has never been addressed and yet they give deadlines here. So, Mr Speaker, once deadlines are given to the Front Bench, let them be respected to save our time of asking the same things over and over again. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I want to agree with you on that, Hon. Basalirwa. [Mr Ecweru] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5659THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022Clerk, extract all pending issues which ministers were supposed to respond to and give me a report tomorrow. (Applause)I want that report sent to the Leader of Government Business and the Government Chief Whip, so that we give ministers space on the Order Paper and we sort all these issues before we go for recess. Now, on the issues coming here, I know you might be looking for honourable ministers and you do not get them, but in my chambers personally, I have suffered with most of you colleagues, who insist that, “No, you see, I saw the minister but my constituency needs to see me speaking.” (Laughter) They need to see you.You have heard Fr Charles Onen himself. It seems when people do not see you talking here - I have many of you but I say, “Honourable colleague, I am calling for you a minister; we are sorting your issue now.” He says, “Yes, thank you but you see, my people need to see me speaking.” (Laughter)On matters of disasters and national importance, we have discussed with my colleague and agreed that before you present here a matter of national importance -in relation to disaster -please first ensure your district disaster committee - because that is the right procedure - has visited the affected area and written to the Prime Minister, so that you present here a copy and we ask, “Prime Minister, what have you done about this?” Instead of getting an answer that they have not received any information from the district and we then go back -let us do it that way. Hon. Kaberuka, what is the issue? On what point are you standing? Procedure? MR KABERUKA: Yes, Sir. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I appreciate your guidance and reading from Hon. Basalirwa’s presentation, we are constrained as Members of Parliament, especially when we are taken to be people who only want to speak; but what are we speaking? Mr Speaker, Parliament is a House of representatives where people should speak about the issues affecting the people. You will bear me witness, three weeks to a month ago, we talked about the Mbwa Tract in Mpungu. The Minister of Tourism has visited it three times. We have agreed many times, but suppose he refuses to do what he promises, what should I do? Mr Speaker, in the Mbwa Tract, when they cut one ape or gorilla, they rush to the spot in either aeroplanes or helicopters. The other day, a lion was killed, and all the staff of tourism were in Kanungu for a week. But the Mbwa Tract, which was presented here on the Floor of Parliament, has not been responded to; they are at large. How should we handle this matter?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister; he is here. I should not answer for him.3.09THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Bahinduka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank Hon. Kaberuka. And we even spoke today. On the issue of Mbwa Tract, I have been handling it with him and we agreed that this Friday, I will be with him in his constituency. The issue with Mbwa Tract - we agree that indeed on the land, there is an issue there. But I have assured him that there is not going to be any eviction in his area-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, please report back to the House on Tuesday. MR BAHINDUKA: Yes but what he needs is just for me to show presence; that is all. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you go there; you should show presence. MR BAHINDUKA:  But I will be there on Friday5660STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No please, Hon. Kaberuka, this cannot be an exchange. MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We appreciate your guidance  on reaching out to the ministers and having some of these things. And on several occasions when we come to your office, you normally refer us to the ministers to have some of these things sorted out before they come to your area. The challenge we have at times – I will be very clear on this- you engage a minister, then the minister tries to defend her position, and challenges you.  One time I was talking to the Minister for Health, Hon. Ruth Jane Aceng about the shortage of blood in Mulago. I was equally telling her that we are just buying blood for the patients in Mulago. She started engaging me, asking me to show her where we were buying blood so that they could arrest those people. She insisted that in Mulago, they do not sell blood. I even told her that we have a patient there. What they told us was that we get your relatives and take them to Nakasero to donate blood, then we shall be in a position to exchange and get blood. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, don’t you think Hon. Jane Aceng was right to ask you who was selling blood so that they could be arrested?MR KIBALYA: She was not. How do I say that I bought blood from this one? I had given her the evidence; she could go to the hospital and see that there was no blood. So, I expected her to go and verify; and do her research.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, when we are approaching the ministers, we should not approach them with assignments to do. Come with credible information and share it because it is going to be very dangerous for you to go on record saying that indeed, it is okay to go and buy blood anywhere. The minister was right, honourable colleague, for your own safety. Otherwise, do you want people to start vending blood around? You should have disclosed them, but that should not take away her duty of ensuring that indeed we do have blood or to investigate it.Therefore, I have gone the extra mile most of the time. I even call the ministers myself and either we meet or we resolve issues on the phone. But I think this is an issue which will require continuous engagement. And I hope the ministers are taking note of the concerns. The Government Chief Whip, do you want to say something?3.09THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Hamson Obua): Mr Speaker, the subject matter of blood is very important. May I propose, if it pleases Members and Staff of Parliament that we organise a blood donation drive within the precincts of Parliament and we donate blood? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, the minister just gave a proposal to which I do not need to put a question.3.11MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju West County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, colleagues, they have talked about blood, do you doubt that your blood will not be accepted? (Laughter) What is the quarrel about? Please, for us whose blood will be accepted, we shall do. For those who do not want to give, it is okay.MR BIRAARO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I bring a matter of national importance and concern. In Buhweju, over the last few days, there has been a lot of rain -  and all over the country- and Buhweju is hilly. So, on Sunday and yesterday, there was heavy rain and the most affected subcounty is Rubengye subcounty and other subcounties are equally affected. Bridges and culverts were broken and washed away, especially in areas of Rubengye Trading Centre, Katerera, Nkyomerwa, Kirende, Kitojo and others. 5661THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022My prayers, Mr Speaker, are that you provide emergency restoration of these culverts so that commercial vehicles and service delivery vehicles can cross. Number two is that the Government should patch up these roads so that they are open to commercial activities and transport and service delivery.Thirdly, I would like to request the Office of the Prime Minister to put Buhweju on their list of disaster-prone areas in every rainy season. I submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister 3.12THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (MS Rukia Nakadama):  Mr Speaker, like you said we need to get a report from the district disaster committee; but all the same, I am also going to call upon the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to go and send people to that place so that they can do something.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure, Hon. Ssemujju.MR SSEMUJJU: I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker. The President came to my constituency, specifically in Buwaate and he said the reason roads are not done in my constituency, is because I do not seat in the caucus. That is what he said.In the last Parliament, we had an MP involved in an accident; Hon. Gutumoi. Hon. Jane Ruth Aceng called Kiryangondo to bring him to Mulago. The ambulance never had fuel. She personally - and I am speaking about someone who is still available, so she can come here and testify – she had to send money on a mobile phone to take  the honourable member to Mulago Hospital. Are the NRM MPs proceeding well by contradicting the President and coming to Parliament to complain about the incompetence of the Government, yet he said that these things are handled in their caucus? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members of the caucus, are you proceeding well? (Laughter) Colleagues, money for service delivery, which we use in this country, is not appropriated by the caucus; it is appropriated by this House; it is done by all of us. So, when we do not allocate Hon. Musa Ecweru or Hon. Ruth Aceng enough money because of the limited resource envelope we have, we should always come together, and as colleagues, to appreciate the situation that we are in. This is not a question of us judging each other but facing the reality. Hon. Ssemujju, I will assign you to ask each one of them - because they are your friends. Or, in the meeting I promised you with the President, I think you can ask him also. (Laughter)MR SONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to my honourable colleagues, especially raising matters of national importance and most of them - if you can look at the list - are related to disasters. I also appreciate the Rt Hon. Speaker directing the minister to go and look at the matter and accordingly report to the House. However, these disasters are to continue. Don’t you think we should have a very comprehensive programme that can address the root causes of these challenges?I understand the Office of the Prime Minister has already made the disaster risk reduction plan. I think it is going to be launched soon. We need that comprehensive document so that we can address disasters in totality. Most of them are cutting off our roads, washing away our bridges and affecting the economy. Therefore, much as the ministers can go personally to specific districts or constituencies, I think we need a comprehensive undertaking if we really want to have a healthy economy in this country. For example –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we do not have much time.MR SONGA: Okay, to conclude, right now in the whole of greater Nebbi, one cannot access 5662STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTthe international route, which is bringing a lot of money to the country. The border posts are all blocked because of disasters. Rain is  cutting off the roads so we need a comprehensive plan to address this.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think colleagues, what we can do for now - because we usually handle these issues in a general manner –is that we need to handle season by season. We know that now we are in a disaster-prone season. Let the Prime Minister, on Thursday, come and present to us comprehensively, the preparedness to handle this season. For example, do we have money? We want to know how much money we have for handling disasters during this rainy season. I know whenever there is money, Members’ issues are addressed. Secondly, I had told the Prime Minister that during this period up to around November, we need the minister for works and transport and that of disaster to always be in this House. I have a whole list. Today, I received 18 issues on disaster alone. If I am to allow each and every Member to raise all these, we shall spend the whole day here addressing one simple issue arising from a slow response to Members’ issues. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on Thursday, come and tell us how you have prepared for this season, at least. If there is no money, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should tell us, why they have not allocated the money, which we appropriated in the budget. That should cover disaster and road emergency situations - I did not know I was opening a Pandora’s Box.MS CECILIA OGWAL: Clarification.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From me? Honourable colleagues, why are you no longer scared of me? (Laughter)MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, you are the right person to give us clarification. The reason I am rising on the point of clarification, not procedure is that every year we receive ministerial policy statements and study them. We know that the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness is one of the ministries that are a matter of concern, and Parliament normally appropriates money for that ministry. Also I am aware that there is a provision for a Contingency Fund for extreme crises that cannot be anticipated. So, for us to massage problems and ask the Prime Minister to come and give us a general statement is unfair.The Prime Minister coming here to give us a statement in generality without specifically addressing decisions that have been taken by Parliament before; how the money has been used and why the disaster-prone issues continue to reoccur yet we have put in place preventive and curative mechanisms; we want to know.The Prime Minister must come and first tell us; what is it that they have done, which we have already prescribed as Parliament. Then, they can come with holistic policies, which we can discuss. I have been to Tororo and I was really surprised to see people there still selling charcoal yet we are in a disastrous situation. People are cutting trees and there is nothing that Government is doing. Things are happening, and people are doing nothing. Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, take your seats. That is why I have said that for us to be specific, let us reduce our demands in this rainy season - yes, for now; to be specific so that we are not general. At least, we want to know - how much money are you having? Do you have items in your stores? Do we have money for the Ministry of Works and Transport to address emergencies where roads and bridges have been washed away? We should become very specific and not go for generally related issues. Hon. Luttamaguzi has the same issue. For the people who have brought issues of disaster, I will start reading the whole list and then speak on your behalf because you are many.[Mr Songa] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5663THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 20223.23THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS  (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth-Oboth): For the record, Mr Speaker –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, listen to Hon. Oboth-Oboth. He might be going to defend us from disaster. MR OBOTH-OBOTH:  One of the core mandate of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces is to help. It is a constitutional obligation. Mr Speaker, you are right on asking the Prime Minister to give the information relating to that.However, the reason I rise up is that I happen, by God’s grace, to come from Tororo. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has put on the record of this Parliament that we are charcoal sellers. The environmental issues of this country are a concern to everyone.I want to give information that you might find where there is a butcher yet they do not even rear cattle. Just like you would find where they are selling charcoal, but it’s being traded from Lira or Dokolo. So, I just wanted to give that clarification.  (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I think that is one to one. Isn’t it? It is a draw. Since we have a draw, let us go to Hon. Sserukenya.3.25MR DA VID SSERUKENYA (NUP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, allow me to bring to your attention that the drainage in Entebbe Road at Bata-Bata Lufuka is alarming. The company that was doing maintenance is no longer operating.In these recent rains, the place is ever flooding. People have lost a lot of properties and the road is ever cut off, yet it is the main link of our country to the western world.Mr Speaker, the culverts crossing the road are very small and cannot accommodate the water overload and this part of the road is below the sea level. There is an ongoing seasonal maintenance of Entebbe Road but to my surprise, they have just put a top layer instead of improving the drainage of this place, yet I had already informed the Executive Director of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA).My humble prayers: i) Immediate unblocking of the drainage of Entebbe Road at Bata-Bata.ii) Replace small culverts crossing the roads with channels of big boxes and raise the road. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, people of Makindye-Ssabagabo – 3.26THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, this has just been brought to our attention. I will draw it to the attention of the directorate of UNRA to see what can be done immediately, particularly if it is just removing the silt. Like my senior colleague the other day said, there is a challenge of siltation sometimes and blocking of drainage across the country, as a consequence of the actions of our own people. However, for this one, we will address it directly. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Musa Ecweru, kindly link up with the Member. I will be asking the Member if you have taken action on his issue. You do not need to come back and report this year. I will be linking up with the Member. Colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Dube Rock Primary School from Butaleja District, 5664STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTrepresented by Hon. Yusuf Mutembuli and Hon. Florence Nebanda. They have come to observe proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. Thank you. (Applause)Colleagues, I saw you registered over 20 matters of national importance. I sent some to the Prime Minister and I will handle others tomorrow. Clerk, I need the minister to bring a statement on Ebola.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE REPORTED EBOLA OUTBREAK IN THE COUNTRY 3.28THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Bangirana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Health wishes to present to you a statement on the Ebola virus disease outbreak in Mubende District, Uganda. The Ministry of Health wishes to inform this august House of a confirmed Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) outbreak in Mubende District.On the 15 September 2022, one suspected case-patient of Viral Hemorrhagic Fever (VHF) was identified and isolated in Mubende Regional Referral Hospital. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, can we listen to the minister?MS BANGIRANA:  The suspected case-patient was a 24-year-old male who lived in Ngabano Village in Madudu Subcounty in Mubende District. He was a referral from a private clinic of St John’s Medical Clinic in East Division, Mubende Municipality, where he had just been referred.The patient presented with high grade fever, convulsions, blood-stained vomitus and diarrhoea, loss of appetite and pain in swallowing. He also presented with chest pain, dry cough and bleeding in the eyes. While in the isolation unit at Mubende Regional Referral Hospital, the patient developed yellowing of eyes, tea coloured urine and complained of abdominal pain on the 17 September 2022. The clinical team took a sample from the patient having suspected him to have VHF. The sample was received at the laboratory of Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) on the 18 September 2022, and results, released on the 19 September 2022, confirmed Ebola (Sudan strain) infection.Mr Speaker, early in the morning of 19 September 2022, the confirmed index case passed on, and the body is still currently kept in the Mubende Regional Referral Hospital mortuary, separated from the other bodies awaiting safe and dignified burial.More information is still being gathered concerning the possible source of infection and contacts of this confirmed case. This is the second Ebola-Sudan strain in Uganda. The first case was reported in Luweero District in 2012. This was diagnosed and ended on the index case. There was no secondary transmission reported then. The incubation period for Ebola-Sudan period is 2-21 days. Like all other Ebola strains, this is a serious disease with significant morbidity and mortality.Ebola is a viral and acute disease that can turn fatal, if left untreated. Ebola is transmitted through the following:i) Close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected animals such as fruit bats, chimpanzees, gorillas, monkeys, forest antelope or porcupines found ill or dead in the rainforest. ii) Human-to-human transmission via direct contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes). iii) Blood or body fluids of a person who is sick with or has died from Ebola. [The Deputy Speaker] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5665THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022iv) Objects that have been contaminated with body fluids (like blood, faeces, vomit) from a person suffering from Ebola or the body of a person who died from Ebola.Symptoms of EbolaAny suspected Ebola patient will present some of the following symptoms: i) Sudden onset fever;ii) Fatigue;iii) Chest pain;iv) Diarrhoea;v) V omiting;vi) Unexplained bleeding;vii) Yellowing of eyes;viii) Bleeding manifestation is usually presented late after the above symptoms.The Ministry of Health has strengthened its efforts to prevent further spread of the Ebola virus within the country through the following interventions: 1. The National Rapid Response Team [NRRT] has been dispatched to support the District Rapid Response Team (DRRT) in Mubende in responding to the virus outbreak. The team has been equipped with a sizeable amount of logistics, including an isolation tent , EVD kits and other essential supplies.2. The ministry has put in place surveillance and contact tracing. This surveillance involves tracing contacts of the confirmed cases, screening travellers at both designated and undesignated points of entry, as well as active case search both within communities and health facilities.3. Line listing of all possible contacts to the deceased index case has commenced in Mubende and Kiboga districts.4. Safe and dignified burial of the confirmed index case will be conducted today, 20 September 2022.5. The Ministry of Health will intensify risk communication and community engagement to increase awareness about Ebola among the communities.Mr Speaker, there have been unexplained deaths and the ministry wishes to respond as follows:On suspicion of the viral haemorrhagic fever, the district rapid response team in Mubende initiated investigations in the community as there were unconfirmed deaths in different communities. This was as a result of community reports of strange illness and sudden deaths in the villages of Madudu and Kiruuma subcounties. The district team verified the deaths as follows: A total of six deaths had occurred in Kiruuma and Madudu subcounties, involving three adults and three children between 1 and 16 September 2022. The deceased have since been buried. However, the Ministry of Health cannot confirm that they succumbed to the Ebola virus disease because they had already been buried. Their contacts are being listed and will be followed up for surveillance and tracing of their contacts. Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health has instituted preliminary containment measures to control the outbreak in the district and the surrounding districts. The ministry calls upon the population across the country and Mubende subregion, in particular, to remain calm but vigilant, and to report any suspected cases to the nearest health facility for assessment. Appeal to health workersMr Speaker, the Ministry of Health urges all health workers to have the highest index of suspicion and maintain heightened safety precautions. Private clinics are encouraged to observe the standard operating procedures and report any suspected case to the nearest district health authorities for further investigations and management. 5666STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTAppeal to the publicMr Speaker, the public is urged to avoid physical contacts with any one with the symptoms that I have listed above, and continue washing hands and maintaining good hygiene at all times. Avoid contact with bodily fluids such as urine, blood, sweat, saliva, vomitus and stool. Handling of dead bodies suspected to have Ebola-like symptoms should be supervised by the health team so that they undergo a safe and dignified burial to prevent further spread within the communities. All public places in the country are urged to institute hand-washing facilities at their premises. ConclusionMr Speaker, according to the International Health Regulations (2005), movements of people from one place to another within the country and between countries is not restricted during the disease outbreak. Therefore, the Ministry of Health reiterates that Uganda is safe and all national and international travellers are free to travel to and within the country as we continue, as the ministry, to strengthen surveillance of the case. We affirm that all places of economic and social interaction in Uganda such as national parks and tourist sites are open and accessible to the public, and people are free to visit any place of interest in Uganda. Finally, Mr Speaker, I am confident that the Ministry of Health and partners will contain the Ebola outbreak. There is no cause for alarm or fear, but we advise all Ugandans to remain vigilant and alert. I urge all Ugandans to avoid handshaking, hugging and to observe sanitation and hygiene practices such as washing hands -(Interjections)-  I repeat, Mr Speaker, for emphasis: I urge all Ugandans to avoid handshaking, hugging and to observe sanitation and hygiene practices such as washing hands with soap and clean water at all times, both at health facilities and in the communities. I also take this opportunity to request colleagues that putting on a mask is also an important issue. We must also observe the standard operating procedures and be vigilant. Mr Speaker, I promise that surveillance is on-going and we shall come back to this House and continue reporting, as the cases unfold. I thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, this statement is for information purposes, but I can get two MPs from the affected areas. I have Mubende, where the case was found, and Kisoro. Colleagues, not everyone will speak on this matter. We have other matters to consider. Hon. Pascal? 3.41MR PASCAL MBABAZI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ebola outbreak in my constituency is very absurd. One month ago, I reported about the gold minefields in my constituency. This 24-year old young boy who died, has been a boda-boda rider –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okaasai, before you go, the issue they are raising is close to your ministry. MR MBABAZI: He was a boda boda rider, doing his businesses from the minefields to Ngabano Trading Centre, one of the busiest centres in Buwekula County. A month ago, I reported that if the operations of the minefields were not regulated, a catastrophe would happen very soon and this is what has happened. Mr Speaker, I feel pity that the submissions we make here, sometimes, are taken for granted. My people are now dying. They have reported one person, but there are over seven with similar symptoms and signs. Over 25 people have been buried between August and September, in the areas of Kasambya [Mr Bangirana] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5667THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022in Madudu Subcounty and Kasolokamponye in Kiruuma Subcounty. These are the very subcounties being quoted to have had a case of Ebola in Mubende District. I expected the minister’s report to tell us that a standby group of ambulance operators and drivers had been sent there – if the cases are many – to ferry these people from Mubende to Mulago or other health centres. More so, I expected the minister to talk about the awareness. Our people need to be educated. They should pay radio stations. We have over five radio stations in Mubende District and the surrounding areas, through which information can be disseminated to make our people know of the dangers of the outbreak. Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health should also include leaders within – they conducted a meeting today, but we were not aware; we were not consulted, told or informed. I just got information that the meeting was taking place in the Resident District Commissioner’s office.Please, this country is not in one man –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. That is why, colleagues, it was important to pick a colleague from the affected area. Hon. Kamara, your border point with Congo?3.44MR JOHN KAMARA (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okaasai, I do not know - Today is plenary, please. You are moving without my permission; I cannot call you back and you, again, rush out. They have told you, this Ebola has started with the miners. The MP clearly told you here; he warned you. We are going to have a problem with artisanal miners. I want you to respond but you are rushing out. MR KAMARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you are aware, Kisoro District borders the Democratic Republic of Congo. This is the time when Kisoro, for example, is receiving very many refugees from the Democratic Republic of Congo. You are well aware that we have got our brothers and sisters in the DRC.Mubende has just been affected simply because of that big gold mine, where people want to go and make money. Similarly, Kisoro may be affected because earlier in the morning, I called our medical personnel in Kisoro to find out whether there could be any cases. Fortunately, there is no case there. Putting in mind that, and all of us well aware that Uganda is a tourism country, this matter must be treated with serious urgency. I expect and I request the ministry that if this problem has been identified in Mubende, it should be an emergency and the ministry should not sit here in Kampala. Instead, they should go to Mubende and find out all those people with the symptoms, isolate them, and ensure that this is put to an end. If this is not done, we are going to see it in the newspapers - both local and international newspapers - that Uganda is now affected by Ebola. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairperson of the Committee on Health?DR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true, that today at midday, the BBC eported the outbreak of Ebola in Uganda and of course that has -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Switch on, honourable. DR AYUME: It is true that the BBC, today at midday, reported the outbreak of Ebola in Uganda and that has ramifications on the tourism industry. I agree that gold mines - mines in general - are potential drivers of Ebola because they are habitats for bats. Those are areas that I think the Ministry of Health should look into. However, I have it on good authority that one of the first outbreaks of Ebola in 2001, index 5668STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTNo.1, was a UPDF patient, coming from an operation in the Democratic Republic of Congo. That is why the epicentres were Gulu and Mbarara. The two divisions that pulled out of the DRC went to Mbarara and Gulu. Today, we are in the Democratic Republic of Congo for Operation Shuja; the UPDF has a barracks in Mubende. I am just giving that information - that could be one of the channels of investigation as we also explore the channel of the mines. Thank you.3.48MS FLA VIA KALULE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the Ministry for the report. I would like to report to the House that Kassanda borders Mubende. Actually, Madudu Subcounty where the case was found, borders Bweyongede Parish in Kalwana Subcounty in Kassanda District.We have two gold mines as well and these people are always moving from one area to another, crossing our districts like that. Unfortunately, in the interventions that the minister has read, I have not heard Kassanda District being mentioned anywhere. They mentioned Mubende and Kiboga, leaving Kassanda in the middle and not addressing those issues. I do pray that the ministry would send those interventions; the rapid teams, etc. - to Kassanda District, so that our people can be taken care of. Right now they are in panic mode and very worried about the consequences of what may happen since we are neighbours. Thank you.3.49MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember when I was still a young girl in primary school, the Ebola outbreak-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are still young, honourable.MS ABER: I am now a grown-up. I am not like those days when I was very - that one. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I get scared when I hear the issue of the Ebola outbreak. The first outbreak that I saw in Gulu District was right behind our house where we were staying. People died. It was terrible. That outbreak claimed the life of Dr Lukwiya. The minister made a statement but I am more interested in the need to cause awareness in the community more, the need to protect these health workers at the hospitals and also the need to control the border points. Mr Speaker, you are not safe from Mitooma; Ebola spreads like wildfire. I, therefore, appeal to this House that the minister be given another time to give us a comprehensive report on how prepared we are in the event that the outbreak spreads across the country because this is worse than the COVID-19. Thank you.3.50MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The border between Uganda and Sudan is very porous, especially stretching from Koboko, Yumbe, Moyo, Adjumani up to Amuru. The refugees move without check. There are urban refugees who move from town to town without control. There are some in Arua Town, others in Koboko Town, Yumbe Town, Moyo Town, Adjumani Town and so on. They move without control. Apart from that, we also have these rural refugees that have settled in the settlement camps, but their movement is uncontrolled and unchecked. I am afraid this will lead to the spread of Ebola in our region. Honourable minister, I want to interest you to come down there and see what is taking place there. People are moving without control - I want to repeat. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.3.52DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ebola is a highly contagious disease, with serious economic effects. The fatalities which Hon. Mbabazi was talking [Dr Ayume] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5669THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022about are very worrying; they are not what the minister is giving to this House. The minister is talking of one death and the six that are not yet confirmed. Hon. Mbabazi is talking about 25 fatalities. I am not convinced with what I have heard from the minister. What has saved us as a country before is that we have always invested a lot in awareness, of the issues of Ebola. That has helped this country to fight Ebola. We want to hear from the Ministry of Health - maybe she should go back and come back to this Parliament with a more comprehensive statement on what the nation needs to do in terms of readiness for Ebola in the entire country. What we are reading now from the statement of the MP, is worrying.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister for energy, the mines - because the colleague warned a long time ago.3.53THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai): Mr Speaker, Ebola is a contagious disease, as he has said and the way to go is to create awareness and cordon off the area. If it is confirmed, then we declare a quarantine to restrict movement and that is the responsibility of the Ministry of Health.We, in the minerals ministry , our interest is for people to live and to gain from mining and once it has been declared, –we will not have any restrictions but to go by the directives of the Ministry of Health. We are ready to close the mine, if it is declared risky.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, these artisanal miners are connected, wherever they are. Some come from Mubende and Buhweju. It is usually a network of a few who are being used because I remember the last time we went to Buhweju to meet artisanal miners, someone who was mining was quarrelling and said he had never seen gold. “There are many corners, you see that building, I dig the soil stocks -” then I asked him that if you have never seen gold, what are you quarrelling for? It is a network of people; they pick artisanal miners from this mine, and they are driven to another. Also, honourable colleagues who go to the field, you are going to bring us Ebola. We will meet with the Minister of Health, as the leadership of the House, to see measures we can put here.  It may even mean restricting visitors; but that will depend on the guidance of the Ministry of Health, for which I am going to request the Clerk.MS BANGIRANA:   Much obliged, Mr Speaker. We shall do exactly according to the directives and we will come back here. We are still continuing the surveillance. Our district and national surveillance teams are on alert; they are moving and working together. We are taking the issue very seriously; all of Mubende region and the districts around are taking care and as I said in the statement, we have sent out alerts to our ministry officials and surveillance teams at every border entry, as the cases come in.On the differences in cases – those are the ones which we got from the 15th, but we are still going through that. Dr Bayigga, we shall come to you and work together on that.3.57MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, first, Mira treats Ebola; I was forced to ask Hon. Medard Sseggona to do a quick Google search. What constitutes an outbreak? Because carefully listening to the minister, she was reporting a singular figure and qualifying it as an outbreak. So, we made a quick Google search about what constitutes an outbreak. My quick guess is that the minister is not being wholly honest. Had it been a singular case, she would not have alarmed the country with the known economic and international ramifications that come with that statement. 5670STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTherefore, my bone of contention is that the situation could be direr than she is reporting in terms of the information she has; she could be economically shy with the truth.Honourable colleagues, the country is recovering from COVID-19 and we know the impact and poverty levels in the country. So, any information that further scares away investors, and tourists should be adequately controlled and I believe this is a security matter. The last time I was in northern Uganda, Arua, with Hon. Atiku, during the outbreak of the Ebola virus, we went for sensitisation of the people who eat wild bats; it was said that one of the easiest ways leading to the spread of Ebola is through those communities that hunt and feed on wild bats.We, especially Members of Parliament from communities that have a habit of bird hunting and eating them, should go on a massive sensitisation because bats easily spread Ebola. And they move long distances; they can even move from western Africa quickly as the season changes.My humble appeal is that we all know communities that go after these wild bats. Please, go and tell your people that it will lead to a rapid spread of Ebola. Then the Ministry of Health - I agree with the position of the energy and minerals development minister on this matter. Let us be fairly radical in our approach, even if it means quarantining a given area, so be it. I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.4.00THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with the sentiments and the statement by Hon. Kivumbi and others, about Ebola and how it spreads. The chairperson of the Committee on Health referred to the UPDF in the past. Let the record capture this correctly: In Mubende, we do not have a barracks; we have a rehabilitation centre, and in Operation Shuja, we have not had any soldiers coming back. They will definitely come back; they are Ugandans and they are doing a great job there. So, for the record, it is not related to the movement of our troops. I remember the day we buried Gen. Eli Tumwine, is when we predicted Ebola and the vaccines were taken to all our troops through the Ministry of Health. Right now, at the border in Bwera, you cannot cross to Uganda or the other side without your body temperature and other checks being made. I think that is one of the issues that I thought I could put on the record.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Minister of Health, please give us regular updates and also, Committee on Health, this is your task now. Ensure that you keep in touch with the Minister of Health and monitor the situation. And on any day you feel you have a report to bring to the House in regard to this matter, we shall give you space. Honourable minister, at least on Tuesday, update this House. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021 (HEALTH SECTOR)4.02MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have guided before, but because I have a report-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you have 30 minutes maximum.If you use less, the better.MR SSEGGONA: You have advised me before that we should use as little time as we [Mr Muwanga Kivumbi]5671THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022possibly can, and it is a report of 115 pages. However, you guided that I could read an executive summary.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Read the executive summary and then Clerk, you will capture the full report on the Hansard.MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I am required by the rules, before reading the report, to present to the House the minutes of the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government), all filed and which form the basis of this report. I beg to lay them on the Table. I also beg to lay a copy of the executive summary that I am going to read, for purposes of your record.Mr Speaker, Article 163(4) of the Constitution of Uganda mandates the Auditor-General to submit to Parliament an annual report on the accounts audited by him for the financial year immediately preceding. The Constitution further, under Article 163(5), requires Parliament to debate and consider the report, and take appropriate action within six months after the submission by the Auditor-General. The report of the Auditor-General for the Financial Year 2020/2021 was presented on the Floor, on 3 February 2022 and referred to the committee for consideration. In accordance with Rule 174 of the Rules of Procedure, the Committee on Public Accounts Committee (Central Government) considered the Auditor-General’s report for the Financial Year 2020/2021 on the health sector to satisfy itself, among others, that:a. The monies appropriated by Parliament and disbursed were legally available for, and applicable for the services or purpose to which they were being appropriated or charged;b. The expenditure conforms to the authority, which governs it;c. Re-appropriation has been made, in accordance with the provisions of the rules of a competent authority; and d. The intended value of the extended monies was attained. ScopeThe report covers audit queries contained in the report of the Auditor-General for the period ended 30 June 2021, in respect of the health sector, in particular focusing on the Ministry of Health, the national referral hospitals of Mulago, Kiruddu, Butabika, China-Uganda Friendship Naguru, Kawempe and all regional referral hospitals. In addition, the report covers findings on other specialised-related institutions of votes and programmes such as the Uganda Heart Institute, the Uganda Cancer Institute, the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services and the Uganda Virus Research Institute. Others include the Uganda National Health Research Organisation, the Joint Clinical Research Centre and the Uganda Reproductive, Maternal and Child Health Services Improvement Project.MethodologyThe committee held meetings with accounting officers and staff of all national referral hospitals, regional referral hospitals, the Ministry of Health and other specialised votes under the sector, including the Uganda Heart Institute, the Uganda Cancer Institute, the Uganda Virus Research Institute, the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, the Joint Clinical Research Centre and the Uganda National Health Research Organisation. The committee further carried out field visits to selected regional and district hospitals of Arua, Mbale, Mubende, Fort Portal, Nebbi and Tororo respectively, to appreciate the conditions in which they operate, the extent of implementation of the development budget and the general levels of service delivery to Ugandans. In the visits, the committee observed the physical condition of the infrastructure and equipment. Members also interacted with hospital staff as well as other stakeholders, 5672STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTwith a keen interest in understanding service delivery-related aspects, as well as the working environment of the hospital staff. Mr Speaker, the committee further conducted desk research to understand the legal and policy provisions relating to appropriation, disbursement, expenditure and accountability of public funds. The committee examined the report of the Auditor-General, in respect of the entity’s accounts for the year under review, and the memoranda/responses and other documents submitted by the witnesses, to whom we are immensely grateful. Mr Speaker, because of the volume of the report, allow me to present on the general observations and recommendations on issues that cut across almost all entities in the sector.General observations and recommendationsThe existence of approved strategic plansThe Auditor-General noted that a number of votes under the health sector had prepared their strategic plans late and therefore, had not been approved by the National Planning Authority by the time of the audit. The committee notes that this was in breach of paragraph (5) of the Budget Execution Circular for the Financial Year 2020/2021, which had noted the poor alignment of Government budgets with the NDP III and, therefore, urged all accounting officers to ensure that all activities for the year were aligned with the NDP III and implemented, accordingly. The committee noted that in a number of cases, approval of these plans had been delayed as a result of sheer negligence on the part of accounting officers and their staff, who had prepared the plans late and never made follow-ups for necessary approvals.For example, Kawempe, Mubende and Lira regional referral hospitals, and others, only received their certificates of compliance from NPA in the third quarter of the financial year under review. In most of the other institutions, the approvals were made in the subsequent financial years. The committee observes that the failure to submit strategic plans in time could cause serious distortion of planning and implementation of Government programmes, thereby compromising service delivery. The committee, therefore, recommends that all accounting officers should prepare institutions’ strategic plans in time and seek the necessary approval from the National Planning Authority. This is to ensure that all implementation of Government activities is aligned to NDP III. The committee further recommends that accounting officers who fail to submit their strategic plans in time should be sanctioned by the appointing authority. These sanctions should include, among others, stripping them of their function and mandate as accounting officers. Further, the committee recommends that the NPA should, for the future, expedite the review and approval process of the plans prepared and presented by accounting officers.Quantification of outputs/activitiesSection 13(15) of the Public Finance Management Act provides that a policy statement shall contain:a. The achievements of the votes for the previous year;b. The annual and three months’ work plans and outputs, objectives, output, targets and performance indicators of the work plans and outcomes;c. The annual procurement plan; d. The annual recruitment plan; and [Mr Sseggona]5673THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022e. A statement of the actions taken by the vote to implement the recommendations of Parliament, in respect of the report of the Auditor-General in the preceding financial year. Regulation 11(3) of the Public Finance Management Regulations, 2016, requires that a vote prepares work plans that indicate the outputs of a vote for the financial year. The committee observed that a significant number of votes failed and/or neglected to comply with the statutory provisions. This had serious implications on the alignment of activities to policy statements, thereby distorting planning and the implementation of Government programmes, thereby compromising service delivery.The committee notes that most accounting officers did not know how to quantify the activities, so as to align them with the budget and strategic plans. In most cases, they reported performance in generic terms such as medical supplies, maintenance and equipment purchased - This is difficult to ascertain in detail the activities and/ or items. The committee further observed that failure to provide details of the quantified activities renders assessment of performance impossible, which compromises accountability. The budget is distorted and proper planning is inhibited. It was clear to the committee throughout the hearings that entities lacked qualified staff to properly handle the quantification function. In Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, for example, the officer charged with the function was an orthopaedic officer. The committee recommends as follows: 1. All entities should hire qualified personnel dedicated to the quantification function and should receive regular and adequate training;2. All entities that fail to comply with Section 13(15) of the PFMA or that delay to submit their quantified outputs should be sanctioned and have their budgets rejected; and3. All entities, without exception, should mandatorily submit their quantified outputs for effective assessment of their performance in relation to the budget.Implementation of quantified outputs Section 13(15)(b) of the PFMA, 2015 states that a policy statement submitted by vote shall contain an annual and three months’ work plans, outputs, targets and performance indicators of work plans .Equally, Regulation 11(3) of the PFMR, 2016 requires the vote to prepare work plans that indicate the outputs of the vote for the financial year, the indicators that are to be used to gauge the performance of the outputs and funds allocated to each activity. From the report of the Auditor-General, most votes under the health sector did not implement their outputs fully. Many accounting officers the committee interacted with attributed this to partial implementation of the lockdown instituted by the Government at the time, as a measure to curb the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. It should be noted, however, that although COVID-19 disruptions were a reality, health workers were categorised as essential workers at the time and, therefore, were expected to carry on implementation of some of the planned activities. The committee notes that the number of staff at these institutions had been significantly reduced at the time of the lockdown, which hampered the implementation of the quantified outputs. In the Kawempe National Referral Hospital, for example, the Auditor-General noted that out of eight sampled outputs, only two were fully implemented, leaving six partially implemented, while Lira Regional Referral Hospital was noted to have partially implemented only one, with a total of six 5674STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTactivities worth Shs 2.32 billion. Out of the six activities, only two were implemented fully, leaving four partially implemented. The same cases of partial implementation can be cited in Mubende, Entebbe, Soroti and Jinja Regional Referral Hospitals. The committee recommends that accounting officers should ensure that the planned and approved outputs are fully implemented. Submission of accurate quarterly performance reportsThe Auditor-General reported disregard of timelines especially in submitting quarterly performance reports by most regional referral hospitals. This contravenes Section 21(3) of the PFMA, 2015, and the Treasury Instructions of 2017, which require the accounting officers to prepare reports for each quarter of the financial year, and that it should be submitted to the Treasury not later than 15 days after the end of each quarter. Most of the accounting officers the committee interacted with showed demonstrated lack of awareness and appreciation of these timelines, and seemed not briefed by their respective hospital administrators, who, in most cases, equally demonstrated lack of knowledge of the process. Mr Speaker, lack of knowledge simply means ignorance. The committee observes that failure to submit performance reports in time and failure to prepare monitoring plans affects timely tracking and evaluation of performance. The committee, therefore, recommends that:1. The accounting officers should prepare budget monitoring plans and reports to facilitate performance tracking within the stipulated timelines; and2. Accounting officers should ensure that their planners are up to date with those statutory submissions in terms of timelines, and strictly adhere to them at all times. Absorption of fundsA number of entities were noted in the report of the Auditor-General to have failed to optimally absorb the funds that were allocated to them, causing money to be swept back to the Treasury. These funds were mostly meant for wage, gratuity and pension that were not fully paid by the end of the financial year. Most accounting officers attributed this to delays in recruitment by the Health Service Commission and the Ministry of Public Service. The committee had a chance to interact with the Health Service Commission on the matter and noted that the long bureaucratic process of recruitment that reportedly takes an average of five months was partly to blame for the delays in recruitment. While interacting with some of these entities, the committee discovered that majority of the affected accounting officers did not seek a revision of their budget and work plan as provided for under Section 17(3) of the PFMA, 2015. For example, Mulago National Referral Hospital had a total warrant of Shs 63,573,318,357, received during the financial year, out of which, Shs 59,379,356,427 was spent, resulting in an unspent balance of Shs 4,193,961,930, representing an absorption level of 93.4 per cent. Lira Regional Referral Hospital had a total warrant of Shs 11,498,592,809 received during the financial year, out of which, Shs 9,631,737,017 was spent, resulting in an unspent balance of Shs 1,866,855,792, representing an absorption capacity or level of 83.8 per cent. Mubende Regional Referral Hospital had total receipts of Shs 11,297,149,897 in the financial year, out of which, 9,155,075,000, representing 81 per cent was spent by the entity, resulting in an unspent balance of Shs 2,142,074,897, representing an absorption rate of 19 per cent.The committee also noted, with concern, a growing trend by the Ministry of Finance, [Mr Sseggona]5675THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022Planning and Economic Development releasing money over and above what the entities request for. In a letter to the PSST dated 24 March 2020 for example, Lira Regional Referral Hospital submitted gratuity estimates of Shs 138,204,004. However, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development sent a sum of Shs 638,938,448, over and above what was requested. Similarly, Mubende Regional Referral Hospital reported an unspent balance of Shs 2.15 billion, attributing it to the allocation of pension and gratuity funds by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development over and above the requirements of the V ote. The committee notes that this is one of the causes of under absorption. Section 17 of the PFMA states that any appropriation by Parliament shall expire by the 30th of June of that particular financial year, and ceases to have effect at the close of the financial year for which it is made. The committee observes that remittances of more funds than are required by the entity does not only distort budgetary planning, but also starves other deserving entities, which fail to implement their plans as a result of inadequate financing. The committee recommends that:a) The Accountant-General strictly enforces Section 15(2) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, which requires that annual cash flow plans issued under subsection (1) be the basis for release of funds to the entities;b) Accounting officers should strictly adhere to the annual budget performance contract signed with the PS/ST pursuant to Section 45 of the PFMA, 2015. The contract binds accounting officers to deliver on the activities in the work plan of the V ote for the financial year submitted under Section 13(15) of the PFMA, 2015; andc) The release of more funds than required by the entities should be investigated by way of a forensic audit.Performance of NTRThe Auditor-General noted, in his report, that in a review of the approved revenue estimates of the Financial Year 2020/2021 and the entities under the health sector, many accounting officers were found not to have budgeted for NTR during the year under review. These included;i) Mubende Regional Referral Hospital;ii) Mulago National Referral Hospital; and iii) The Ministry of Health. While meeting with the committee, the Ministry of Health explained that their mandate did not categorise them as an NTR- collecting entity until the advent of COVID-19. For the other hospitals, however, it was observed by the committee that the NTR collections were significantly low compared to what had been budgeted, despite getting appropriation in aid. Many accounting officers attributed these shortfalls to the COVID-19 disruptions and challenges in the IFMS that did not provide for budgeting of NTR. For example, Entebbe Regional Referral Hospital had budgeted to collect Shs 1 billion in local revenue, but only managed to collect Shs 52 million, representing 5.2 per cent performance. This was attributed to a decision by the Ministry of Health to close the hospital to all other general services and handle only COVID-19 cases. Mr Speaker, equally, Lira Regional Referral Hospital that had budgeted to collect Shs 80 million during the year managed to collect Shs 43 million, representing a performance of 54.6 per cent. The entity attributed this to the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 Pandemic that affected their revenue collection from intern 5676STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTstudents from the various medical schools in Lira and beyond. This affected their NTR collections at the time. The committee notes that such shortfalls in revenue at the V ote level results into aggregate revenue shortfalls at the Treasury level, which, in turn, negatively affects implementation of planned activities at governmental level. The committee notes that Instruction 4.10.2 of the Treasury Instructions, 2017 requires planning and budgeting to be closely linked to the budget to reflect the entity’s policies over the period covered, and should represent a statement of intent against which performance is measured. Therefore, not budgeting for NTR undermines the importance of the budgeting process that affects the posting of the entity accounts. The committee, therefore, recommends that;1. The entities should strictly plan for NTR in their budgeting process to avoid distortion in economic planning;2. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should always provide technical assistance to entities in areas of economic planning and budgeting;3. Entities should further look for ways of diversifying their revenue sources to ensure that they meet the targeted NTR thresholds.Delayed remittance of deductions to Uganda Consumers and Lenders Association (UCLA) and Uganda Bankers Association (UBA)Mr Speaker, the Auditor-General noted that in a significant number of referral hospitals, statutory payroll deductions were made without making timely remittances to the lending institutions, contrary to Paragraph 4.6.1 of the Establishment Notice No.2 of 2019, which requires payroll deductions to be remitted concurrently with salary payments. In the case of Mubende Regional Referral Hospital, for example, deductions to a tune of Shs 151 million were not remitted in accordance with the above establishment notice. The accounting officer attributed this to system challenges. The committee did not believe him.For example, Masaka Regional Referral Hospital payroll deductions of Shs 222,282,880 were not concurrently remitted with salary payments in 10 out of the 12 months, with an average delay of 11 days. Such delays to remit deductions arising out of a loan obligation create accumulated arrears that expose the staff to increased loan burden through interest in surcharge. It also encumbers their financial cards, thereby curtailing their ability to access credit facilities in future. The committee recommends strict adherence to Paragraph 4.6.1 of the Establishment Notice No.2 of 2019, failure of which should attract sanctions to the accounting officer in question. Delayed Remittance of Pay-As-You-Earn (PAYE) deductions to URAThe Auditor-General noted that a number of entities such as Mubende, Lira, Gulu, Kabale and Moroto regional referral hospitals delayed remittance of PAYE deductions to URA for periods ranging from 13 to 27 days, disregarding Section 123 of the Income Tax Act 1997, which requires withholding agents to remit to URA  any tax that has been withheld or that should have been withheld within 15 days after the end of each month in which the payment subject to withholding tax is made. The committee noted that a number of entities delayed remittances of deductions to URA, contrary to the law. Accounting officers attributed this to system failures although the committee received no evidence of this communication to URA. It is also incomprehensible that these system failures would affect all entities the same way so as to attract similar delays. [Mr Sseggona]5677THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022The committee, therefore, observed that:1. The delays led to accumulation of arrears that were not paid by 30 June 2021; and 2. Delayed remittance of PAYE attracts fines and penalties from URA, which may necessitate budget allocations to clear such arrears created by negligence of the responsible officers. The committee recommends that accounting officers be held responsible for fines accruing from the delays in submission of statutory deductions. Going forward, all accounting officers should ensure that all statutory deductions are remitted in time, failure of which should attract sanctions. This duty should be included in their annual performance contracts by which they should be gauged.Delayed access to salary/pension payrolla) Salary payrollMr Speaker, the Auditor-General noted that in a number of regional referral hospitals, transferred and newly recruited employees experienced delays, ranging from five to nine months, to access the payroll. Such delays contravene Section B-a (11) of the Public Service Standing Orders, 2010 which requires accounting officers to ensure that public officers access salary payrolls within four weeks from the date of assumption of duty.Pension payrollThe Auditor-General also noted that in a number of regional referral hospitals, pensioners experienced delayed access to the payroll, contrary to Paragraph 5.1 of Establishment Notice No.1 of 2020, requiring responsible officers to initiate and complete the processing of retirement benefits within six months to the mandatory retirement date (It should be prior to retirement – that is the emphasis of the committee). In case of death or early retirement, the process should be initiated immediately the letters of administration are issued, and/or the early retirement has been granted.Mr Speaker, the example is Masaka Regional Referral Hospital; four pensioners delayed to access the pension payroll, with the average numbered days that pensioners took from the date of retirement to the date of accessing and subsequent payment of pension being seven to eight months. In Mubende Regional Referral Hospital, three pensioners took between seven to 12 months before accessing the payroll.The accounting officers generally attributed these delays to challenges in acquiring – (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, switch on your microphone. That shows you the time I gave you is – but please conclude.MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought it was malice on the part of the Clerk.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. MR SSEGGONA: Accounting officers generally attributed these delays to challenges in acquiring supplier numbers from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and delays in the computation of retirement benefits by the human resource officers, as well as delayed submission of the documents by the retirees. (Both case scenarios are inexcusable).The committee notes, with dismay, that Government continues to run a manual system, where a retiree is required to produce, among others, an appointment letter issued 40 years back. It is the duty of Government, as a prudent employer, to keep proper records of employment in the employee’s personal file. In modern times, that is basic corporate management, through computerisation. The committee notes that delayed access of salary/pension payroll is a disservice that can lead to demotivation of staff and equally poor wellbeing of affected retirees. It also leads to accumulation of pension arrears and threats of litigation and associated costs. Accounting 5678STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTofficers attributed this non-payment to insufficient funding from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.The committee further observed some cases of complete non-payment of pension, contrary to Section 9(1) of the Pension Act, 2014. Further, the current pension system shouldered by Government is expensive and cumbersome, and causes difficulty in tracking the growth of the fund. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service should fully computerise their tracking and information management systems that should enable automatic migration from salary to the pension payroll upon retirement, without further assurance. Government should develop a system of a contributory pension scheme for Government employees, as opposed to a system where Government shoulders the entire burden of providing pension. Such a system is cumbersome and does not allow growth of pension funds for the civil servants, unlike in the private social system, where the fund grows with a period of contribution and service.Delayed deletion of staff from the payrollMr Speaker, contrary to Section B-a (12) of the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders, 2010 that requires the payment of salary to public officers to be stopped immediately they cease rendering services to Government under whatever circumstances, including death, the Auditor-General noted that a number of entities under the health sector had delayed to delete staff who had either retired, been transferred, absconded or died.Hoima Regional Referral Hospital, for example, was reported to have paid Shs l8,438,987 to staff who could not be accounted for. Similarly, Jinja Regional Referral Hospital was reported to have paid Shs 6,149,095 to four staff who had retired. In the case of Masaka Regional Referral Hospital, Shs 896,977 was paid as salaries to two staff who had retired.Many accounting officers attributed these delays to transfers of some of the affected staff after the closing dates of the IPPS. The accounting officer of Jinja Regional Referral Hospital particularly explained that the transferred staff at the entity had to be delayed from reporting to their new stations because of the critical nature of their jobs. The accounting officer could not, however, provide evidence to substantiate his assertions.The committee observed that such delays are acts of negligence of duty that can cause payments for services not rendered and, thus, could result in loss of funds to Government.The committee recommends that with the help of the internal- auditors, accounting officers should regularly examine the payroll to establish cases of near retirement, and also ensure immediate removal of transferred, absconded or dead staff as soon as the cases occur.Unauthorised loan deductionsMr Speaker, the Auditor-General noted that in most regional referral hospitals, there were unauthorised loan deductions from employee’s salaries without letters of undertaking from the responsible officers.The accounting officers explained that this mainly arose from staff transferred to new stations without their personal files. In such cases, employees would have active deduction accounts without complete records at the new station(s). In some cases, non-transferred staff faced similar predicaments, thus attracting the attention of the Auditor-General. Indeed, honourable colleagues, in this Parliament, Members have raised similar concerns of loan deductions on behalf of affected civil servants.In Mubende Regional Referral Hospital, for example, the Auditor- General noted that eight employees were not in the “my approval report”, but in the “active deduction report”. In other words, not sanctioned but deductions were going on, while 39 employees were not [Mr Sseggona]5679THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022in the “active deduction report” but in the “my approval report”. In other words, they are supposed to deduct because there is approval but no deductions reported.At Lira Regional Referral Hospital, the Auditor-General noted that unauthorised loan deductions amounting to Shs 190,771,403 were made from 90 employees that neither had letters of undertaking nor existed in the “active deduction” or the “my approval” reports on the PDMS.The committee observed that: 1.  Government continues to maintain manual staff files, which are not easily moveable upon transfer of the affected staff;2.  The practice poses a risk of causing deduction without liability, thus depriving staff of their hard-earned money or funds. For instance, the accounting officer of Masaka Regional Referral Hospital had fallen prey to the said vice. This may also expose Government to litigation and in some cases, industrial action; and3.  Twenty-one employees had inconsistencies between the loan amounts in the IPPS and the active deductions.Further, the committee is cognisant of clauses 2.1.2 and 2.1.4 of the service agreement between the Government (The Ministry of Public Service) and the Uganda Consumer Lenders’ Association/ the Uganda Bankers’ Association, which require a letter of undertaking for each Government employee before making an employee reservation on the PDMS. Therefore, under the said clauses, only deductions consented to by employees, in writing, should be submitted to the Ministry of Public Service for timely monthly payroll processing or as advised by the employer/entity.The committee recommends that: 1. Accounting officers should ensure that all loan applications are streamlined with all data being reconciled, in liaison with the PCA Management and approvals done through the PDMS; 2. The hospital management should, within two months from the adoption of this report by Parliament, seek for guidance from the Ministry of Public Service on the usage of the PCA and PDMS interface, to accurately manage their loan database. Off-budget receiptsThe Auditor-General reported that most of the entities received off-budget financing, which were not declared to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, and accordingly, was not appropriated by Parliament as required by Section 43(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.There was no evidence that the entities obtained guidance from the Accountant-General as required by Section 43(5) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. Such omissions go against the requirement of running an integrated budget and pose a risk of double financing. For example, Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital received numerous funding including Shs 4,164,571,391 delegated funds, Shs 3,575,864,122 as EGPAF/USAID Rhines of Shs 588,707,269. Although the Accounting Officer for Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital explained that the funds were for intern doctors’ allowances, isolation building plus other activities relating to TB and HIV/AIDS and that the funds were spent as per the agreed Memorandum of Understanding, they were not spent within the IFMS of Government, thus contradicting or contravening sections 36(6), 43 and 44(2) of the PFMA 2015, which require all public resources including external funding, to be paid into the Consolidated Fund and be availed through the Appropriations Act. 5680STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTThe Auditor-General noted that Masaka Regional Referral Hospital received off-budget financing to the tune of Shs 1,068,012,711, which was not appropriated to the entity by Parliament. Mubende Regional Referral Hospital received Shs 1,418,986,671 from the Ministry of Health and Mildmay Uganda. Off-budget financing is subject to Section 43(1) of the PFMA 2015 and the Budget Execution Circular issued by the PS/ST, and any use of such funds in contravention of those provisions is illegal and actionable. The committee, therefore, recommends that the accounting officers should, at all times, adhere to the laws cited herein above and non-compliance with such should attract sanctions on the accounting officers. Internal control weaknessesThe Auditor-General noted that a number of referral hospitals had internal-control weaknesses in areas such as monthly wage, pension and gratuity performance analysis, and remittance of quarterly returns to the Ministry of Public Service. Other areas included payments of salaries, pension and gratuity of the IPPS in disregard of Establishment Notice No.2 of 2019 and No.1 of 2020. The committee notes that these internal-control weaknesses are the leading cause of arrears, under-absorption of wage, pension and gratuity as well as delays in granting clearance to recruits. The committee observes that in almost all regional referral hospitals, this audit query is outstanding and the accounting officers are medical professionals, who do not have and/or dedicate enough to the human resources and the accounting function. This is attributed to their busy schedule in relation to their core appointment of professional service. In most cases, they are medical consultants. The committee recommends that accounting officers should strengthen internal-control measures by submitting quarterly returns in compliance with establishment notices, and ensure that salaries, pension and gratuity are processed and paid through the IPPS in an efficient manner. The Ministry of Public Service should review the structure of regional referral hospitals, with the view to creating a key position of Hospital Planner, and also ensuring a uniform human resource structure for all regional referral hospitals.The PS/ST should consider appointing non-medical staff as accounting officers as opposed to the already laden staff, who dedicate little time to the accounting function.  Mr Speaker, for specific queries and recommendations  delineated per vote, I request that honourable members refer to the main report, which is already uploaded on their iPads. I beg to report. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairman. MR SSEGGONA: Let me first thank you. First of all, for your guidance – you know where we got stuck and it was through your guidance that we could move. I also want to thank members of the committee and our technical staff, for their dedicated service. It was very difficult coming up with this kind of report. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I have read this report and, indeed, I have been discussing it with the chairperson. You really need to interest yourselves in the report in detail, because I have observed that very many people do not read these reports in detail. When I open the debate, usually it is limited to what the chairman has said. Whatever the chairman has not said – yet we know the devil is in the details.  [Mr Sseggona]5681THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022The report is extremely rich, and I really hope that committees do look at how such reports should be made. I have taken the time to look through it. I want to thank you, chairman, and your committee members for the well-written and well-researched report. Hon. Patrick?MR OSHABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have highlighted something very critical; this report highlights very critical matters that if taken seriously in our governance, we shall improve a lot. Mr Speaker, I was here in the 10th Parliament and in this Parliament, we have no mechanism for following up on these very critical matters that Parliament recommends, and we just continue getting our reports through. No mechanism is taken to establish whether what we recommend really is implemented or acted on. Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter on that, to ensure that we have a mechanism within which to report back to Parliament on whatever we do here, to ensure that we are doing a good job here. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, we have Rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure. That is where we seek refuge on action-taken reports. I have already instructed the Clerk to extract all pending issues where the ministers are supposed to report back on the several resolutions we made, on the questions raised, and I want to put it on the Order Paper. If a minister has not taken any action, he or she should come here, we know, and then we see – Also, when you read, for example, the report from this committee, you can see – if the sectoral committee takes keen interest in the report – because what I would expect, for example now, will be that the Chairperson of the Committee on Health convenes his committee so that they go through this report for guidance. Most of the issues you could see are issues, which the committee should have identified during the budget processing and asked the hard questions and ensured that they were addressed at that time. When a report is released, in relation to your committee, the chairperson and members pick interest. That is why we guided the chairpersons of accountability committees, especially PAC (Central Government), to do their reports, sector by sector, so that the committee responsible can go back and dissect it to ensure the recommendations are incorporated when they are handling business regarding that sector. For example, when you are processing a ministerial policy statement for that sector, you should be able to look at these issues and say, Auditor-General recommended this, the committee processed and the House adopted these resolutions. How are they being addressed in the current or the next budgeting process? Hon. Nsamba raises a very critical issue, part of which is on our side as a House but part of which is with the committee. Thank you. Colleagues, I am seeing some members of the committee like Hon. Nandala, standing. When you look at the recommendations, you notice they are straightforward. If you are not going to add value, please, lend us that time to process other business.Otherwise, you are going to recycle and you might even recycle badly, what the committee had recommended extremely well. 4.55MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, this is just for purposes of the House to know. Under the National Audit Act, after this report has been adopted by Parliament, there should be a Treasury Memorandum. The Treasury Memorandum comes here because the Auditor-General is supposed to audit it to confirm that the recommendations, which were passed by Parliament have been implemented or what action has been taken. What Hon. Nsamba has raised is legal because it should be the Treasury Memorandum to deal with this. It is this one and not advisory. It is not like where they say that this resolution will be advisory, no. On this one, you must act.5682STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We have already instructed the PS/ST that all pending Treasury Memoranda should be presented. Also, the donors have required - IMF and World Bank have been very clear that they want those Treasury Memoranda presented so that they can be assessed. Usually, colleagues, even without going so much into detail, colleagues who had wanted us to bring back the old reports - even the Treasury Memorandum will go back to the committee to see what action has been taken and whether it is to the satisfaction of this House.MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I wanted to raise is what Hon. Mafabi - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then another - MS ALUM: Mr Speaker, let me come. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We do not repeat business here. MS ALUM: No, Mr Speaker, my issue -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You are coming. MS ALUM: Yes, I am now coming. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay. (Laughter) Please, colleagues, what is funny? A member said she is coming and I said it is okay. MS ALUM: Yes, now I am coming, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to give a timeline? I am saying this because for the time I have been in this Parliament, the issue of Treasury Memorandum has been talked about here so many times. Now, beginning with this one, wouldn’t it be fair to give a timeline?Secondly, we have the chairpersons of local government and health committees. I am trying to scan around. I do not know whether they are here. Anyway, when you look at this report, you notice that it is very critical. While we lack money for roads,   it is just being given out over and above - and others are not even budgeted for. I am of the view that we save this report and debate it when the ministers are here because one wonders how money, which was not appropriated, is given to an entity over and above what they demanded. To me, the two ministers and the chairpersons should be here so that they tell us, in detail, what is happening. Who are the people eating this money? I think this is a racket that people are using to siphon money.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Most of the issues raised are even beyond the sector. There are issues to do with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development specifically, on how it conducts its business. Colleagues, I am going to give you another opportunity to read this report comprehensively. Okay. Then, Tuesday next week, we shall have a debate.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE INQUIRY INTO ALLEGATIONS OF BREACH OF THE CODE OF CONDUCT FOR MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT AGAINST HON. TWAHA KAGABO, MP BUKOTO COUNTY SOUTHTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think even five minutes are enough for him. Honourable, I am going to give you 10 minutes but if you use five, I will thank you for leaving a balance of five.Colleagues, let us listen to the Chairperson, Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.4.59THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Once again, I have this unenviable duty of trying to do a self-fumigation process. This is the Report on the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the inquiry into the allegation of the breach of the conduct of the honourable Member of Parliament for Bukoto County South; the Hon. Twaha Kagabo.5683THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022I beg to lay on the Table, as the rules require, the original report duly signed by the requisite number of members of the committee and the minutes.Mr Speaker, my deputy, the Hon. Father Onen, earlier on said that he wants his people to see him talk. I want to take this opportunity to allow him to read this report so that his people can see him presenting it. I think that is also a good way for senior members or a chairperson to mentor colleagues. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.5.02MR BERNARD ONEN (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): By the authority conferred on me by the Chairperson, I stand to read the report of the Standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the inquiry into the allegations of breach of Code of Conduct of Members of Parliament against Hon. Twaha Kagabo, Member of Parliament for Bukoto County South.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 10 minutes, honourable colleague.MR BERNARD ONEN: Mr Speaker, On 9 August 2022, during a sitting of Parliament, in her communication, the Rt Hon. Speaker raised a matter of the breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament under Appendix F of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament by Hon. Twaha Kagabo, Member of Parliament for Bukoto County South. She alleged that Hon. Twaha Kagabo appeared before the media carrying a sum of Shs 40 million which he purported to have received from her and sought to return it to her. The Rt Hon. Speaker, being aggrieved by the actions of Hon. Twaha Kagabo referred the matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline with a directive to report back to the House in one month. The mandate of the committee with regard to the matter is stipulated under Rule 175 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament. Pursuant to the above mandate, the committee inquired into the allegations levied against Hon. Twaha Kagabo and now presents its report to the House for consideration. The issues, which the committee agreed on for resolution, were as follows: a. Whether Hon. Twaha Kagabo made allegations of bribery in the media against the Rt Hon. Speaker.b. Whether the actions or conduct of Hon. Twaha Kagabo constituted a breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament is enumerated in Appendix F of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. c. The observations and recommendations of the committee on the matter. Methodology The Committee;a. Held a meeting with Hon. Twaha Kagabo;b. Reviewed the relevant documents including the Hansard of Tuesday, 9 August 2022 and Tuesday, 6 September 2022; c. Reviewed the applicable laws like the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament, treaties and papers on Commonwealth Parliamentary Procedures and Practices. The committee, being cognisant of its quasi-judicial status and the Member’s constitutional right to a fair hearing, wrote to Hon. Twaha Kagabo - I refer you to appendix B and C, - informing him of:a. the allegations made against him together with the copy of the Hansard. b. his right to be represented by a counsel;c. his right to attend meetings of the committee with other witnesses and to cross-examine them. 5684STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTThe committee further resolved that any Member with personal interests in the matter under investigation, including a Member who could have publicly expressed his or her views on the matter, would be disqualified from participating in the proceedings of the committee. Findings, observations and recommendations The committee interfaced with Hon. Kagabo on Wednesday, 7 September to respond to the allegations made against him. He opted not to exercise his right to legal representation in the committee proceeding, and was therefore, not represented by a counsel. Hon. Kagabo testified as follows:a. That it was true that he appeared in the media carrying money in the precincts of Parliament, which he claimed he had received from the Rt Hon. Speaker as a bribe;b. That he admits he never received any money from the Rt Hon. Speaker, and that allegations of bribery made against the Speaker were false; c. That prior to the incident, the media had been awash with news that Members of Parliament received free money for an unspecified purpose;d. That his political party headquarters directed the party members who had received the said free money to return it either to the party Chief Whip or the Leader of the Oppositione. That the constituents mounted pressure on him to return the said money, if indeed, he receive it; f. That because of political pressure, and in a bid to clear his name, he decided to arrange for money, which he paraded before the media and falsely alleged that it had been given to him by the Rt Hon. Speaker;g. That he had reflected on his actions and acknowledged that they would undermine the integrity of the Rt Hon. Speaker and bring the Office of the Speaker and Parliament generally into disrepute;h. That he had been tormented, castigated and isolated because of his actions to the extent that  he contemplated committing suicide; (Interjections)  i. That he regrets his actions and tenders an apology to the Rt Hon. Speaker, Members of Parliament and the institution of Parliament generally for the bad reputation and damage caused;j. That he prays for pardon for his misconduct in the interest of fostering harmony in Parliament and for better service delivery. The committee sought to determine whether Hon. Twaha Kagabo made allegations of bribery in the media against the Rt Hon. Speaker.In his testimony before the committee, Hon. Kagabo stated that the bribery allegations he made against the Rt Hon. Speaker were false and apologised for his action. Accordingly, the committee resolved issue No. 1 in the affirmative. Having resolved issue No. 1 in the affirmative, the committee resolved that there was no need to invite other witnesses to provide further evidence. The committee proceeded to examine whether the conduct of Hon. Kagabo constituted a breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament under Appendix F of the Rules of Procedure as alleged. The Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament sets out the standards of behaviour expected of Members of Parliament. The Code of Conduct is designed to assist Members in the discharge of their obligations to the House, their constituents and the public at large. [Mr Onen]5685THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022Paragraph 2, therefore, places a public duty on Members to uphold the law and act on all occasions in accordance with the public trust placed in them. It provides that: “2 Public Duty(1) By virtue of The Oath of allegiance taken by all Members, Members have a duty to be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Republic of Uganda and to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and to uphold the law and act on all occasions in accordance with the public trust placed in them.  (2) Members have a general duty to act in the interests of the nation as a Whole; and special duty to their constituents.”  Paragraph 3 of the Code of Conduct elaborates the general principles of conduct -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, switch on the microphone.MR BERNARD ONEN: Members are required to observe the principles of selflessness, integrity, objectivity, accountability, openness, honesty and leadership. Paragraph 5 of the Code of Conduct requires Members to act in public trust at all times. Mr Speaker, the committee observes that the false bribery allegations Hon. Kagabo made against the Rt Hon. Speaker portrayed Parliament, its presiding officers and Members, as corrupt in the eyes of the public and thereby, denigrated public trust and confidence in the integrity of the person and Office of the Speaker and brought the House and its Members into disrepute. The committee, therefore, observed that:1. By admitting that he made false bribery allegations in the media against the Rt Hon. Speaker, Hon. Kagabo did not waste the time of the committee.2. A day before the meeting of the committee with Hon. Kagabo, he apologised to the House during the sitting on Tuesday, 6 September 2022, an act the committee considered courageous and remorseful. A review of the Hansard of Tuesday, 6 September 2022, (Appendix D) reveals that Hon. Kagabo stated as follows:“’Madam Speaker and colleagues at large, I rise on a procedural impropriety and ambiguity that awashed Parliament and the country a month ago –(Interjections) - I do acknowledge that it was a procedural flaw. At this juncture, Madam Speaker, I do invoke –(Interjections)-Honourable members, I do acknowledge and reflect on how important it is to work in harmony, as honourable colleagues and our Speaker, for the better dispensation of services to our country. I, therefore, request for pardon for the impasse. I beg to move. I request for the procedural impropriety that I caused on the actions of Parliament.Thank you, Madam Speaker. A month ago, I was seen moving with funds in the precincts of Parliament, which must have infringed on the privileges and rights of my fellow colleagues and the House at large. I do, therefore, request for a pardon over that and extend an olive branch to others for the betterment of services in the country .”The committee, however, noted that the apology Hon. Kagabo made to the House was ambiguous. Accordingly, the committee requested Hon. Kagabo to submit an unequivocal apology, in writing, for clarity. Attached herewith is the unequivocal apology (Appendix E). Hon. Kagabo further made a commitment that he would not engage in such conduct in future.5686STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTRecommendations1. Hon. Kagabo, having apologised to the House and before the committee, should be pardoned for the misconduct.2. Members of Parliament should uphold their duty to maintain and strengthen public trust, confidence and integrity of Parliament at all times.3. Members should desist from populist actions and conduct that degenerate the integrity and reputation of Parliament, its presiding officers and Members in the eyes of the public.4. Parliament should orient Members on the Rules of Procedure, with special emphasis on the Code of Conduct enumerated in Appendix F of the Rules of Procedure.ConclusionThe committee, therefore, prays that this this report be adopted by the House. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kagabo, do you want to respond to the committee’s report? 5.14DR TWAHA KAGABO (NUP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee and fellow Members for having given me a chance to party with you. Most importantly, I thank the Rt Hon. Speaker, Anita Annet Among, for having allowed this to take place because the denigration was partly on her.I am also privy to the fact that she has incessantly objected to frequent information about her to have me expunged from this House. She preferred to handle it in a motherly way. (Applause) Therefore, I pray to Allah  Subhanahu Wa Ta’ala to use this as a basis to exonerate her from her transgressions on Judgment Day.Mr Speaker, I also concur with the submission by the committee. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. (Members rose_) Colleagues, our hands are tied by rule 175(3), which does not allow us any debate on such a matter. Please, just look through your rules. As a result of that, I now want to put the question – No, no! Honourable member, please, allow me to put the question and we close this matter. Honourable colleagues, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the inquiry into allegations of breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament against Hon. Twaha Kagabo, MP Bukoto County South, be adopted.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues –(Mr Muwanga Kivumbi rose_)- Hon. Kivumbi, please, this is not a matter where I will allow you because it is more or less personal. Colleagues, I would like to remind you that Appendix F of the Rules of Procedure, which the Chairperson referred to, is very important for you. Please, be very cautious. Hon. Kagabo has provided us a learning example that if you dare come here and make outrageous allegations against someone, you have a duty to prove those allegations. You know, you can make statements against someone that can destroy their name completely. I saw how people were ridiculing the Rt Hon. Speaker. I thank God who has given her a heart to forgive Hon. Kagabo. That is what is important; we should learn to forgive. I will thank her for that. I also thank Hon. Kagabo for coming out and understanding that, sometimes, politics has a limit. You do not veer off into a personal lane to score a political goal. It is very important. I want to thank you for that courage – to know that when you do wrong, you come and stand up for it and apologise. [Mr Onen]5687THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022Next item? (Mr Muwanga-Kivumbi rose_) Honourable Leader of the Opposition, this is a personal matter. If it is another matter, then it is okay. 5.18MR MUHAMMAD KIVUMBI MUWANGA (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I am not going to comment on this matter but I have a responsibility, as the acting Leader of the Opposition, because Hon. Kagabo belongs to the National Unity Platform (NUP) party. He is our member and we have a standard against which we hold our members. This matter will be further picked up by my party and subjected to a disciplinary procedure. I beg to inform the House. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY GLOWING TRIBUTE TO UGANDA’S REPRESENTATIVES AT THE 22ND COMMONWEALTH GAMES IN BIRMINGHAM, UK AND AT THE WORLD ATHLETICS CHAMPIONSHIPS IN OREGON, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA FOR THEIR EXCELLENT AND EXEMPLARY PERFORMANCETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have just received information from the minister that he is not around and they were not yet ready for this item. So, Clerk, you are going to link up with the minister because this is a Government motion. They are the ones who requested for space. So, we shall give them one more chance. If not, we shall drop it from the pending business. HON. KATUNTU: “Procedure?”THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, you have accessed the microphone without my permission. (Laughter) Hon. Katuntu is claiming he did not know that the microphone was switched on. (Laughter) Today is a day for forgiving; let me forgive you for your transgressions. (Laughter) Hon. Katuntu - MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I think these rules are meant to be obeyed. When you look at Rule 175(3) of the Rules of Procedure, it says - I need to read it for purposes of the record: “Without prejudice to subrule (2), where an affected party agrees to the findings and recommendations referred to in that rule, there shall be no debate, save for approval of the report by the House.”That is what the rule says. Whatever the Leader of the Opposition is saying, in response to the report, cannot stand in our rules – not even a comment. It has to be expunged. (Applause) The rule says there is nothing you can do, except to adopt.To have a response - whatever response it is - will be offending rule 175(3). Whatever they need to do, let it not be part of the record.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I do not want us to reopen thisissue. I just want it to go because hearts have healed. I hope no one tries to open wounds.Now, Hon. Katuntu, the rule ties me because it was just tying me to debate and we have not debated. However, I hope there will be no retribution on a Member for such an issue. Even outside, we urge you to promote harmony. We do not need it to look like it had been sponsored by someone else. And because the Member has now withdrawn the matter, the person who had sponsored all this is annoyed and is going to punish using other means; that would be- And the Hon. Kivumbi I know, maybe he will also demand an apology internally by saying, “Why did you attack our Speaker?” Because NUP also voted for her. I do not know - which would be a double jeopardy more or less. Hon. Kagabo has gone through a lot, colleagues. I would urge that we leave this at that. (Members rose_)Colleagues, please, I request that we go to other items. Let us leave this item. The more we go into this, the more we go into reopening wounds afresh. So, next item.5688STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTMOTION SEEKING LEA VE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIV ATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED “THE NATIONAL FOREST AND TREE PLANTING (AMENDMENT) BILL”5.24MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I raise a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, entitled “The National Forest and Tree Planting (Amendment) Bill.”I am moving under Articles 79 and 84 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 and Rules 56, 121 and 122 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.The motion reads:“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter of peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda; AND WHEREAS Article 94(b) of the Constitution and Rules 121 and 122 of the Rules of Procedure recognise the rights and the procedure of a Member to move a Private Member’s Bill; AWARE THAT the Constitution, under national Objectives And Directive Principles of State Policy, obligates the state to ensure that the utilisation of the natural resources of Uganda is managed in such a way as to meet the development and environmental needs of present and future generations of Ugandans and particularly to take all possible measures to prevent or minimise damage and destruction to land, air and water resources resulting from pollution and other causes; FURTHER AWARE that the Constitution, under National Objectives And Directive Principles of State Policy, and further obligates Government to stimulate agricultural, industrial, technological and scientific development by adopting appropriate policies and enacting enabling legislation to take appropriate steps to encourage people to grow and store adequate food, establish national food reserves, encourage and promote proper nutrition through mass education and other appropriate means in order to build a healthy state;RECOGNISING THAT the Uganda Forestry Policy of 2001 highlights the fact that Uganda has a national forest cover of forests and woodlands of approximately 4.9 million hectares, covering about 24 percent of the total land area with 1.9 million hectares of this being permanent forest cover, inclusive of forest reserve land; FURTHER RECOGNISING that the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 grants the National Forestry and Tree Planting Authority powers to manage, maintain, control and grant utilisation licences over forest reserves and community forests;NOTING, HOWEVER, that the power of the authority to grant tree farming licences under the Act is limited only to the establishment of commercial forest plantations with defined tree species, which falls short of incorporating the practice of agrisilviculture; the practice that involves the growing of forest trees, commercial fruit trees, and grasses together with the same land at the same time;CONCERNED THAT the omission deprives the licensees and the country of the benefits of agrisilviculture, including the production of multiple products from the forest reserve lands such as commercial forest trees, fruits, fodder and forage needed for livestock, fuel wood, timber, leaf litter needed for organic for organic manure production, improvement and sustaining of the crop productivity, which increases the level of income of the farmers, improvement of the nutritive value of animal feed, due to the supply of green fodder, soil nutrient recycling, which helps to reduce chemical fertiliser purchase, improvement of the farm site ecology by reducing surface runoff, soil erosion and nutrient loss, galley formation and landslides, improvement of local microclimate and environment and enhancement of the productive capacity of the TRIBUTE TO UGANDA’S REPRESENTATIVES TO THE 22ND COMMONWEALTH GAMES, UK5689THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022forest and reduction of pressure on community forests;APPRECIATING the 21.5 percent and 23.7 agricultural crop contribution, to the GDP in 20 in 2017, and 2019/2020 respectively, as well as its 46 percent contribution to export earnings, and its potential to further increase export earnings and contribution to the country’ s net benefit, since nearly three quarters of Uganda’ s population is employed in agriculture; FURTHER APPRECIATING, therefore, the need to amend the Natural Forestry and Tree Planting Act to authorise the National Forestry Authority to issue licences for the practice of agrisilviculture in forest reserves and community forests; NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:1. Parliament grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled ’The National Forestry and Tree Planting (Amendment) Act.’ And the Bill is published in preparation for the first reading.” Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable member. Is the motion seconded?  It is seconded by Hon. Basalirwa, Hon. Gilbert Olanya, Hon. Christine, the Minister of State for Local Government, Hon. Atima, Hon. Kisa; the motion is seconded by several Members of the House.Honourable member, would you use three minutes to speak to your motion because the details are already captured? MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The object of the Bill is to amend the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 to empower the National Forestry Authority to grant licences for the practice of agrisilviculture from a forest reserve or community forest to provide for the right of a licence holder to use the licence as collateral in a financial institution.The National Forest and –(Interjection) – I yes, I am-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, those people you are responding to are not on record. MR MAWANDA: Yes. Mr Speaker, when it goes to the committee, I will give a clarification as to why I am coming up with this amendment.The National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 grants the National Forestry and Tree Planting Authority powers to manage, maintain, control and grant authorisation licences over forest reserves and community forests –(Interruption)MR MEDARD SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I am on record in this Parliament having stated since the Ninth Parliament that I will never oppose a Member’s right to bring a Private Member’s Bill because principally, that is the power of Parliament. Secondly, it is because we have an opportunity to discuss the content and context of the proposed Bill. My concern, however, and why I am rising up on a point of order, is where my good friend, Hon. Mawanda states - in justifying – that the purpose is to grant authority to the National Forestry Authority to allow the use of this as a title when the proposed Bill attached does not include that but instead provides that the licence shall be a document of title. The justification is luring Parliament in excitement to approve; yet, the content we are going to find in the Bill is different. Is he in order?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, whatever statement you make here now forms part of the record; not what is just written but also what you say. What you have said and what you have submitted written, is the record of this House. The reason we insist that you attach a draft of the Bill is to ensure that your submission, whether written or verbal, speaks to the draft Bill so that once we give you permission, you do not waste your time or resources to bring a Bill, which we shall push away. 5690STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTHonourable member, can you ensure that what you submit here speaks to the content of the Bill. As you can see, even if I allowed you to submit, one statement might end up making Members deny you leave. In the end, I will take their vote. Therefore, from what the Members are saying, can you either clarify or withdraw that part – honourable colleagues, I usually do not want us to be harsh to each other because in the end, it is your vote that I will record. Hon. Mawanda, can you withdraw that statement or do you think you can justify it? The seconders are allowed to help him with this. MR MAWANDA: Mr Speaker, I would like the Members not to interpret what we are trying to amend that you are going to use the land title of the forest, which will be allocated to you, as security. We are trying to – (Interjections)  – yes, there is a difference between a land title and a licence. 5.36THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (BUNYORO AFFAIRS) (MS Jennifer Namuyangu): Mr Speaker, with due respect to my colleague, Hon. Mawanda; first and foremost, in Government, we are not aware of an institution called Tree planting and National Forestry Authority. It does not exist.Secondly, the institution that we know is the National Forestry Authority. It is not in charge of the community forests but only the central forest reserves. Thirdly, the central forest reserves are held in trust by the Government for the people of Uganda. Therefore, how can one use those reserves as collateral? (Applause)Therefore, I want to propose that to save him, he should go back and write the right thing.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mawanda, do you think you can explain your point better? Let us give him a chance to explain his point; then, we have a right to either accept or reject his proposal.MR MAWANDA: Mr Speaker, we are not referring to the existing forests but those people who are going to be given licences to plant trees – (Interjections)  – in gazetted land under the –(Interruption)MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  People have been trying to de-gazette forests and this is another way they are trying to do it. One of them has been Hon. Mawanda. He came here with Bank of Uganda – (Interjections) – I am on a point of procedure. Point of order cannot be raised. Wait, you will talk later.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, do not take away my duty. Now, you are determining what applies where. That is my duty. (Laughter)MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, as Hon. Sseggona said, in this House, we encourage Members to bring Private Member’s Bills but we do not want those, which offend the Constitution, or the laws we have, that would be in bad faith. If you look through this, it is talking about giving this to somebody to take to the bank and get money. Whose land? That means that you have even offended Article 93, which does not authorise a Member to bring a Bill, which has a charge on the Consolidated Fund. The moment you use public property to get money, you have put a charge on a public asset. Therefore, is it procedurally right for Hon. Mawanda to proceed that:1. They are going to plant grass,2. They are to plant food? Should he proceed with this motion, which offends the Constitution and other laws, even the one of National Forestry and Tree Planting - section (32)?TRIBUTE TO UGANDA’S REPRESENTATIVES TO THE 22ND COMMONWEALTH GAMES, UK [The Deputy Speaker]5691THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, what is going on is that you are debating the motion. However, Hon. Mawanda, I know you usually put on many lenses. You have read the mood. From that, would you want to take any other action or should I put the question on your motion?MR MAWANDA: Mr Speaker and Members, let us request for more time to re-examine and come back with a proper document that will bring everybody on board. Thank you.5.41THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Mr Speaker, I would like to be clear on this. Our rules do not provide for “Let us go; we need more time.” At this point, Hon. Mawanda can only withdraw his request such that we do not even have intentions of considering it again.Secondly, at this point, we are looking at the principle such that if we agree with it, we can give him permission and then, the committee looks at the details. However, even on the principle, we are disagreeable. That is a problem. Honourable Mawanda, we say this with all the pain because we cannot be seen opposing a private Member, who is bringing a Bill. Really, we cannot but this particular one, where is the mischief that you want to cure? We do not see it. Mr Speaker, this country is over-regulating; everything is law, law. We can have a policy without having a law in place because once you put it as a law, then you cast it in stone, and for you to change it, you have to come to Parliament to amend it. Whatever you are saying, I have problems with consenting that it should leave this stage even to go to a committee or even for him to consider it again. I really request Hon. Mawanda, our good friend, to just withdraw this motion because it does not make sense at all. Hon. Mawanda, please. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mawanda, everyone is saying they are your good friends. So, would you like to listen to the advice of your good friends? I do not know where you met them. MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Looking at the moods in the House, I take this opportunity to withdraw this Bill. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. We have allowed the honourable member to withdraw. Let us go to the next item.MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO CONSIDER PRIORITISING AND PROMOTING UGANDA’S EDUCATION SERVICES AS A PRIORITY EXPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Michael Timuzigu, can you present your motion?5.45MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging the Government of Uganda to consider prioritising and promoting Uganda’s education service as a priority export. The motion reads thus:  “WHEREAS the education system in Uganda is organised and regulated pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995; the Education Act, 2008; the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001; the Business, Technical, Vocational Education and Training Act, 2001; the National Curriculum Development Centre Act, Cap.135; and the Uganda National Examinations Board Act, Cap 137;AND WHEREAS the laws regulating the provision of education in Uganda are supplemented by various Government policies, statutory instruments, directives and circulars;5692STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTRECALLING THAT in 1993, the Government liberalised the education sector, resulting in the establishment of both Government and private education institutions at all levels of education in Uganda;AWARE THAT currently, in Uganda, there are 282 registered institutions of higher learning, which include private and public universities and tertiary institutions, which provide post-secondary education offering courses of study leading to the award of certificates, diplomas, degrees, and conducting research and publishing and that 92 per cent of all parishes in Uganda now have a Government-aided primary school, while 71 per cent of all subcounties have a Government-aided secondary school;NOTING THAT Uganda’ s education system has been recognised as one of the very best in the world, and some of its education institutions, such as Makerere University, are ranked as some of the best in the world and are recognised by international bodies such as the Council of International Schools, as producing students with knowledge, skills and abilities to pursue their lives as global citizens;CONCERNED THAT whereas Uganda possesses high-quality education…”THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, can we have order in the House? Hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Mawanda went out.MR TIMUZIGU: Mr Speaker, I beg that you to protect me from Members because this motion is very important for this country.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are protected. MR TIMUZIGU: “…CONCERNED THAT whereas Uganda processes high-quality education institutions and has at all the levels of education, education institutions offering high-quality education as well as international education curricula, which attracts students from outside Uganda, the Government has not harnessed Uganda’ s comparative advantages to position Uganda as an attractive study destination for students from around the world;FURTHER CONCERNED that Uganda earned $ 30.7 million from international students in the year 2006/2007 - the earnings from international students have declined due to a reduction in the number of foreign students enrolled in universities in Uganda;RECOGNISING THAT Uganda’ s education system has comparative advantages over other education systems in attracting international students due to the existence of high-quality education institutions, low tuition fees charged to international students, diversity of courses offered by universities in Uganda, Uganda’ s modest cost of living, relative safety and use of English as a medium of instruction in all education  institutions;FIRMLY CONVINCED THAT there is need for the Government to harness Uganda’ s education potential by designating education as an export service and making it a priority by providing the competitiveness of the education sector to attract international students;COGNISANT THAT since 2007, Uganda’ s national export strategies have consistently identified educational services as a priority export sector;NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government formulates policies and strategies to promote Uganda’ s education services as an export in order to realise the full potential of Uganda’ s education sector.”Mr Speaker, I beg to move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? [Members rose_] Hon. Nsaba Buturo, Hon. Godfrey Okello, Hon. Patrick Oshabe, Hon. Julius and Dr Abed Bwanika. We have time to debate. Honourable, use two minutes because I can see Members are tired; they might end up charging towards –(Laughter) [Mr Timuzigu] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION5693THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022MR TIMUZIGU: It might not be easy to understand this motion but I am a member of the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us listen to the Member. He is justifying.MR TIMUZIGU: At the moment, Uganda is facing challenges of debt-to-GDP ratio. Our debt is too high; our income is limited because we export less and import too much. Education can be exported. United Kingdom is getting a lot of money from exporting education. A few years ago, they got money worth our GDP, from education. We can position education in Uganda as an export service and earn more foreign exchange. We have an advantage of cheap food. Of course, the cost of living in Uganda is cheaper than in Europe. Therefore, we can position education as our export and export it to East Africa, the rest of Africa and Europe. Secondly, our universities are highly ranked. Recently, Makerere University was ranked amongst the best universities in the world. Last year, the Vice-Chancellor of Makerere University was ranked the Educationist of the Year in Africa, which means Africans trust Uganda as a source of education. Another issue we must consider is that our population is growing and so, we must have income to cater for that population. A few days ago, we were talking about exporting labour, which is not well educated. As we standardise our education, preparing to serve the rest of the world, our people will get better education and we shall have no challenges of exporting labour, which is not educated. So, we shall take that advantage. I beg to move. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Nsaba Buturo –(Member rose_) Let us first listen to the seconders  and then, I will allow you.    5.55DR JAMES NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, there is indeed a very strong case for Uganda to designate education as an export service. As a matter of fact -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you get closer to the microphone, honourable colleague, so that you can be more audible.  DR BUTURO: As a matter of fact, Mr Speaker, education is, indeed, a cash cow and Uganda enjoys unrivalled position and comparative advantage over other countries in the region. Nations like United Kingdom, United States, Australia, Canada and New Zealand make considerable amounts of money from education. It is essential that we also capitalise on this advantage that we have in the region. May I also say, Mr Speaker, that in 2021, United Kingdom made a gross-added value from education of £110 billion, which was a rise from £97 billion the previous year. In United States of America, higher education is a major American export. In Australia, it is the same story. In fact, in Australia, education is the country’s third biggest export and Uganda can make much strides as far as generating revenue; revenue that we can plow back into education and other areas are concerned.Mr Speaker, there are particular areas, on which exporting education would put emphasis,  such as consultation services, education services and attraction of students from other countries coming to this country. I urge honourable members to support this motion – (Member timed out.)    THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Geofrey Okello, you have two minutes.5.57MR GEOFREY OKELLO (DP, Nwoya East County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion for a resolution of 5694STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTParliament urging Government to consider prioritising and promoting education as a service for export. Mr Speaker, education is a service, which has a lot of renewable resources. At the time when the world is struggling with dwindling resources, it is worthwhile to invest in education with more of renewable resources. Uganda is moving slowly on this path, and surely, we are moving. Hon. Timuzigu has already mentioned that a number of countries in this world are benefiting from education service as export. Some universities in the United States of America have their turnover more than the GDP of Uganda. When Hon. Timuzigu brings this motion to this House, it is good to think twice; to think deeply and understand this concept. In the academic year 2020/2021, US, for example, earned $38.9 billion from educational export. It hosted one million students and from that, created 415,000 well-paying jobs. It is this kind –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable. Please, switch on the microphone. MR GEOFREY OKELLO:  Can I conclude, Mr Speaker? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, colleagues, let us respect others when they are on the Floor. MR GEOFREY OKELLO:  The pillar of this motion would be our curriculum. That would then improve the professionalism of our teachers and bring us in tandem with the modern technologies so that the country acquires skills that can be sold to consume the modern technology world over, with which we can earn a lot of money just like Malaysia and Indonesia did. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Agnes Apea? 6.00MS AGNES APEA (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion. If you talk about the export, you need to tell us the product that you want to promote. And when you talk about that product, then show us the market. But when you come here and tell us “Education for export”, I am thinking - okay. Right now, we are sending our girls to Saudi Arabia.  (Interjections)  The motion would have been specific and you tell us that instead of sending our unskilled girls to Saudi Arabia, we are going to invest, for example, in hospitality so that we send them to Saudi Arabia with skills.  However, when the motion is generalised, it leaves us with a lot of unanswered questions.I think the motion comes in good faith but is not specific. Therefore, I would advise that the mover of the motion goes back and tells us specifically what skills we have, where the market is and how we should invest to improve on those skills. Thank you very much. (Applause)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The motion is assigning someone else the duty to go and get those details because it is saying: “… Government formulates policies and strategies to promote Uganda‘s education services as an export.” Honourable member, If you had framed it well that “education can be a foreign exchange earner for Uganda” – so that we do A, B, C and D to attract foreign students into Uganda, I think it would have been much easier for colleagues. You cannot use an excuse of time because you drafted your motion and read it – and I did not interfere.6.02MS LILLIAN PAPARU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion but I have concerns with it.  I want to understand: [Mr Okello] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION5695THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022what is that surplus that we have? In Uganda, now, you cannot even say that we have teachers in surplus. If we are to look at the teacher-pupil ratio – if we had the money to employ all our teachers, nurses and doctors, the numbers would not even be enough. The statistics here – when they talk of the UK and US, I would like us to look at Congo and maybe Kenya. If they have ever exported, we could borrow. (Laughter) I am a bit concerned. As the previous colleague said, probably, if there is anything unique that they want us to export, it would be the girls whom we are exporting very cheaply and they are not even trained. I do not see any surplus skill in this country. Thank you.6.03MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like you alluded to it earlier on, there is need for the mover of the motion to look at the title. When you look at exporting services in education, there is need for us to be informed more. Education is one of the key sectors in this country and we do not need to rush with motions that are not clear.There is something to be done about skilling first, before we consider exportation. When you look at the case studies that the mover of the motion was talking about, I would have loved to have  a report of a study done by a section of the legislators from Uganda so that as he presents this motion, we have a backing to that effect. I, therefore, plead with you, Mr Speaker, that the mover of the motion needs to do something more.6.04MR JOSEPH BYAMUKAMA NULU (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): I thank you, Mr Speaker. The mover of the motion, possibly, thought that we have a product. If you have to export a product, you must have a patent for that product. What is he talking about, exactly? Our education system is also imported and has patent elsewhere. So, what are you going to export? (Laughter) Yes, I take the information - (Interruption)MR ALERO: Thank you for giving me way. The honourable member wants us to make the whole process legal in the sense that there are many teachers who are going to Rwanda to teach English. There are many teachers who have gone to South Sudan to teach in various schools. I think he wants us to legalise the whole process.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it illegal to go and teach in South Sudan or Rwanda?MR ALERO: It is not illegal but he wants to make it formal. That is his intention. There are many teachers who are in Rwanda right now teaching English. 6.06MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I agree with you that the framer of the motion did not house it very well. Maybe, the intention did not match the technical capability to frame a good motion for us.However, honourable colleagues, we must know where we are coming from. A few years ago, Uganda, in the region, was the best country in terms of attracting students to come and study here – whether in private or Government institutions. Today, I am aware that the very affluent members of this country are taking their children to Nairobi to attend even preprimary and primary education. In the Great Lakes Region, our advantage of being fluent in English, alone, would be able to attract students from South Sudan without a doubt. If we did our homework, we would be able to attract students from eastern Congo; even Rwanda and Burundi would come here. However, there is homework to do, which is the prayer of the motion. The homework is on how to make our country very attractive in terms of what we give out as our educational product. For us to do so, there is a lot more that we need to do to re-gain our 5696STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTadvantage. We are talking of thinking outside the box. Economies are running away from bananas, tobacco, copper and oil to become more service and technology-oriented. That is where the future is. Countries that are going to match that need and define it will have a better stand in future.However, I agree with the Speaker that the framer of the motion did not properly house it for us to have an informed debate. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.6.09MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I appreciate the desire the movers of this motion have. Unfortunately, they should have sought guidance on how to move a motion. First of all, we should have been told where the gaps were. In the existing laws, procedures and policies, where are the gaps, which we are trying to cure by this resolution? (Applause) Secondly, we need to understand the meaning of “export”. What is export? In my simplistic understanding, “export” is for me to sell something that I have in excess and then, I use that money to bring something in. What is it that we have in excess in Uganda, in terms of education, that we can give out in order for us to get something good out of it? This motion does not answer that. Finally, Mr Speaker, I fear that we may be dramatising some of our roles. We see that there is a gap and then, we want to run there. Can we bring a law? (Laughter) We are doing our best and that is really our role but at the same time, I believe that the education system we have now -(Member timed out.) I think we should be properly guided.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. People, you are repeating the same words. Let us listen to the Member who has been listening to us.MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I understand the mood of the House. Maybe the word was not appropriate. Secondly, my information to the legal department was “positioning” education as our export, which means we have to prepare ourselves to position but now, when the word became “prioritising”, I think the problem came from there. So, Mr Speaker, I beg through you that this House gives us another opportunity to present this motion.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Hon. Katuntu had already guided, if you were in the House. You either withdraw it or I put a vote on it.MR TIMUZIGU: In that case, I beg to withdraw this motion and you allow us a chance to reschedule.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have withdrawn. Getting another opportunity is not an issue for this House; it is an issue with the presiding officer. Honourable member, we do not want to coerce you into anything; what do you want to do?MR TIMUZIGU: Mr Speaker, if the withdrawal of this motion will kill the spirit of the motion itself, I beg that you put a question and it remains a record of Parliament.THE SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I now put the question for a resolution of Parliament, urging Government to consider prioritising and promoting Uganda’s education services as a priority export. (Question put and negatived.)THE SPEAKER: Colleagues, I have received a communication from the Clerk that at the close of the two days, which had been scheduled for East African Legislative Assembly aspirants to present their papers, he is happy to inform the House that 28 aspirants have presented their papers.[Mr Muwanga Kivumbi] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION5697THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 20 SEPTEMBER 2022The committee is going to begin their verification tomorrow 21st of September. We shall keep the House updated. I hereby adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 6.14 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21st September 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 