

Tuesday, 12 September 2017

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

1. Ms Rose Lilly Akello.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I welcome you, hon. Rose Lilly Akello, to Parliament and congratulate you upon being sent back by the people of Kaabong to come and represent them.

You have been here before and so, you know the rules of engagement, what to do and what not to do. Therefore, I am going to give you copies of some books; a copy of our Rules of Procedure as updated. This will help you to continue doing things that you have already been doing before and a copy of the Constitution.

You have just taken oath to confirm that whatever you agree in doing here must fall within the four corners of that Constitution. 

We also have a Member’s Directory to help you know the Members who are in this Parliament. I am not sure whether you are in that book but we will find ways of updating it so that you are accommodated.

You are welcome again. Please, take a seat. Thank you. (Applause)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome all of you to this sitting and I welcome the honourable member for Kaabong again for having been brought back by the people of Kaabong. 

Last week, I communicated here the loss of a senior citizen Justus Byabazaire. It is sad indeed that yesterday, another senior citizen the hon. Kitata Gaweera, former Member of the National Assembly of the Fourth Parliament from 1980 to 1985 and a delegate to the Constituent Assembly for Mukono North County, which is formerly of Mukono District passed on.

Hon. Kitata Gaweera served the nation in various capacities including serving in boards of parastatals like the defunct Uganda Coffee Marketing Board and just in the recent past, he served as a Resident District Commissioner.

His services to the nation will be greatly missed. On behalf of the Parliament, I wish to convey our sincere condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the nation at large.

We also received a communication to the same effect from the Prime Minister Mr Senkatuka Martin of Bukama bwa Bunyala making the same announcement about the death of hon. Kitata Gaweera Mukumbe. I do not know whether that is a nickname.

This has happened honourable members, may we rise for a moment of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated last week, I would like to remind you that we will join other nations to celebrate the International Day of Democracy on the 14th September at 10.00 a.m. in the Parliamentary Conference Hall. A public lecture to which various dignitaries have been invited will be conducted. Parliament during the same function will commemorate the 60 years of the entry and participation of women in politics in Uganda and will honour hon. Florence Alice Lubega, the first Ugandan lady to sit in the Legislative Council. Therefore, I invite you to be there.     

This evening, a talk show will be hosted on Radio One Spectrum programme running from 7.00p.m. to 8.00p.m. on the theme “Democracy and Conflict Prevention.” Honourable members, I urge you to listen to this programme as Parliament will be represented by a panellist. 

I also request you to turn up in large numbers this Thursday 14th September, as we celebrate the International Day of Democracy. In order to give this day the recognition it deserves, I am directing that all committees on that day should not sit and any prior meetings that have already been arranged should be cancelled and rescheduled for another day. Let us respect this day and give it our full participation so that we can deal with this matter and give it the right recognition. I so direct the chairpersons and clerks to note and take action on these. 

Honourable members, every year, for a long time now, this Parliament has hosted the National Prayer Breakfast. Therefore, this is to inform you that the National Prayer Breakfast will be held on 8 October 2017 – this is done every year on 8th October. The Chief Guest is His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda. The host is Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, the Speaker of Parliament; the keynote speaker will be Pastor Engineer Dr Toluhi Olusegun Ayobami, Institute of National Transformation, Nigeria. The theme is: “As for me and my household, we shall serve the Lord”.

Please, confirm the attendance by the 15th September to enable us prepare for you by filling a form on the table near the pigeon holes or by sending an email to info@ugandaprayerbreakfast.com. You can also text to mobile No. 0775 412558. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

ON THE PROGRESS OF REGISTRATION OF LEARNERS AS RAISED IN PARLIAMENT ON 13 JULY 2017 

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Mr Speaker, last week my senior, the Minister of Internal Affairs did inform the House that he was consulting on this statement with the Minister of Education and we will be ready to give it in the course of the week. However, I have not got the exact date when he will do it but the consultations are still going on. 

I, therefore, request that we stay over that item until he is able to give notice. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yesterday, the minister talked to me in the office; he said that they need to consult with the Minister of Education who has now said, he should be the one to make the statement and he will come to give a full statement on the matter that has been raised.    


MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON RESPONSE TO A QUESTION CONCERNING THE BRIDGE CONNECTING BULAMBULI TO NAKAPIRIPIRIT

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Mr Speaker, this statement is in response to a matter raised by hon. Alex Burundo, MP Bulambuli County, Bulambuli District. The bridge referred to in the question is called Cheptui bridge on Muyembe-Nakapiripirit road. The bridge is located along Cheptui River in Bwikhongi sub-county in Bulambuli District.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport is aware of the state of the bridge and has been working tirelessly taking all necessary steps to address the situation. For the interest of the House, I would like to give you a brief highlight of the steps that have been undertaken to address this matter.

In 2007, the main bridge collapsed due to settlement of the foundation. The Ministry of Works and Transport constructed another bridge as an intervention to restore connectivity on the corridor. On 9 July 2017, the deck slab of the temporary bridge was punched through by heavily loaded trucks carrying marble from Karamoja. This was the second time the overloaded trucks are causing damage to this bridge.

As a short term measure, UNRA Mbale station procured materials and commenced bridge repairs on the 20 July 2017. We expected it to have been completed by end of August 2017. Indeed, by the 18 August 2017, the temporary bridge was completed and opened to traffic.

The permanent structure will be constructed under the project for civil works for upgrading Muyembe-Nakapiripirit road being financed by the Islamic Development Bank (IDB). The bank has already issued a no objection to the civil works contractors and the list we gave them on 13 July 2017. We are now in the bidding process for this project.

Another matter, which was also raised was the verification for compensation of project affected persons, this process is ongoing and UNRA land acquisition team is on ground carrying out verification and disclosure of the 85 project affected persons. This is going on up to date. After that evaluation report will be given and payment to the project affected persons will be made during the first week of September. However, a supplementary evaluation report comprising of 332 project affected persons was also prepared capturing cases of omission. The report will be submitted to the chief Government valuer for subsequent review and approval within this month.

To address the issue of the overloaded trucks, UNRA is planning to employ mobile weighbridges to apprehend the overloaded trucks, which routinely damage the bridge. In the meantime, UNRA has advised all trucks carrying marble stones to use option roads, which also is still facing challenges which is the Moroto-Soroti road.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit the report as it was required.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, as I keep saying, these are not typical ministerial statements anticipated under our rule 43, which would attract a debate of an hour. This is the minister’s statement in response to a question. So, I would like to treat it that way because ordinarily, this should have come as a question for oral answer. Therefore, we will treat it as a specific question to which the minister has responded. I will ask the Member who raised this question, is there any supplementary question? 

2.26
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Like the minister has stated, in 2007, that bridge was washed away by the heavy rains. To cut the story short, a temporary bridge was constructed but 10 years down the road, it has still remained temporary. I am happy that that temporary bridge also collapsed so that they can construct a permanent one. (Laughter) This is because “temporary” means temporary but now it is becoming - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Supplementary question. 

MR BURUNDO: The supplementary question I would like to put across is that Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) repaired the bridge. However, a few days ago, I convinced the committee and it went on the ground. As I talk now, the bridge is on the verge of collapsing again because of the heavy trucks that are ferrying marble from Amudat to Tororo Cement Factory. My argument and prayer was that they stop those heavy trucks that are ferrying marble from Nakapiripirit as we await the construction of the permanent bridge - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Supplementary question. 

MR BURUNDO: The supplementary question I would like to ask the minister is that when are you going to construct a permanent bridge to help the districts of Amudat, Nakapiripirit, Moroto, Kween and my two sub counties? I have now been cut off because they are not listening to me. They are now part of Nakapiripirit- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought that was in the minister’s statement. 

MR BURUNDO: I would like the minister to help me. Finally, up to now, my people have not accessed the compensation. So, when are they exactly getting this money because it is long overdue? They have waited and some of them have died. Thank you very much. 

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think I have alluded to what we are going to do permanently on that road. The bidding process has started and we are going to have a bigger project where the permanent bridge will be constructed. 

As regards to the payments to project affected persons, of course, in the first quarter, we did not get a substantial amount of money. Nevertheless, we also had to do a verification to ensure that the right people are being paid. That is on-going and I can assure the honourable Member of Parliament that starting with the second quarter, we shall start paying those people who will have been verified as the rightful persons affected by the project.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Testimony Christian Primary School represented by hon. Sam Mangusho and hon. Rukiya Chekamondo Kulany from Kapchorwa District. They have come to observe the proceedings. So, please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause) 

We also have pupils and teachers from a school in Lira District in Erute represented by hon. Jonathan Odur and hon. Atim Joy Ongom. They have come to observe the proceedings. So, please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

In the gallery, this afternoon, we also have a delegation of staff from the Hansard Department of the Parliament of Ghana. They include Ms Ruth Efua Gaisie, Mr Peter Apenkwa and Mr Harrison Ashong. Join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. Thank you. (Applause) 

STATEMENT ON A PETITION BY THE PERSONS AFFECTED BY THE PROJECT OF THE OLWIYO–KITGUM-MUSINGO ROAD

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think we received notification from the Members who raised this matter. Are you ready to proceed because they were meeting people in Gulu or something like that? Since the minister is ready with the response, please, proceed. 

2.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This statement is presented as a response to a petition brought to this august House by the district Woman Representative, Kitgum District. The petition contained the complaints of the Project Affected Persons (PAPs) of Olwiyo-Kitgum-Musingo Road. 

Mr Speaker, you directed that the Minister of Works and Transport finds out the authenticity of the complaints and reports back to this House.

About the project

The location of the road project is in northern Uganda. It crosses the districts of Pader in the south, Kitgum and then Lamwo in the north. The road starts at Acholibur about 700 metres before the Gulu Road junction along lira road towards Kitgum and passes Kitgum town at 18 kilometres and then follows the north eastern direction to Musingo on the border of South Sudan. 

As you continue towards Musingo, you pass through other important towns and trading centres of Mucwini, which is located At 40 kilometres, Madi Opei located at 62 kilometres and other small trading centres. 

What were the issues of concern which were raised by the petitioner? Mr Speaker, your petitioners raised the following issues of concern which required action and redress:

    i) Re-verification and revaluation of land and property of the affected persons should be carried out afresh in the presence of the land/property owners and compensation rates computed systematically and fairly.

    ii) Payment of compensation for land should be segmented according to the location of the area, instead of classifying it all as a flat customary land. For example, land within the municipal council, land within township or trading centres and community land along the road should be given specific rates of payment. 

    iii) Titled land should attract a higher compensation rate than untitled land and land within trading centres should attract a higher compensation rate than customary land along the road. 

    iv) Payment of compensation to none affected persons in Paibwo parish in Labongo Layamo Sub-county and payment to non-existing fuel filling stations In Mucwini Sub-county both in Kitgum District should be investigated and corrected. 

    v) Persons who are affected by electricity and water lines should be urgently compensated and relocated on the risk they are currently faced with. 

    vi) UNRA should establish the list and rights of compensation of all affected persons for them to study and be able to raise concerns if any, before subjecting them to signing of forms and vouchers.

    vii) Access roads leading to quarrying sites should be compensated by the contracting company.

    viii) An explanation should be given to the affected persons and people of Uganda on why the size of the roads within the town councils and municipality was being reduced from 30 metres to 23 and 25 metres and in some cases 23 meters, like in the case of Camu-camu Cell, along Badege Road in Kitgum Municipality and Madupe Township, in Lamwo.

The other petition was that the affected persons would like to know why ghost names or persons who are not residents of the project are appearing on the compensation documents, yet they are not affected by the road project. The affected persons also would like persons whose land and property were marked for destruction in the road project to be compensated for loss of time and business, since the road has shifted to the opposite direction.

Another petition was that land or buildings, which have been affected by the road project should be fully and adequately compensated, instead of paying for only part of it. This will enable the affected persons to settle fully in the new place. 

The other petition was that the affected persons who were made to sign forms and payments vouchers before being given an opportunity to study and understand the documents should be allowed to raise their dissatisfaction and objection if there are any without any form of suppression. 

Another petition was that the Katuramu Company, which was the consultant should prevail over its staff for being arrogant and rude to the affected persons or else UNRA should identify another service provider in order to handle the remaining compensation.

The last petition was that UNRA should improve on information sharing and regular communication with the PAPs and other stakeholders in order to build and improve the level of trust and confidence for the community of the project affected persons instead of concealing information on the compensation process from the affected persons. 

Mr Speaker, these petitions are not only unique to these projects. These are the commonest things we find in most of the projects. I hope that the responses, which I am going to give in this petition, will also suffice on the other projects.

Response to the petitioners:

Mr Speaker, the concerns of the petitioners were mainly on compensation and sharing of information with relevant stakeholders, and the response is as follows:
 
1)	On the 13 June 2017, myself accompanied by the Executive Director of UNRA, together with the technical team travelled and met the PAPs in different places in the districts of Pader, Lamwo and Kitgum to find out what exactly was on the ground. The local leaders from LC I and the Members of Parliament also attended some of the meetings. The venues for the meetings included Ongom Centre, Okia Centre and Kitgum District Headquarters, where the majority of the PAPs assembled. 

The delegation also made spot checks on certain properties of the PAPs to fully understand the situation. In all the meeting places, questions were asked by the PAPs or their representatives and were answered by the members of the delegation. Mr Speaker, with your permission, I would like to sample some of the questions, which were asked and the answers provided. 

    i) Why has it taken too long to compensate all the PAPs? The reason was, as I said before, we lacked funds but we promised that starting with this financial year, the money has been included in the budget and according to releases, the affected persons will be paid.

    ii) What is the timeframe for compensating the PAPs that have not been compensated yet? Again like I have said before, we expect that most of the payment will start being effected with the release of the second quarter.

    iii) Who is responsible for the bank charges levied on PAPs upon opening bank accounts, and yet compensation takes too long to be affected? The concern is appreciated but the PAPs were advised not to open bank accounts until they are told to do so. 

    iv) Why doesn’t the contractor make roads to public places such as health centres, schools and trading centres? The response is that the design of the road project did not include roads or access roads to public places but at the completion of the project, the local leaders were encouraged, together with UNRA, working with the contractor and through the corporate social responsibility to make the contractor make some access roads to the public places like health centres and schools.

    v) The other question was what was going to happen to PAPs whose names were misspelt? Those with minor spelling errors were encouraged to fill a form, changing the name, which was to be signed by the sub-county chief, but those with gross spelling errors were advised to make statutory declarations and swear an affidavit so that they can change the names.

    vi) Why should a finished house be valued less than a semi-finished house whose construction is at ring beam? This was something accosted and the UNRA team was directed to carry out re-valuation of such properties.

    vii) Is it possible for the PAP to be compensated for only the part of the building, which needs to be broken instead of the whole housing unit? We found in some cases where the road was starting in half the building and the question was, should they only compensate only the half, which is taken by the road or the whole house? When part of the building is affected, then the whole building should be compensated. It cannot be half way.

    viii) Why are institutions affected by the project, such as schools and health centres not yet compensated? This was because the issue of ownership was a big problem. For instance, a school or hospital may have more than one contending owner, such as the founding religious body, the relevant ministry or the land lord who donated the land on which the institution is built. So, compensation cannot take place until this matter has been sorted out.

    ix) How can illegal “ghost” PAPs be avoided? The answer is that a list of all PAPs to be compensated will be availed to the local leaders, minus the amount of money to be paid for purposes of security and “ghost” PAPs will be identified by the community.

    x) Why is some land valued higher than another, which is of the same size and in the same locality? The answer is that where there is more development, that land will be valued higher than where there is less or no development.

    xi) What will be done on some stretches of the road where shoddy work has been done? The response is that Government will not take over the road until it has ascertained good and quality work and also ensured that there is value for money.

    xii) Some of the utilities like boreholes were relocated to places where there is no water. We ordered that these boreholes be taken to other places where the water level is suitable so that the communities can access the water.

    xiii) What should PAPs who have settled their disputes on the ownership of land do? The concerned parties should write to UNRA. This was because we found that in some cases you find that on one piece of land, a father built a house and also a son and grandson also built on the same piece of land. When it comes to compensation, who takes the money? Is the father or the son or the grandson? In such situations, we tell the families to sit down and agree and once they have agreed and the local administration says that they have agreed, then we write giving the instructions to UNRA, informing them where money should be directed. 

    xiv) What should be done to the water channels that have been dug by the contractor and they are channeling flood water into people’s residences? The contractor was instructed to rectify this problem.

    xv) The last question was asking why there was reduction of road size in some areas? During the development of these road networks, consideration is made of the developments existing in some of the areas and are taken into consideration especially in some of the urbanised centres. For example, you may find that if we maintain the road size uniformly from the countryside all through to the trading centres, then, we may have to erase 100 per cent of the trading centres. 

That does not only attract high compensation but also what damage will you have done to the development of that community? Therefore, there is that consideration that after all the speed within the trading centre and town council will not be as high. So, we can reduce the size of the road, save the development but still be able to get - instead of wasting a lot of money but also disenfranchising the community who must have invested a lot in their buildings.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker, I am glad to report that in all meetings held, the PAPs expressed satisfaction with the answers given to them in response to the questions raised.

The Ministry of Works and Transport appreciates the cooperation with the PAPs and the local leaders for having allowed the project to proceed even before they were fully compensated; this showed a lot of patriotism.

As ministry of works, we thank the local leadership in Kitgum and Lamwo for mobilising the community to attend all the meetings and working with UNRA and the contractors for the progress of the construction works.

I would like to assure the House that Ministry of Works and Transport is committed to fulfilling its constitutional obligations to serve Ugandans and spearhead Uganda socio-economic transformation.

I appeal to the community to take advantage of the project and persuade the local youth to be employed in the available project jobs, particularly, those that do not require a lot of technical knowhow so that they can earn a living.

As a ministry, we acknowledge that UNRA is undergoing changes for better service delivery and one of the actions being undertaken include bridging the communication gap between UNRA and the population through the client care desk, grievance management committees and working closely with the local leaders.

Therefore, all PAPs with grievances should be expeditiously handled and the right value for the right people should be paid. The Government is committed to pay all, given that some have already been paid.  Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for responding to this petition. Honourable members, you now see that there is some value in sometimes referring these petitions directly to the implementing agencies and ministries so that they can handle them directly. This was one such petition that was referred to the minister directly and I am sure you have listened to him and it is clearer what the issues were.

This is a report on a petition, we can have a short debate on the report on a petition and where necessary a decision can be taken. However, if we are satisfied with what the minister has said, then we can proceed with it that way.

However, let me first recognise in the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have hon. Francis Okwameri District Speaker and the Clerk to Council from Katakwi District. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

2.50
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the minister for having committed to informing and making sure that the lost spirit of the people of Kitgum on Musingo road was rebuilt.

It is true that we went with a very big team together with the Members of Parliament. I was there with him and other colleagues from Lamwo and this is exactly what we have.

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that I trust in the minister and I know what he has said here shall be done for my people because their only prayer is that they should be paid. He also gave them some hope especially those people whose buildings were compensated halfway.

However, the only issue still at hand is the said house that is in Payibo, which was compensated Shs 238 million and yet the house is supposed to be knocked down but up to now, it still exists.

I would also want to get information so that I take it to my people on the “ghost” fuel station, which was compensated because there was no clear information, which was given either by the minister or even by the Executive Director of UNRA.

However, I would wish to appreciate the work done. My people have also sent their greetings especially to Parliament of Uganda for having moved to this level. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, do you want to respond to those specific issues?

GEN. KATUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question of the house, which we saw with the honourable Member of Parliament and also the issue of the “ghost” fueling stations, these are matters under investigations and once we get to the bottom of that then we will be able to bring the response on the Floor.

2.52
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement. I would wish to bring to the attention of the minister that when I read through the petition, there are a number of issues that were raised by the petitioner and this statement has clearly avoided giving answers to those, one of those my sister has raised. 

However, the most important thing that I would like to bring to the attention of the minister - this land compensation issue is not specific to this area. Almost everywhere else, you find that all roads that are being done, there must be compensation. We are aware that Government gazettes some of these roads and when you move on those roads, you can clearly see that there are road reserves because electricity and water lines pass there. However, almost every sector is compensating.

We had made a proposal and this is what I had wanted the minister to respond to. Is it in your thinking that when we are acquiring land, we should work together with the Ministry of Energy, that of water to ensure that the same piece of land that we acquire road reserve are protected so that we do not have to compensate  every time? This is being done each time and you can see that there is some connivance, taking place within these ministries to compensate for the same piece of land. I thank you.

GEN. KATUMBA:  Thank you, hon. Odur. This is a matter, which is already under the Prime Minister’s Office and I am very much aware because we have set up a committee, which my ministry is chairing. When acquiring land, all utilities must be catered for instead of each one acquiring land on its own. Therefore, in future, all projects where land is going to be acquired, the provisions for utilities will be incorporated to avoid these piecemeal acquisitions.

2.55 
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi Couty, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for the response. There is this question of road reserves versus the problem of compensation for property including land of people along the roads. You ably said here that much as the petition was about a specific road, the experiences got from there are also applicable elsewhere.

Therefore, I would like you to help us here and particularly UNRA. Where does the road reserve stop, where the compensated land in terms of dimensions start from? So that these things which we are talking about here do not also affect the lower local governments because roads are also managed by other entities such as the districts and sub-counties and they may not have the capacity to do the same kind of compensation like UNRA in this kind of national roads. Compensation is good for the people who are affected but in some cases it brings a lot of problems to the development of infrastructure such as roads in district and sub county local governments where they do not have funds to compensate, yet the roads have to pass.

Secondly, how does UNRA coordinate with other service providers such as national water or rural water supply managers and rural electrification programme? In west Nile, we have West Nile Rural Electrification Company (WENRECO) which is different from the one at the national level. We also have rural water supply. For the sake of Obongi Town Council, there was a quarrel between those who managed the water and UNRA because UNRA cut their water pipes. Instead of connecting or compensating, UNRA was telling those people of water, “You have built your water pipelines in our reserves”. 

Therefore, where is the distinction between the reserve, which is meant for UNRA and the one which is meant for other service providers such as national water? Who accounts for the cutting of the water? Mr Speaker, I was made to pay money to reconnect water, which was not cut by the Member of Parliament. It was cut by UNRA, the complainant was the department of water and a Member of Parliament was the one charged. Who will pay my money? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we are closing this now. Honourable minister, please, let us close.

GEN. WAMALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I can assure the House that my ministry will soon bring to this House the road Bill which will, in detail, define what the road reserve is and the dimensions. I think at that point we shall get a clear definition of what the road reserve is. However, talking specifically about this issue of UNRA cutting the pipes for the other service providers, maybe it is a question of communication because the utilities are supposed to pass through the road reserves. I think it was the act of an individual but not a principle with UNRA. My apologies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, the rules require us to report to the petitioners about the decision that has been taken. Please, extract the record of the response to this petition and submit to the petitioners. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INVESTIGATE THE EVICTION AND DISPLACEMENT OF SMALL SCALE/ARTISANAL MINERS IN MUBENDE DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This petition was presented last week on Thursday and debated but no decision was taken because there was a request from the minister to consult during the course of the weekend so that today the House can be briefed on how we are going to handle this matter and shape our decision. Let us have the minister and I will ask the petitioner to proceed.

3.00
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, indeed, following that request, consultations were made and the meeting was held in Mubende with the honourable members of Parliament from Mubende District and H.E the President, out of which discussions were held and we agreed on a number of issues regarding the matters that had been raised in that motion to do with the eviction which Government had undertaken so that the environment is restored and re-organised in the area.

The issue of returning the licensed artisanal small-scale miners was discussed. As I reported last Thursday, out of the five artisanal small-scale miners associations that had been formed, three of them had location licences given and two are waiting. It was agreed that the ministry, after the restoration of the area, we have a map and clear demarcation of at least five square kilometres for the artisanal small-scale miners operations outside the licensed targets. 

Of course, for those who already have licences, those areas are going to be clearly demarcated and within two months they should be able to go back and carry out their activities. For the other two associations that had not been licensed, the licensee who is already having that area for gold explorations has accepted to give more land so that those two associations can be settled to enable them carry out their activities in a legally regulated manner. 

We also agreed that the businesses and services to the mining activities be located at the trading centres and not at the mine sites for proper regulations.

On the issue of other illegal miners who had flooded the area, they were advised to go back to their home areas and wait for the specific time when the mining sites have been allocated to the small-scale miners for them to return and carry out their activities.

On the part of the Government in reviewing the mineral policy and mining Act, we pledge that by the end of this month, we will submit to Cabinet a draft revised mineral policy which policy is going to provide for the small-scale artisanal mining activities. In addition, the principles to be embedded in the mining Act (Amendment) Bill will also be presented to Cabinet after which the process of preparing an amendment Bill to be brought on the Floor of Parliament for enactment and, therefore, amending the mining Act to overcome the gaps that are in there will be carried out. 

All this is being done to ensure that there is peaceful coexistence between artisanal small-scale miners and the large-scale miners. It is also being done in the spirit that we need to have the activities regularised. We need them to be carried out in a legal manner so that the Government of Uganda does not lose out on revenue but also ensure that our people are empowered to participate legally in the mining sector.

Mr Speaker, in summary, that is what we agreed upon. I would like to assure this august House that the Government of Uganda is committed to the organisation of the artisanal and small-scale miners into viable and sustainable sector. My prayer is that my ministry is given time to accomplish these undertakings. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEKAER: How much time should your ministry be given?

MS MULONI: At least from now, we have given ourselves three months for the resettling of the artisanal small-scale miners because we have to go through the arrangement of resettling them, demarcating the areas, licensing them, training and also monitoring their activities and similarly with the other agencies that trade in the gold also to be relocated. 

Of course, on the area of the Bill, once we submit to Cabinet at the end of this month, discussions will be held and we will try to fast-track it so that it comes to Parliament as soon as possible before the end of this year.

3.05
DR MICHEAL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  First of all, allow me to thank this House under your guidance, for the support, which they gave us on Thursday that led to this discussion. It has been appreciated by the people of Bukuya and all Ugandans. Mining is not only done in Bukuya but   also in other areas.

On the 10th of September, Members of Parliament from Mubende and local leaders met His Excellency, the President, in the presence of the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development and agreed on most of the issues. What was not clear, and from what the minister has stated, is that they thought it was three months from the onset of the operation when the artisanal miners will be going back. I would like to state that it is six weeks from now and not three months.

Most of the other issues, which the minister has talked about, were lively discussed. The issue of traceability of the gold that is mined was much emphasised.

We also agreed on the issue of policy and regulation of the artisanals, which the minister has talked about. Mr Speaker, when we talk about policy and amendment of the Act, that is a non-specific area that can take over a year when they are still in that process. So we want the ministry to be very clear on it.

The issue of compensation was very difficult to handle given the fact that artisanals were not revisited. However, the President promised to visit the team, on 21 October 2017 and discuss with the affected persons how they can be rehabilitated and assisted to return to their normal livelihoods.

The other issue, which I had forgotten, is that the investor was willing to cede 10 square kilometers instead of the five, which we had agreed upon. We hope all that is going to be considered. Our worry though is that we had to come to this House. However, we are grateful that the House assisted us and we have got where we are. We are not sure if we leave things as they are now, we shall get what we want.

We also agreed to have another meeting on 26th of September, to complete all these issues in the presence of the investor, the artisanals and the Members of Parliament.  

Therefore, our prayer is that we stay the motion for another two weeks until when we are sure that the Executive is committed to fulfilling its obligations as per what we agreed upon in the meeting.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the report. Honourable members, we had a full debate of this motion. It was only when we wanted to decide, that the request was made.

3.08
THE DEPUTY OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Roland Mugume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our Shadow Minister for Water and Environment visited this place in Mubende and there are some few issues that I would like to raise to the minister.

First of all, I would like the minister to explain why the miners were given only two hours by the UPDF to leave the mines. Secondly, I would like the minister to explain why evictions were undertaken only in Mubende and not in Busia, Buhweju and Karamoja, where there are artisanal miners engaged in gold mining.

Mr Speaker, there were some children who were abandoned. I would like to ask the minister what the government has done to support the abandoned children because they are in a sorry state.

Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with hon. Bukenya. He has raised the issue of compensation. However, I would like to ask the minister to tell us the status of compensations by government to those particular persons whose property was damaged.

Lastly, the minister should also tell us about the status on the implementation of the Minamata Convention by the Government. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of eviction that was carried out – my colleague, unfortunately, might have not been here on Thursday, because there was a lengthy debate about the matter. Taking us back to those issues would not be appropriate and fair to all of us. I think we have moved on. For all that has happened, we were able to discuss and agree on the way forward.

Relatedly, in the statement that is uploaded, we have indicated that we have started with Mubende but we are going everywhere in this country. We are going to reach Buhweju, Busia, Namayingo, Karamoja and all other areas where there is illegal gold mining. We want these areas to be organised so that the artisanal small scale miners are licensed and they are able to participate in these economic activities and that the Government of Uganda is able to benefit from it.

Of course the issue of compensation and abandoned children at site; we discussed these matters at length over the weekend with His Excellency, the President and the Members of Parliament from the area. We agreed on how to move forward on all these matters.

As government, we are a member to that treaty for the Minamata Convention, which recognises the hazards that are presented by the way small-scale miners utilise the methods of chemicals like cyanide and mercury in gold mining. That is why we had to step in because we are members of that treaty. We do not want to expose our people and our environment to those hazardous methods but use methods which are recommended and ensure safety of our people in terms of their health. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, when this motion was brought, it could not have been discussed. However, the reason that motion was discussed was because of the urgent situation that had taken place in Mubende, mainly because our committee, chaired by hon. Alex Byarugaba, was already dealing with the policy and regulatory issues of the mining sectors; they actually have a preliminary report. Because of that, I advised that we remove aspects that were related to general policy, management and regulation so that the committee could come back to the House and we have that debate in a full way, in respect of the whole country. However, Mubende presented a peculiar situation of an emergency. That is why this debate was carried out.

Now that the movers of the motion are satisfied with the discussions and processes going on, it would be difficult to split the motion. It is because I have already referred it to the committee so that they can handle those other aspects of the policies and regulatory issues that were discussed in this motion. They will leave only the emergency, compensation and demarcation specifically for Mubende to be dealt with in these processes.

Therefore, I think substantially, I would refer this motion to the committee so that they come back with it and we have a fuller and more resourceful debate instead of keeping deferring it. 

Therefore, this motion is referred to the Committee on Natural Resources. Hon. Alex Byarugaba, incorporate these issues in what you are discussing and come back and brief Parliament about the regulatory policies and legal issues that will come up. It is so referred. Thank you. 

Meanwhile, there are other issues we will keep reviewing through the Members of Parliament on how they are progressing. When there are issues, come back and brief the House about the progress of this matter. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPOINT AN AUDITOR TO AUDIT THE ACCOUNTS OF THE OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As she comes, honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from Kampala University, Luweero Branch, represented by hon. James Abraham Byandala and hon. Lilian Nakate Segujja. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome.

Also, we had students earlier whose names were not indicated but the district was. They are pupils and teachers from Rima Nursery and Primary School. I think they have already gone. They are represented by – Oh, they are here. They are represented by hon. Jonathan Odur and hon. Joy Atim Ongom. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are all very welcome. (Applause)

3.15
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kakumiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A motion for a resolution of Parliament to appoint an auditor to audit the accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General:

“WHEREAS Article 163(9) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and section 36 of the National Audit Act, 2008 mandates Parliament to appoint an auditor to audit the books of accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General;

NOTING THAT Parliament is a public entity and its procurement must be in accordance with the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) Act, 2003;

WHEREAS in accordance with the PPDA Act 2003 and Regulations, the Parliamentary Commission which is the procuring and a disposal entity of Parliament invited bids through the International Open Bidding Methods for procurement of an auditor to audit the accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General for the period running from financial year 2005/2016 to the Financial Year 2016/2017;

FURTHER AWARE that M/s Kisaka and Company Certified Public 
Accountants emerged the best evaluated bidder to provide the audit services;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament, to appoint M/s Kisaka and Company Certified Public Accountants to audit the accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General for the period running from financial year 2005/2006 to the financial year 2016/2017.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Member for Ndorwa County West, Member for Bungokho, Member for Budadiri County West and Member for Kumi Municipality. Honourable member, are you justifying your motion or it is already self-justified?  

Honourable members, this is one of those formal motions for conclusion of a process that has gone on. The law requires us to give our sanctification of this process. Therefore, that is what we are doing now to put the final seal so that the persons concerned can now begin engaging with – 

Honourable members, the motion has been presented and the question that I now propose for your debate is: Motion for a resolution of Parliament that M/s Kisaka and Company Certified Public Accountants be appointed to audit the accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General for the period running from financial year 2005/2006 to the financial year 2016/2017. That is the motion I propose for your debate and the debate starts now, if necessary. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought under our rules, the mover of the motion should after speak to it. She has to justify her motion. We would like to know how they arrived at the decision and how many people bid. Then, we will be able to have a meaningful debate. However, just to throw the motion at us to debate; what are we going to debate?

Some of us have had the advantage of being chairpersons and members of the accountability committees and we know the work of the Auditor-General, including the challenges. We would like to know whether before they arrived at that decision, they addressed themselves to the challenges in that institution. I do not want to be tempted to go into the debate without knowing exactly how they really arrived at that decision.

After they have done that, then Mr Speaker, we will be able to make a meaningful contribution and end the process as required by the law. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you recall that when this motion was moved and seconded, I asked whether the member wanted to speak to the motion and she said the motion is self-explanatory. Therefore, I opened the debate. That is where we are.

3.34
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think one of the things I wanted to raise has been raised by hon. Katuntu. 

However, you can see we would like to appoint an auditor to audit the Office of the Auditor-General from the financial years 2005/2006 to 2016/2017. This is a period of 10 years. That raises a big issue. Why am I saying it raises a big issue? The Office of the Auditor-General is supposed to be above all offices and it should lead by example. We need the commission to explain to us why they have been hiding the Office of the Auditor-General for all the 10 years. This is an issue we need a clarification on, first.

Second is the process of identification of the auditor. Why that one? Why not Nandala-Mafabi’s or Katuntu’s?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you bid? (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Mr Speaker. I am just putting it across that way; I never bid anyway. I was just giving a name nearer mine. 

We need to know how you did the evaluation to see the capacity of a firm which can audit 10 years’ books of accounts and produce a report in the shortest time possible.

Mr Speaker, I have the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda here, Article 163(9) which states: “The accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General shall be audited and reported on by an auditor appointed by Parliament.” These are accounts which arise every financial year. Therefore, are we going to say the “accounts and accounts” of the Auditor-General because it is more than one year? I do not know how to make a – “Accounts” name is for one year but I do not know which word I can use for accounts of 10 years. Which reports are you going to produce on the accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General? 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, a dog which goes and hunts others must prove that it is able to – not be doing wrong things. That is why it is hunting the others. Now, how are we sure that in 10 years the Office of the Auditor-General has not messed us up yet it is bringing reports? It might fear to bring all the reports appropriately because it can also be touched on.

Therefore, in conclusion, Mr Speaker, I would personally be happy that the mover of the motion goes and brings the entire process because we are now evaluating so that we are able to use that entire process to make a decision on whether there is competence or not, the reasons why we delayed to appoint the auditor and where the reports of the other arrears are.

Mr Speaker, why am I raising this? I recall there was a time here we attempted to appoint an auditor. When we appointed the auditor, I think Johnson and Johnson shortly, the other one - it was a consortium of auditors - 

Shortly when the other one saw a bulk of money, they sacked one and we had paid our money. What happened to that audit? We need that report first before we can deal with the other one.

There was John Nyende who had been also appointed as an auditor; he produced a report that we have never seen. I am raising this from institutional memory because I have been around for a good period of time.

Therefore, in that way, they would be happy in the process. However, I rose to second the motion and get the justification and the details of that before I can move.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, from the iPad I have borrowed, I see only those few sentences which were raised by a whole parliamentary commissioner who has all the facilities to do a report. 

To me, on those few sentences, I am unable to say anything apart from saying – We agree, you have presented a motion but we need more information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two things and in these, if you are going to debate this motion, we should not put them together. We should debate the motion before us - that is for the appointment of an auditor into the Office of the Auditor-General. That is the motion before us. If you are going to ask about processes that led to this particular proposal that is fine. However, to begin asking why 10 years, that is outside this motion.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has actually indicted part of the reason in his submission. There was a process and attempt the Parliamentary Commission made and appointed a particular agency about five years ago and did not take off. They had appointed an auditor which did not take off.

They disintegrated and so there was no audit done. Probably, that contributed to this backlog because you appoint people and there are challenges and involvement of the Inspector General of Government (IGG) and the whole process is stalled.

Therefore, the matter that is before us is the appointment of M/s Kisaka and Company Certified Public Accountants to audit the accounts of the Office of the Auditor-General for those periods that have been mentioned. That is the only motion and if you are going to debate, please restrict yourself to that or you will not speak.

It is open; I proposed the question - unless hon. Nabbanja would like to justify her motion. Proceed.

MS NABBANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You will realise the urgency of this matter. First of all, in 2015, like my colleague has rightly put it, there was an auditing company that was procured. However, things did not go well. 

The Office of the Auditor-General is an overall audit body for the whole country but we also need to know what they do. This is backed by Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure. We also have a law in place that mandates Parliament under Article 163 to audit the accounts of the Auditor-General.

As a chairperson of a sub-committee of audit of Parliament, I thought it is really a mandate of Parliament to do this and thought we needed to give a company out of the many that bid. This was having a bigger financial muscle. It had -

Mr Speaker, can I be given an opportunity to come and present all that happened tomorrow?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this motion will be justified tomorrow. It is deferred. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON OVERSIGHT VISIT TO PUBLIC HEALTH FACILITIES IN  KAMPALA DISTRICT AND EASTERN UGANDA

3.34
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity for us to present a report of the sectoral committee on health and oversight visit to public health facilities in Kampala District and eastern Uganda.

Before I present, I would like to tell the House that the report was written in December but we had not got the opportunity to present it. However, it still contains the facts on the ground, which have not changed much. Therefore, the House should bear with us.

Before I present the report, allow me to lay on the Table a copy of the report and minutes of the several meetings held during the committee visit. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of that report and the minutes for which the conclusions of the report were drawn.

DR BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, the Committee on Health has part of its extended induction and in performance of its oversight function in conformity with Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, conducted field visits to public health facilities in Kampala City and eastern region of Uganda and hereby presents its findings.

The committee’s physical scope was defined as follows: public hospitals in Kampala city including Mulago National Referral Hospital, Kawempe General Hospital, Kiruddu General Hospital, Naguru-China Uganda Friendship Hospital, Kangulumira Health Centre IV, Kamuli General Hospital in Kamuli, Kapchorwa General Hospital, Mbale Regional Referral Hospital, and Iganga Hospital.

The terms of reference - allow me to say they are outlined as listed therein and the methodology is also outlined. However, allow me to go to the findings.

Mulago National Referral Hospital

A brief history: It was founded in 1913 and is the main national referral for the entire country and a teaching hospital for the Makerere College of Health Sciences. It also serves as a general hospital for the Kampala metropolitan.

In the financial year 2014/15, Mulago had 1,880 staff that constituted 67 percent of the staffing positions leaving a gap of 581 staff to be filled. Mulago Hospital had an annual budget of 38.14 billion in financial year 2014/15.

The patient load in Mulago Hospital continues to be very heavy which affects the quality of services. During the financial year 2014/15, the hospital attended to 829,817 outpatient visits; 761573 inpatients; 62,568 emergencies; 28,759 total ANC visits; conducted 39,081 deliveries; 11,120 postnatal visits; 1,738,652 lab tests; 33,949 X-rays; 27,142 ultrasound scans; 49,680 immunisation contacts; 13,397 major surgeries and;9,701 family planning contacts.

In October 2014, major renovations and rehabilitations works commenced at the hospital to bring about structural and performance improvements. These works, estimated to last 24 months, are the largest renovation works to the facility since the New Mulago (Lower Mulago) Hospital Complex was completed in 1962.

This project is estimated to cost $49 million and it is financed by a loan from the African Development Bank. During the rehabilitation works, medical emergencies and referred patients are attended to at Kawempe General Hospital, Kiruddu and China-Uganda Friendship Hospital in Naguru.

As part of the planned changes, the intensive care units will be enlarged from five to 25 beds; the mortuary will be expanded from 16 to 160 slots and the operating theatres will be increased from six to 16. By the time the committee visited in August 2016, the first phase of rehabilitation, consisting of approximately 60 per cent of total works, was reported to be complete. The second phase of the renovation was expected to last for another 12 months.

It should be noted that the services of the hospital are temporarily being accessed in Old Mulago, Kawempe and Kiruddu General Hospitals.

Findings

The committee noted that at the time of the visit, which was in the morning, the hospital facility was clean. The super specialised hospital was expected to be completed in August this year, as the centre of excellence. The committee was informed that the new facility will be able to conduct organ transplant and utilise telemedicine. The detailed project components are as follows:

    a) An extensive rehabilitation and modernisation of the lower Mulago Hospital building (currently has 860 bed capacity), including complete replacement of water, electrical, sewerage and mechanical systems, reorganising the space for increased efficiency and rehabilitation of all wards including the private patients service wing.

    b) Construction of two new general referral hospitals in Kawempe and Makindye (Kiruddu) divisions of Greater Kampala. Each with 170 bed capacity with 40 per cent of the beds in each of the hospital devoted to maternal and child health services and the remainder for general and specialised services. The general referral hospitals also have adequate provisions for 24 hour emergency and trauma services. Although the two hospitals were at that time operational and housing services that had migrated from Mulago Hospital Complex as the result of the rehabilitation.

    c) Upon completion of the rehabilitation of Mulago Hospital that was expected in August this year, the hospital would have been provided with appropriate health care technology, medical equipment and devices to improve both the diagnosis and treatment capacities.

    d) The new hospital will be fitted with ICT network equipment and software for patients, administrative, telemedicine and financial management systems.

In reference to the visit to Old Mulago, the hospital faces challenges of congestion as a result of the breakdown of the national referral system. It continues to receive patients without referral notes and individuals with minor ailments such as malaria and headaches.

The committee visited Mwana Mugimu paediatric and nutrition rehabilitation unit at Old Mulago and found that there were 80 children admitted in both the “Giraffe” (resuscitation and critical care area) and “Zebra” (general admission ward). The challenges noted were congestion, few staff on duty and limited government support.

The committee toured the neurology unit and found that up to 90 per cent of cases recorded at the facility are as a result of injuries to the head caused by boda boda motorcycle accidents. Another category of cases arises from iron bar strikes to the head by criminals terrorising different parts of the city. The challenges noted in the unit included a shortage of anesthesia staff, limited ICU space, low pay for health workers, human resource and manpower constraints.

The committee visited the new 12-bed intensive care unit established in Old Mulago to handle critical cases during the rehabilitation process and noted the challenges of shortages of manpower where the 12 beds were served by three nurses as opposed to one nurse per bed. The committee was informed of the high cost of medicines required and the shortage of consumables such as disinfectants.

The visit to the casualty unit revealed that the only CT scan available at the facility which is designed to serve 10 patients per day is used for up to 100 patients which overstretches its capacity. This causes it to break down frequently due to overuse.

The committee visited the National Maternal and Neonatal Referral Central commonly known as the “women’s hospital” which is currently under construction on Mulago Hill and was informed that the facility was 55 per cent complete and would be opened in August 2017. This project is aimed at curbing the high maternal and infant mortality rates in Uganda.

The committee visited Old Mulago Hospital, the 110 housing units under construction near the hospital campus, the site of the renovations in the hospital complex and the women’s hospital currently under construction on Mulago Hill.

Kiruddu General Referral Hospital

This hospital is located in Makindye Division of Kampala. It is an urban, general hospital built between 2014 and 2016 at an estimated cost of $15 million. The Government of Uganda constructed the hospital, with funding from the African Development Bank and Nigeria Trust Fund.

The 170-bed facility is currently occupied by the Mulago National Referral Hospital and shall return to the management of Kampala Capital City Authority after the completion of the rehabilitation works at the Mulago Hospital Complex. The health facility opened its doors to the public on the 16 May 2016.

Findings

The committee visited the Kiruddu General Hospital and made the following observations:

    i. The health facility is currently hosting the entire directorate of medicine, except surgery, obstetrics and gynaecology and paediatrics which are housed in Kawempe and Old Mulago.
    ii. The accident and emergency unit is opened in Kiruddu as well as in Kawempe and Old Mulago.
    iii. Accident victims are not treated in Kiruddu, emergencies may be admitted but they still get transferred to Mulago after they have been resuscitated. 
    iv. The hospital operates on a 24-hour basis with staff working in shifts to ensure that it continues to operate at all times.
    v. The challenge with transport arises out of the need to ferry supplies, food and staff from Mulago with the limited fuel budget. The committee was informed that the hospital had five double cabin pick-ups, two new 33-seater buses and several ambulances.
    vi. Following the expansion of Mulago Hospital operations in Old Mulago, Kawempe and Kiruddu, the hospital is handling more patient cases yet the budget for medicines, sundries and other medical supplies had remained static.
    vii. The hospital has faced blood shortages which is unacceptable, especially for a national referral.
    viii. The hospital is fitted with life support machines for critical cases and a mortuary for those who die.
    ix. The hospital is staffed with 300 staff of whom 35 are physicians, five plastic surgery specialists, one senior radiologist, 40 senior house officers, 10 medical officers, 150 nurses and other supporting teams in the laboratory and pharmacy.
    x. The health facility has an accident and emergency unit, a special outpatient clinic, a functional radiology department providing X-ray services, ECG and ECHO services, a burns and plastic surgery unit, general and private wards and a dialysis section. 
    xi. The hospital sees 250 patients for diabetes only and 51 per cent of the deaths recorded at this hospital arise from diabetes and heart disease. The challenges with diabetes and cardiology clinics include the high cost of drugs, the chronicity of the illnesses and the high disease burden. 
    xii. The endocrinology section of the hospital dealing with diabetes faces challenges of costly insulin with a monthly budget requirement of Shs 30 million for insulin only. The hospital informed the committee that diabetes is a high burden disease in Uganda and complications from these cases often resulted in hospitalisation for long periods and amputation. 
    xiii. The facility conducts 700 dialysis sessions per month and it should be noted that while private facilities charge up to Shs 1.5 million for a session, Mulago Hospital charges 60,000 per session. The most pressing challenge is inadequate staff. 
    xiv. The pulmonology department which deals with diseases of respiratory systems such as asthma, TB and lung cancer was also plagued by the high cost of medicine, the high disease burden and limited staff. 

The hospital recorded some achievements, including: 

    a) Provision of accommodation for critical staff
    b) Food is provided as part of the treatment for patients
    c) 250 patients are admitted on a daily basis despite the 170 bed capacity; 
    d) The assessment centre handles up to 250 patients daily
    e) The emergency unit received up to 50 cases daily
    f) The hospital provides good learning environment for interns, and 
    g) It has a fully functional Hepatitis B screening clinic. 

The general challenges include: 

    a) Some areas of the hospitals were still incomplete at that time
    b) The patient numbers are very high
    c) The CT Scan and some laboratory tests are not yet installed and patients have to be taken to Old Mulago to access the service and then later returned
    d) There is a critical shortage of sundries and medicines
    e) The dialysis machines and those of measuring BP are insufficient
    f) The limitation in the budget affects supplies, duty facilitation allowances, lunch allowances, uniforms and fuel. 

Kawempe General Hospital

Kawempe General Hospital is a hospital located in Kawempe Division of Kampala City. It is an urban, general hospital built between 2014 and 2016, at an estimated cost of $ 15 million which is equivalent to Shs 38 billion by then. 

The Government of Uganda constructed the hospital with funding from the Africa Development Bank and the Nigeria Trust Fund. 

The 170-bed facility is currently occupied by the obstetrics and gynaecology department of Mulago National Referral Hospital and shall return to the management of Kampala Capital City Authority after the completion of the on-going rehabilitation works at Mulago Hospital Complex. 

Findings at the visit 

The committee noted the following: 

The health facility was visibly congested. On the day the committee visited, the hospital was full to capacity. The committee was informed that this was the only public facility in the Kawempe area and the confidence that the public has in the services offered by Mulago was responsible for the overcrowding. In addition, private facilities are expensive for ordinary citizens. 

The committee noted that the supply of meals to patients was irregular and inconsistent. Management informed the committee that the irregular supply of meals resulted from interruption in supply of cooking gas in Mulago Hospital Complex because of the on-going rehabilitation works. 

The committee noted that there was a shortage of oxygen at the facility. The hospital management informed the committee that this arose out of delays in transportation of oxygen from Mulago to Kawempe as the hospital awaits installation of its own oxygen plant. 

The committee noted the issue of stock-outs of essential medicines and sundries. Management blamed these issues on the monopoly of the National Medical Stores. 

The committee was informed that the priority of procurement of medicines was given to the most important medicines and sundries. An annual budget of Shs 12.6 billion for medicines from Mulago Hospital is insufficient since the per capita expenditure rate is Shs 7,200 for every patient. 

The committee was informed that the KCCA per capita budget is Shs 900 for every patient. When this figure is critically examined, it is evident that the allocation is insufficient even for the most basic ailments.

The committee raised the issue of shortage of blood and in response it was informed that it was necessary to engage Uganda Blood Transfusion Services for their response to this issue. The Blood Bank is responsible for collecting and making blood ready for use by hospitals.

The committee noted that the theatres in the hospital at that time were not fully functional. This results in the failure to handle critical cases which should not be the case with a health facility like Kawempe General Hospital, especially since it is handling cases of maternal and neonatal health. 

The committee was informed that the monthly lunch allowance paid to medical workers has been Shs 66,000 since 1996 and it needs to urgently be revised. The committee noted the need for the issue of emoluments for health workers to be expeditiously addressed as this is the case across the country. The committee noted that there was also no accommodation for critical staff at Kawempe.

China-Uganda Friendship Hospital, Naguru

Naguru Referral Hospital also known as China-Uganda Friendship Hospital, Naguru, was donated by the Government of the People’s Republic of China and was completed and handed over to the Government of Uganda on 6 January 2012. The hospital has a vision of being a centre of excellence in providing specialised and general health services. 

Findings

The committee made the following findings: 

The staffing levels of the hospital stand at 84 per cent of the established structure. The hospital, however, informed the committee that the wage bill is 100 per cent funded and the engagements with Ministry of Public Service are on-going to ensure the structure is completely filled. 

The hospital is in need of accommodation for critical staff near the hospital premises. The hospital requests government, through KCCA, to allocate it land from the Naguru Housing Project for it to construct staff houses. 

The hospital reported an increase in the number of patients received by the facility following the partial closure of Mulago Hospital for rehabilitation. The committee observed this through an overcrowded outpatient department and overflowing wards. 

The hospital reported drug stock-outs, resulting from a mismatch between the quantities delivered and the requirement by the large number of patients received at the hospital. 

The committee was impressed that the hospital has a teenage centre that has resulted in a significant improvement in productive health in Nakawa Division. Statistics of the hospital are summarised in the table. 

The committee further noted that the hospital has the following challenges: 

    a) The X-ray department, where the X-ray machine is not functional
    b) Experiences oxygen supply and blood shortages 
    c) The building that was handed over in 2012 is cracked. There is a leaking roof and the floor is sinking 
    d) There has been no board of management in place for that hospital for the last five years and now they are six
    e) Noise from Legends Rugby Club/Bar and Restaurant
    f) The staff structure is for a general hospital yet the hospital is at the level of a regional referral which affects their budget and allocation of medicines and sundries
    g) Defunct machines, including a mammogram and a CT Scan; it should be noted that these have never worked since the time of installation
    h) The electricity system in place was unreliable and there was a need to address it.

Kangulumira Health Centre IV in Kayunga District

Kangulumira Health Centre IV is one of the 23 government health facilities in Kayunga District. Of the 23 government health facilities, one is a general hospital, two are health centres IV, eight are health centres III and the 13 are health centres II. It is a 30-bed facility. 

The committee findings

The health facility serves patients from different parts of the geographical area, including patients from areas as far as Kamuli, which is across the Nile. The health facility has a theatre that has not been functional ever since it was set up in 2010. The equipment in the theatre has never been used, because it lacks an oxygen cylinder.

If I could elaborate a bit more; in this facility, they have two surgeons and two anesthesia officers that were not working due to lack of an oxygen cylinder. The patients are often asked to buy their own medicine when stock-out occurs in the facility. When the committee visited, we were informed that there were neither injectables, no intravenous anti-malarials and, no gloves.

The patients informed the committee that doctors at the facility were asking them for money for the medicines. We also learnt that the doctors, as a gesture of kindness for the fear of the patients buying the wrong medicines, were taking money from the patients to help them to purchase the right medicine. The committee learnt that despite the prerequisite staff level, the health facility was not effectively delivering because of the drug stock-outs, an ill-equipped laboratory, non-functional theatre, absence of sundries and large numbers of patients received daily.

The committee was dismayed that there was a large number of people in need of services yet the facility was not equipped to deliver. The committee was informed that the health facility has suffered a month-long water shortage, caused by leakage in pipes laid and maintained by the Rural Water and Sanitation Programme operated in the area. The committee wondered how it was possible for water shortage to last such a long time without any corrective action at a health centre as important as that.

The committee was informed that the facility had resorted to using harvested water for its operations. The committee noted that neither the patients nor the health workers were aware anyone taking stock of Hepatitis B statistics in the area. This simply means that without a critical sensitisation programme, the epidemic is likely to get worse. There were also no Hepatitis B testing kits or vaccines at the facility. The committee noted that out of the 24 critical hospital staff who were supposed to be housed at the hospital; only 10 could currently be accommodated at the premises. The management appealed to the government to consider constructing 13 more houses at the facility, to accommodate the remaining critical cadres.

Kamuli Hospital

Kamuli is a public hospital, in Kamuli District in eastern Uganda, with a bed capacity planned at 100. However, many more patients are admitted with some sharing beds or sleeping on the floor. The committee was disappointed with the garbage disposal practices in the hospital. The committee observed that the hospital refuse was disposed in the same manner as green garbage; there was no incinerator, and there was no effort to properly dispose of any refuse by utilising alternatives to incineration.

The committee noted that the hospital compound was being slashed because of the visit, an indication that the hospital is usually grassy and bushy, given the comparison of the areas that had not been slashed. The committee also noted that the X-ray machine and ultra-sound scan had been delivered to the hospital in 2001, but has remained non-functional ever since it was delivered to the facility. The machines have been in the hospital, occupying a room for 15 years and yet to-date, no patient has benefitted from their presence. The committee was informed that the machines could not be used because they were defective, had no technicians to repair them and were set in a language (Spanish) that no one understood. 

The committee inspected latrines and found that none of the latrine stands had doors. The issue was raised with the hospital and district authorities who undertook to fix the doors, since the issue did not require government intervention. The committee also noted gross negligence in the management and maintenance of Kamuli Hospital, where the disposal pit is filled with syringes, glass bottles, microscopic slide machines and the machines remain unused for over 10 years.

The committee also noted the hospital ambulance had broken down due to a fault in the gear box and required Shs 97 million to replace it. They further informed the committee that the local garage had submitted a quotation of Shs 5 million for repair and were considering that as a cheaper option although they were hindered by procurement issues.

Kapchorwa General Hospital

Kapchorwa Hospital was established in 1964, serving Sebei sub-region, that is, Kapchorwa, Kween and Bukwo. It was initially planned as a 100-bed capacity hospital, but currently, it is a 150-bed capacity general hospital. The committee noted the following: 

    i) The hospital had a catchment population of 50,000; an average daily out-patients attendance of 300 and 50 inpatient admissions daily. 
    ii) The hospital conducts 8-10 deliveries per day.
    iii) It also receives referrals from neighbouring districts of Kween, Bukwo, Bulambuli, Sironko, Amudat, among others. The most complicated cases are referred to Mbale Referral Hospital, which is 66 kilometres away.
    iv) The hospital has a staffing level of 84 percent but lacked a pharmacist, physiotherapist and medical officers, special grade.
    v) The hospital was rehabilitated between financial years 2014/15, and 2015/16 with funding from government. The areas renovated included the operating theater, maternity ward, TB ward, children’s ward, mortuary; installation of solar in the major service delivery points (OPD, theatre and wards); one five-stance staff toilet constructed; two five-stance patient toilets were constructed and one twin house renovated. It should be noted that the renovation processes was still on-going by the time we visited. 
    vi) While the facility is well equipped with mattresses and beds, it still lacks pediatric beds and mattresses. 
    vii) The hospital has transport challenges, with only one ambulance for transporting referred patients. The ambulance was received in 2010 and it was still functional but old. 
    viii) The committee was informed that the funding to the hospital has remained static for the last five years, despite the increasing population and inflation. The hospital receives Shs 34 million for hospital operation per quarter and Shs 66 million for medicines per cycle. It should be noted that occasionally, there is a delay to release these funds that affects implementation of planned activities. 
    ix) The hospital sometimes experiences drug stock-outs attributed to a small budget for medicines and an increasing population. The most commonly affected items included anti-malarial medicine (Artesunate) and laboratory commodities. 
    x) The hospital has issues of land encroachment by squatters. The committee noted that some people have grabbed the hospital land and the matter is in court.
    xi) It is also important to note that the hospital has a land title for all its land.
    xii) The hospital, as noted, has high utility bill, for especially water. Currently, the hospital pays Shs 900,000 per month, which is high for the hospital with a limited budget. 
    xiii) The health facility informed the committee of the challenge of accommodation for the staff, with 20 per cent of staff being accommodated in the available housing units. Some of the nurses are accommodated in uniports.
    xiv) The out–patients department (OPD) section is visibly congested and the committee noted that it was also poorly lit. It was dark even in the middle of the day. 
    xv) There is an acute lack of equipment in most departments, such as a slit-lamp for eye department, dental chair for dental unit, incubators for the neonatal unit, and examination couches for the OPD, fridges for maternity, operation theatre beds, among others. 
    xvi) The hospital decried the low salary for the medical workers, for instance an enrolled nurse and midwife earns Shs 400,000 per month, while a medical officer earns Shs 900,000 per month, with no additional incentives yet there is a high cost of living.
    xvii) Most staff in the hospital lacked uniforms, since they are not being supplied by the Ministry of Health.
    xviii) The hospital raised the issue of short durations of the renewal –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have seen some children leaving before I could recognise them. I have pupils and teachers from Kalongo Girls Primary School. They are represented by hon. Akello Judith Franca and hon. Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) They are from Agago. We also have pupils and teachers from El-Shaddai Nursery and Primary School. They are represented by hon. Akol Anthony and hon. Akello Lucy from Amuru District. Please join me in welcoming them. Chair proceed and I hope you are preparing to wind up

DR BUKENYA: I have to read the details so that Members understand.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please summairse.

DR BUKENYA: Okay, the important thing here is that the Hospital is required by the Atomic Energy Council (AEC) to periodically license its X-ray machine at a fee of Shs 1 million every two years even if they are a Government entity.

Mbale Hospital

I will skip the introduction and go straight to the findings.

The first impression of the hospital is that it is one of those hospitals without cleaning staff as it was littered with garbage. The corridors are being used to admit patients especially in the emergency wing. 

The committee witnessed a patient's attendant rolling a patient from the theatre immediately after an operation as the theatre nurse rolled the patient to the entrance of the theatre and handed them over to the attendant. Upon further inquiry, it emerged that there was a shortage of staff manning the theatre.

The hospital also charges patients. The patients that the committee interacted with revealed that unless one paid between Shs 300,000 and Shs 500,000, they could not get an operation at the hospital.

At the time of the committee visit, there were no doctors on duty; there was only a group of unsupervised interns in the pediatric unit. The pharmacy stores were dirty and dusty. There are drug stock outs experienced at the hospital resulting from the large patient load.


The hospital required more houses to accommodate staff and the hospital reported rampant cases of teenage pregnancies.

The visit to the radiology department revealed that the X-ray machine and CT-Scans were non-functional due to lack of films. This made it necessary for the patients to seek these services from private facilities that are around the hospital.

The hospital informed the committee that the patient load often led to stock outs and the committee noted that for over a year, the Ministry of Health had not supervised Mbale Regional Referral Hospital.

Findings on Iganga General Hospital

There was no effort at the hospital to cover up the extortion of money from patients. The committee witnessed an incident where the dental assistant and  his  team  refused  to  handle  any  more  patients  after  the committee stopped the payment of Shs 3,000 per patient.

The hospital informed the committee that it lacked funds to fill the unfilled positions. The committee observed that there were children admitted together with adults and in the same ward. TB patients were admitted in the same physical space with other patients.

The equipment donated to the hospital, including beds and trolleys had broken down within months of receipt and the hospital compound was ill maintained.

The hospital had abandoned use of the diesel generator because of fuel challenges. Inspection of the stores further revealed poor management standards of drugs and medicines.



Interaction with patients revealed that every one of them for a caesarian section had to pay at least Shs 300,000. The committee was informed that the patient load at the hospital was due to sub counties of Namalemba and Nawanyingi, which did not have health centres III.

The committee was informed that according to the Ministry of Health awards, the hospital was the best performing in the country for the last five years.

Observations and recommendations

Medical Equipment Procurement

The committee observed that many of the facilities visited had issues with proper utilisation of medical equipment and inquiries into the reason why the equipment was not being utilized revealed many issues ranging from incompatibilities with power, lack of spare parts, and having manuals in foreign languages.

The committee blames the procurement entities for procuring equipment that is not suited for the use in Uganda healthcare facilities and without personnel trained to deploy and maintain them.

The committee recommends that procurement of medical equipment should take into consideration suitability, the purpose, and compatibility with technical specifications required for our health facilities to avoid incidents such as those found in Kamuli.

The committee further recommends that the procuring process for medical equipment should be streamlined, strengthened and standardised to ensure that equipment procured meets standards.

Storage and utilization

The committee observed gross negligence with regard to storage and utilisation of medical equipment. The committee noted that while some equipment was not utilised because it was faulty, in some areas it broke down due to poor conditions of storage.

The committee noted that most of eastern Uganda had nonfunctional x-ray machines, no CT scans, only one ultra sound machine was working and only in Iganga, of all the facilities visited, were patients required to pay for the service.

The committee recommends that infrastructure engineering and quality assurance department under the Ministry of Health should expeditiously visit health units and ensure that medical equipment is put to proper use.

The committee also recommends that Government should dispose of all non-functional medical equipment and X-rays at Kamuli Hospital and replace them with others.

Maintenance

The committee noted that in the health facilities visited, wherever equipment broke down, it took long for action to be taken to either repair, decommission or replace.

In Kangulumira Health Centre IV, the theatre had not been utilised because of a missing oxygen cylinder. This case is five years old. In Kamuli, an X-ray machine was not utilised for 12 years. Noting that improved service delivery results in saving lives, it is necessary for immediate action to be taken.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health takes keen interest in cases where equipment breaks down and no reports are filed.

Further, the ministry should engage managers of different hospitals, where these cases have arisen, to ask them to show cause as to why no steps have been taken.

The committee further recommends that proper serving and maintenance of medical equipment should be prioritized, especially with the new and expensive equipment installed in our facilities.

Human Resources 

The committee observed that the level of service deliver at the hospital and health centres IV visited is poor and this has been detailed in the report. There is rampant absenteeism of health workers, underutilised equipment, under staffing, and a laissez-faire attitude towards work.
The monitoring of these health facilities by the Ministry of Health and the district health officers is inadequate. Equipment is mishandled and sometimes not utilised. 

The committee proposes decentralisation of recruitment and deployment of health workers in these facilities. In the meantime, the district local authorities should take keen interest in the functionalisation of these health units.

In addition, the Department of Infrastructure and Quality Assurance at the Ministry of Health should help district local governments to adequately supervise and ensure an improvement in the quality of health service delivery by health workers.

Low staffing levels for specialist and medical doctors

The committee noted several staffing gaps in the hospitals visited. It was informed that local governments had advertised for specialists to fill positions in the districts but that those positions failed to attract applicants. The committee notes that even if the specialists are recruited and posted; it is only a matter of time before they leave for greener pastures. 

In addition, the committee was informed that some workers are leaving because of the heavy workload. This is because the population has increased yet the structure in regional referral hospitals has not been revised; with only one surgeon in  regional referral hospital like Mbale, expectations of the many people may not be met –(Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, we listened to the visit to each hospital and what the committee noted and observed. Is it procedurally right for the chairperson to continue noting without summarising the recommendations so that we can debate?
     
DR BUKENYA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker, I am summarising.

Low staffing levels

The committee recommends that Government urgently improves the remuneration package given to specialists to ensure that our institutions have specialists to attend to them. 

The committee further recommends that Government urgently reviews the staff structure for consultants in these referral hospitals.

Shortage of critical cadres in healthcare

The committee recommends that Government urgently reviews the staffing norms of regional referral hospitals so as to accommodate the vital cadres such as biomedical engineers, needed for proper functioning.

Recruitment and deployment of health workers and DHOs

The committee recommends that the recruitment and deployment of senior cadres in the general hospitals and health centres IV – mainly doctors – be recentralised.

Lunch allowance for health workers

The committee, appreciating the current financial times, the cost of living and the rate of inflation, recommends that this provision be revised. 

The committee reiterates the recommendation of the Ninth Parliament, as adopted, that the lunch allowance for nurses, doctors and other health workers be revised to Shs 288,000 to cater for lunch at a unit cost of Shs 12,000 per day.

Uniforms for health workers

The committee recommends that funds be availed, under the Ministry of Health, for the procurement of name-tagged uniforms to minimise extortion of money from patients by those pretending to be health workers.

Stock outs

The committee recommends that the Health Unit Management Committees be activated, facilitated and strengthened to ensure proper oversight and that the Ministry of Health starts performing its supervisory role over regional and national referral hospitals. The committee further recommends that the ministry issues and takes strong sanctions against those engaged in extortions.

Static medicine budget despite increased patient load leading to stock outs of medicine

The committee recommends that the budget for National Medical Stores should be increased in the medium term to cater for the increasing population.

Implementation of the Abuja Declaration

The committee recommends that the funding to the health sector be increased to 15 per cent of the national budget as recommended by the Abuja Declaration to ensure funds are available to purchase the equipment and enhance health workers’ pay.

Free medical care vs. national health insurance scheme

The committee recommends that Government fast-tracks the contributory national health insurance scheme, in tandem with the region and the rest of Africa, to resolve the issue of funding for health in view of the realities on the ground.

Oversight by the Ministry of Health

The committee recommends –

THE DEPUTY SPEKAER: Honourable chairperson, you have taken over an hour.

DR BUKENYA: I am reading the recommendations only.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please! Conclude. You should have gone to those ones at the beginning.

DR BUKENYA: Well, let me pick out only one recommendation about utility bills. The committee recommends that health facilities, at all levels, should be supported to start using alternative sources of power such as solar and to harvest water in order to reduce the monthly electricity and water bills, which are not sustainable in the long run. 
The committee also recommends that hospitals be supported to repair their equipment and that Government constructs accommodation for staff.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, we recommend that Government prioritises primary healthcare and provides additional funding in subsequent years to the lower level facilities. I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEKAER: Thank you. Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is for a motion that the report of the sectoral Committee on Health on the oversight visits to public health facilities in Kampala District and eastern Uganda be adopted. That is the motion for your debate and the debate starts now, with each Member taking two minutes.

4.25
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, committee chairperson, for the report. Mr Speaker, I come from Moyo, a refugee-hosting district, where the population of the refugees is now over 170,000 and the host community is only 130,000. 

Moyo Hospital has just been rehabilitated - and I would like to thank the Government for that venture. However, given the influx of the refugees, the current facilities and equipment are not enough. The staff are not enough: we do not have enough doctors and nurses. Even the ambulances are not enough. There is always stock out of medicine because of the influx of the refugees. Blood is always out of stock and there is always congestion. Staff accommodation is also a problem. Water is another very serious issue. Electricity is also a challenge. Sometimes ladies are brought from the refugee camps to deliver but when power goes off, there is a problem. Even health centres II, III and IV at Obongi are all overwhelmed by the influx of the refugees. 

The people of Moyo, therefore, will be very grateful if the Government can have a deliberate affirmative action of helping our district because of the influx of the refugees. I rest my case.

4.27
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I only heard one sentence in the whole report. Long as it was – visiting hospitals all around and seeing all they were seeing – there was no effort in trying to save our health, our effort, time and our money. It only came in the last conclusion in one sentence when he talked about primary healthcare. Prevention is better than cure. 

When I saw the list of Members on the committee, I hoped that since there were some people who are not doctors, perhaps we may have some hope because doctors cannot provide our health. They do not study health. They study medicine and they come when it is too late. They do not even stop you from getting diseases or dying from diseases. 

The whole sector of the Ministry of Health is wasting so much time, energy and money in coming too late as if they are doing post-mortem the way pathologists do, instead of emphasising how to prevent diseases. The amount of money spent on doctors and medicine is more wasted yet it would have been much cheaper, safer, easier and accessible by everybody if the emphasis was laid on preventing ill health by teaching about hygiene, nutrition, immunisation - disease management is a small aspect of life. 

However much we spend on this report and committees and hospitals, until the whole concept changes - the doctors are not a solution. I repeat that they spend only a small section of their six or seven years of study on public health – and they themselves are eating badly –(Member timed out.)

4.30
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to commend the committee and the chairperson for the fact finding report they have presented to the House.

I would like to applaud the Government, especially for renovating referral hospitals across the country. However, as Government renovates the referral hospitals, there are district hospitals like the one in Hoima, which have ceased to exist. Even if district hospitals exist within the referral hospital areas, the out patients are accommodated in the dilapidated and old buildings. It is very appalling at Hoima District Hospital. When you go there, you find people in those old buildings as if there is a white elephant in the building. 

Therefore, I would like the minister to tell us whether it is the Government’s policy to have out patients treated in the old dilapidated hospital buildings.

The second issue that I would like to find out from the minister is: old hospitals like Masindi Hospital, which was constructed in 1926, with a capacity of 100 patients and one theatre, cannot accommodate the rising population today. When is Government renovating and rehabilitating these hospitals to ensure they can accommodate patients from the growing population? 

4.32
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for that detailed report presented. However, I did not hear anything concerning the needs of persons with disabilities as members of my constituency.

I would like to request the committee to consider issues of access to those hospitals because they are far - accessibility within the hospitals such as the examination and labour beds.

Secondly, I would like to also request the committee to consider issues of communication, within the hospitals, to the deaf and blind persons. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

4.33
MS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the minister to tell us if we have a comprehensive healthcare system in this country. We are posturing as a giant in healthcare by providing regional health care; we provide healthcare services to South Sudan, Congo, Rwanda and all neighbouring countries. 

I would like to ask the minister if we have a regional budget, within our national budget that caters for that. Do we have a system where Ugandans, with their national identity cards, are incorporated to be a priority in our regional hospitals?

Mr Speaker, I think there is no country that does not have a budget that is proportionate to its population. No wonder we have congestion, stock outs and all border areas report the same thing. 

In England, they only provide universal health care to nationals of the countries where they have reciprocal arrangements. Do we have reciprocal arrangements with our neighbours so that when we treat their patients and they can also treat Ugandans in those countries? I would like to be informed about that.

Mr Speaker, Kampala is in trouble. Those hospitals like Kawempe, Kiruddu and Naguru were built to cater for the needs of the high population in those divisions. Now that Mulago is being renovated, Government did not offer an alternative to the people in Makindye –(Member timed out.)

4.36
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report. There is a saying that titles mean nothing without good health. I say this because in Amudat District, healthcare is in a very pathetic situation given the fact that health facilities are understaffed by about 75 per cent of the required number. You find that in health centres II in Amudat District, there is one health worker operating as a midwife, nurse and all those other duties. The last time we visited that place with the Minister for Local Government, we noted that it was a terrible situation. If the only health worker falls sick, who will serve the community?

Mr Speaker, Amudat District has an influx of Kenyans. During the dry season, they come to graze their cows in Uganda and this affects the health system because of the increased population yet we do not have any Government hospital; we only have health centres II. Therefore, my request to the Government is that it should build a government hospital in Amudat District to serve the population there. Thank you.

4.38
MS MONICAH AMODING	(NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for that oversight report, except I did not hear anything about Atutur Hospital in Kumi District. 

I would like to take this opportunity to bring to the attention of the minister that the people of Kumi District are dying. Every other day we bury at least five people. If you calculate that, it is a big number in a month. If you go to Atutur Hospital for an operation, since it is the only government referral hospital, they tell you they cannot operate you. They refer you to a private clinic, where a government doctor, paid by the Government, will operate you from and at a cost, which is not less than Shs 400,000. Sometimes, they refer you to Ongino, a private hospital. 

Mr Speaker, if an old person goes to that government hospital, they will say they have nothing to give them and will ask them go die. They will say they are not going to take care of them because there is no medicine in the hospital. The stock-outs are a big challenge. I am wondering why the Committee on Health did not visit my district, which has a big challenge at Atutur Hospital as I speak. 

Mr Speaker, I am using this opportunity to bring to the attention of the minister the plight of the people of Kumi District. This crisis has been there for the last four months. When medicines are brought from the National Medical Stores, they are not accounted for. I was actually planning to write to your office, Madam Minister, together with colleagues to request you to visit Kumi District the coming week. Now that this opportunity has presented itself on the Floor, as a Member of Parliament from that district, I would like to invite the minister to come to Kumi District next week and look at the situation of that hospital; the district is in a dire situation. I am sorry for using this platform but this is the best platform I can use as the representative of my people.

So, I believe that you have already heard those concerns and this report is relevant because you have visited hospitals and health centres including mine in Kumi District, particularly the Kumi Referral Hospital. I think that was a very important issue, which I needed to raise with you. I thank you very much.

4.40
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to also thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting this elaborate report. 

I would like to concur with you on quite a number of issues. When the lunch allowance, accommodation for staff and the hard-to-reach allowances are not operational, the health workers will not be motivated to work although this should not be an excuse for them not to work. 

I had a very nasty experience when I took a patient who had been referred from Atiak Health Centre IV to St Marys Hospital Lacor and later to Mulago. When we reached Mulago, it took my intervention for her to see a doctor. That is how bad things are in Mulago.

The other question I have for the minister is: what category of medicines is available in the public health facilities especially the antibiotics? I have had scenarios – and this is not only at Mulago – where I have been requested to buy specific antibiotics for patients. When I had a patient at Gulu Referral Hospital, I had to buy medicine and not just antibiotics but also antimalarial, including gloves. When I was at Mulago National Referral Hospital, I was asked to buy antibiotics. 

Therefore, my question is: what category of medicine is actually available in these public health facilities? This will help us tell our people that when they go to Mulago, they should expect this and that, and not the other medicine. Otherwise, it becomes very difficult for us to say, we want more money yet - (Member timed out.)

4.43
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for presenting this report. 

Mr Speaker, what we have heard about these few health units in the Eastern region is true of all health units all over the country. Of course, the situation is appalling everywhere other than the referral hospitals that have been renovated.

I am wondering what happened to the cost sharing policy. It is because we purport to be offering free medical services yet we do not. Patients present themselves and the best they can get is just a prescription. Otherwise, they are asked to go buy medicines from the outside in the nearby clinics and/or pharmacies yet they cannot afford it. Why don’t we have a clear scheme where people can contribute? 

Honourable minister, where is the national health insurance policy that was designed to help our people  - those who are able to contribute to this scheme can do so and those who cannot, be subsidised for them to access equitable health services and prevent more deaths? 

Yes, know that every sub-county is supposed to have a Health Centre III, but is the construction going to start? I am asking this because the budget was approved. Some of our districts, for example, Mitooma, have several sub-counties that do not have Health Centres III.

Mr Speaker, really the situation on health services in this country needs specific attention. (Member timed out.)

4.45
MS AGNESS KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. However, my concern goes to the minister. For long, we have been complaining about understaffing with the workers being over burdened by doing extra work yet they earn miserable salaries. 

They have also mentioned the lunch allowance - if you divide Shs 66,000 by 22 working days, the lunch will go at the rate of Shs 3,000 per day. If you move around, mainly in Kampala now, you cannot get lunch at a rate below Shs 3,000. I would like to call upon the minister to provide a comprehensive plan of how she is going to replace –(Interruption)

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, my colleague for giving way. I would like to give information to the House in regard to the lunch allowance for the health workers that this very financial year, on the recommendations of the committee, that figure was revised upwards and approved by this Parliament, to Shs 288,000. So, it is no longer what the committee found when they went for the visit. I thank you.

MS KUNIHIRA: Thank you - (Member timed out.)

4.47
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the committee for the report presented. Indeed, like a colleague has said, what you found out in Kampala and Eastern Uganda is actually what is happening almost in the entire country. Health service delivery in the country is appalling; we need to do much more. 

I would like to talk about the issue of drugs stock out but also the static budget for medicines. What do we consider and what formula do we use to compute how much money we allocate for medicines in the health centres? I know here at Parliament, we appropriate the budget for Ministry of Health but when it comes to allocating money for medicines in the districts, I do not know the formula. This budget has been static for a long time yet the population keeps increasing with the disease cost increasing too.

For cases like my district, Bundibugyo, it is even worse. The money we are allocated is for the population our health centres are serving but we are a border district - and I know other border districts also have the same problem - with Congolese who come to our health facilities yet their numbers are more than that of the residents of the district; the budget remains the same. The policy of Government is that we allow these people, because they are our neighbours, to enjoy our health facilities at no cost. So, the budget that is meant to sustain the district in terms of medicine for one month –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if there is any member who has issues different from what the chairperson has communicated about the concerns from the hospitals - human resource, the numbers and the condition of service, supply of drugs, cases of stock out – (Interjections) - usually, when the Speaker is talking, Members sit - equipment, their use, misuse and none use. We have heard of cases of where new equipment has been kept in stores for 10 to 15 years; issues of accessibility and proximity to hospitals and conditions of the buildings. Is there any Member who has anything other than those above?

4.50
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The different issue I have which has not been captured by the committee is the fact that an operation in this country must be paid for. I do not know whether that is a Government policy. However, just like a police bond, each and every operation on a patient is and must be paid for. Short of that, there is no operation that will be performed on the patient.

Secondly, Mr Speaker the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That matter was covered by the chairperson. Let us only deal with any matter that has not been raised.

4.52
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very Much, Mr Speaker. Two clarifications I would like to seek from the chairperson. 

One is whether during their visits, they had interface with patients. I am raising this because I would like to gauge the level of patient satisfaction, which I know is very important in hospitals and health facilities.

Secondly, I also want to know the category of the staff that are lacking because he told us that at Mulago National Referral Hospital, there are 581 staffing gaps; what are the categories? And what are the reasons for these staffing gaps? Are they financial, lack of qualification or staff turnover? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.53
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Mr Speaker, Koboko Health Centre IV was elevated to a district hospital three financial years ago. However, up to now, Koboko Health Centre IV has remained at the same status without a budget provision, even when it was given in writing. So, I would like to know from the honourable minister what Koboko has done not to benefit from the – (Interjections)– I was in Cabinet and fought during that time to get it on board.

4.54
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr speaker, for giving me this opportunity. There are two things I would like to add on and one is the treatment of Hepatitis B cases. Until now, there are so many who are sick, for example, Ngora where I come from, in Teso and the entire Eastern Uganda. Unfortunately, there is no budget for it.

Secondly, the vaccines are getting finished yet people still want that service. I thank you very much.

4.54
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The chairperson of the committee has not emphasised the area of sanitation and hygiene in our health centres.

I was at Kiruddu Hospital in Makindye yesterday and I can tell you that I could not stand there long. Patients were there with dirty water flowing from place to place. We have to explore areas of inter-sectoral coordination in terms of sanitation and hygiene in health centres.

It is true we have the primary healthcare unit at the Ministry of Health but when you go to places like Butaleja and the different health centres - I used to be a Member of the Committee of Health - the situation is very much wanting.

Today we are talking about 23,000 Ugandans, according to the statistics, dying of diseases relating to poor sanitation and hygiene that could be preventable like Diarrhea, Hepatitis B, which is alarming in Teso and many other areas.

Therefore, we are better off preventing than budgeting for illnesses. If we prioritise sanitation and hygiene in our health centres; if we had better coordination of sectors between ministries of health, water, gender and local governments, we would be addressing very many health issues in the country. I beg to submit.

4.55
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Mr Speaker, ideally a national referral hospital must be better than any other health facility in the country. Mulago is the only National Hospital Uganda has -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one we already know; is there anything new?

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, for your guidance, Mr Speaker. Many patients go to the national referral hospital but they are sent to private clinics around Wandegeya and Kampala for even blood tests.

I would like to get the difference. A clinic to be better than a national referral hospital is awkward. I believe this is new. It has not been mentioned before –(Laughter)– and I need a very perfect answer to convince me. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please let us contribute new ideas to the report.

4.57
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is new. The committee is not covering the districts with hospitals, for example, Kalungu.

Most of our hospitals are missionary founded and are better than Government hospitals. When you look at their charges, you realize they are low. However, Government has failed to invest money into these hospitals through the Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement. 

I would pray that the chairperson of the committee kindly pays attention to these hospitals. Well, you are constructing new health centres, but we have those missionary, Islamic or/and church of Uganda-founded hospitals that you are not giving any kind of support to help our patients. They are well established and they can manage Government funds better than some of our health centres where money is swindled. I pray that that can take place.

Mr Speaker, for example, I can state on record and the minister has been helping me – and I would like to thank you, hon. Sarah Opendi. They gave me an ambulance from Government in one of my missionary-founded health centres at Kyamulibwa although the very minister has refused to sign the release of my ambulance. But it is the only health centre -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it your ambulance or for the health centre? (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: Actually its mine too because normally when I get sick, I go there for medication. Thank you.

4.58
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What is new in Mbale is that the committee never visited the entire hospital. There is an eye clinic that was put up by the Norwegians - we do not have specialists there and it is not operating at all.

Now you talked about the health section but in Mbale there is no medicine. When patients go there, they are sent outside yet Mbale Hospital takes care of the entire eastern region as it used to be but we do not have doctors in that hospital. 

The intern doctors are the ones being sent to the theatre to operate people and people keep dying in the theatres.

Patients are also asked to buy gloves and they are sent outside the hospital to buy medicine. That is what people are going through day after day.  

The other thing I would like to appreciate is that we used to have a man called James Kakooza. He was a Minister of State for Primary Healthcare sometime back and he sits this side these days. That man used to make impromptu visits to hospitals and got doctors away.

I would like to ask you to emulate him by visiting these hospitals and bring it to the attention of the directors of the hospitals because they are never there - the senior doctors have their own clinics. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.


 5.00
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for presenting this report. 

I would like to know when Oyam District will get a hospital. This is because at the moment, we do not have any Government hospital. Can the minister clarify to us about this? It was unfortunate that the committee did not reach the northern parts of the country.

Secondly, I also would like to know whether the committee did not find any problem with the physiotherapy because during my visit, this was a big problem and a gap in many of the health facilities; they don’t have physiotherapists yet their services are demanded by our people who get accidents and related critical health issues.

Mr Speaker, sometimes when doing my private field visits, I get to note that some maternity wards do not have curtains. Did the committee also find some things like that and what is the ministry going to do about this critical problem because this affects the women?

Then, finally –(Member timed out.) 

5.01
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): I will only ask two questions because I have to speak under duress. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, now that you are under duress, please sit.     Let us have the Member for Kumi Municipality.  

5.02
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out from the committee whether they took time to look at the visitors’ book to see whether the ministers ever visited the hospitals, especially Mbale. You see Mbale regional hospital is the one that hosts the entire Teso and neighbouring districts. I do not know the number of times the minister takes to visit this hospital.

Secondly, concerning the issue of ambulances, what is our policy on fuel? Who is supposed to fuel these ambulances? Is it the ministry, hospitals, the patients, the pregnant women about to deliver or the MPs? (Laughter) We need to know this because this is where our problem lies. We have endeavoured, as Members of Parliament, to privately procure these ambulances, but fuelling them is a big issue.

Finally, about the issue of people working in hospitals as senior doctors, what is our policy because there should be a wall between doctors who are practicing privately and those who are working with Government? When will we bring such clear policies such that if you have decided to work with Government, you commit yourself and if you have decided to quit, you do it so that all people know. When are you bringing that policy and if it is already in place, can you comment about it?

5.03
MR RICHARD OTIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. The issue I would like to raise, which the committee did not touch, and I would also like the ministry to interest itself in, is about child theft and exchange of babies at Mulago Hospital. Despite, the high numbers of 39,000 deliveries, there are still many mothers who fear to go and deliver from Mulago because they think if they go there, their babies will either be stolen or exchanged. 

There are many mothers, who have given birth to twins, but their babies were stolen and they are told them that they gave birth to only one child. 

Mr Speaker, this is a vice which the ministry needs to look into and I think that the committee would do better for this country to interest itself in it. And as you have also heard from colleagues, this vice is spread across the country.

There are many mothers who would access safe deliveries in Government hospitals, but due to the fear, they cannot. Somebody who would be a “nalongo” or “salongo” is denied that opportunity just because one of the twins has been stolen.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you know the difference?   

5.05
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My issue is a practical incident and it happened to me yesterday. While I was in my constituency, a patient from Toroma was taken to Katakwi District Hospital. From Katakwi Hospital, this same patient was supposed to be taken to Soroti. Both ambulances from Toroma and Katakwi broke down on the way. What the residents did was to hijack my car to transport the patient from Katakwi to Soroti. I would like the minister to explain to the country the person responsible for the maintenance and servicing of these ambulances?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That matter was raised already.

5.06
MR CHARLES IIUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I would like to know from both the minister and committee is: since they mentioned the issue of Naguru, I do not understand why they did not interest themselves in finding out the status of Naguru Friendship Hospital as of now. This is because Naguru Friendship Hospital was upgraded from Naguru Health Centre IV, which belonged to KCCA. Recently, we heard rumors that KCCA is going to take over Naguru Friendship Hospital? What is the status of this hospital?

Secondly, can the minister tell this House something about the rumors we have heard that some of the health centres II have been stopped from receiving medicines from National Medical Stores? Three of the health centres II from my constituency have been stopped. I was advised to complain and when I wrote a letter formally; I went to the Ministry of Health, they pushed my letter to the pharmacy. When I went to follow it –(Member timed out.)

5.07
MR ELIAS ASIKU (NRM, Koboko County North, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two issues. One is: it is known that there will never be enough funds to finance the health sector. 

However, what did not come out very clear in this report is about the plans the ministry intends to put in place to minimize the issue of stockouts. For example, the concept of holistic delivery of health care which tried to look at the causes of some sicknesses; some people go to hospitals, when they simply require a counsellor. However, because they are in hospital, a doctor will still prescribe medicine yet they might not need that medicine. This is because our health care delivery system is weak. 

Secondly, is the issue regarding cost sharing - I was in Mulago when they introduced cost sharing and it was contributing about 24 per cent of hospital requirements and it added value but this has been scrapped and we know the effect.

When supply of services was centralised under National Medical Stores, the prices of medicine went up and this has not been investigated. 

I have evidence that when supply of drugs and medical sundries was tendered to National Medical Stores, the prices of these drugs went up –(Member timed out.)

5.09
MR SSOZI MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to commend the committee’s work. My concern is that, when you moved around in all the hospitals - I am very certain you were informed that some health workers report late while others absent themselves. We are empowered by our Rules of Procedure to take some action because we have the powers of the High Court –(Interjections)– yes and the Speaker will advise on this.

However, did you take any action about the issues raised because some of the measures needed immediate action? Did you take some action while you were there in the field? Thank you for reporting back to Parliament. That is what I wanted to find out. Thank you so much. 

5.10
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity and committee chairperson, for the elaborate report. I have an inquiry directed to the minister. It has been reported that the super specialised hospital was supposed to be completed by August 2017 with the capacity to conduct some organ transplants. 

Mr Speaker, as I speak now, my aunt is due for a kidney transplant and has been referred to India at a cost of 150 million, which the family has still failed to raise. If this is complete, then that would be a short cut for such ailing patients who are at a risk of losing their lives. I would like to hear from the honourable minister whether this is completed.

Secondly, I come from Kibale district but it does not have even a single ambulance and all the patients who are referred –(Interjection)– yes, it is that bad. My district does not even have one ambulance so all patients who are referred risk their lives, if there is no rescue. 

What happened in Toroma happened to me one time when I visited the hospital in December. My car was used to help a lady who had to be transfused to the nearby hospital so it is as bad as that. I need clarification from the minister.

5.12
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The health sector strategic plan 2 that was passed in either 2002/2003 provided for health unit management committees, which would help in the general management and linking the patients to the staff. They would assist in issues like sanitation, general supervision and so much more. Honourable minister, I wonder whether you would like to revisit this health sector strategic plan so that you can solve some of these issues that are faced in the ministry. 

5.13
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue I would like to raise concerns primary health care. Under the health care service delivery systems, there was an establishment of village health teams that were supposed to help in monitoring health related issues at home; issues to do with hygiene, mobilisation towards health care, service delivery and the rest. However, as of now, when you go to most of these villages, these institutions that were supposed to help to improve health care information and service mobilisation are inactive. I would like to know why this is so. 

Secondly, concerning staff retention and maintenance, there was an introduction of hard-to-reach areas allowances, especially for districts where doctors do not reach. For example, the other week we were in Bulambuli and we were told that there is no doctor in the whole district. The argument was that the doctors expected a hard-to-reach area allowance. In West Nile, Arua is a hard-to-reach area while a place such as Kirwa located very far at the border is not. Therefore, I would like to know the criteria in relation to retention of health workers. Thank you.

5.15
MR WILSON KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, I have two issues to raise in this report; first of all, I thank the chairperson and the committee for this elaborate report. I also wanted to know whether the minister has arrangements to address the attitudes of health workers in this country. Their attitude has changed. You find that health workers are rough, inconsiderate and the drugs that come are not given to the patients, which demoralises them from going to the health centres. Therefore, I do not know whether they have a plan to address the attitudes of health workers. 

It looks like some health workers go to these health centres by force. I do not know whether they are forced to work or it is just the attitude. I do not know whether the minister has got a regimen for this. I would request the ministry to take interest in the attitude of the health workers. 

Secondly, the expenses in the hospitals are too high and unaffordable by our people. If you can go to the health centre and your bill is Shs 10 or 20 million because of an ailment you cannot manage yourself, I think it is too high. I do not know what the ministry is developing in this area because the expenses are too high and our people are dying –(Member timed out.)

5.17
MS BETTY AWOR (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague has just said what I wanted to say concerning the attitude of health workers. Many of them are rude and arrogant. They are quite negative so I hope that will be looked into.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, Apac hospital has no x-ray equipment. My patients have to travel all the way to Lira for that service. I am also thinking about a mortuary for Apac hospital. I wish that could also be looked into. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.18
MR MOSES ADOME (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The entire country complains about poor health facilities; all the way from Kampala to the western part of the country. Then it is more dangerous in Karamoja because I think we live by the grace of God. For example where I come from, ever since H.E Idi Amin established our Health Centre IV in 1974, we have remained without one in Kotido. 
Our Government has never thought of constructing for us a hospital. 

Probably the minister can interest herself in knowing that there are also people in that area who require the same services that are being talked about here. This is because on the other side of the country, you do not get syringes, cannulas and people just survive like that. Thank you. 

5.19
MS SARAH WEKOMBA (Independent, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for the statement. However, in Bulambuli, the ambulance broke down for the last two years. As I speak now, with the floods that are in one of my sub-counties; lower Bulambuli, still my people cannot access services because they have no transport to the nearby health centres. There is going to be a break out of cholera soon. This will affect my people so I would like the minister to come in and take interest because my people are not well with the intensifying rains that are going on. Thank you. 

5.20
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report. This report is as good as produced from the side where they never went. The problems are the same like in West Nile. In Obongi Health Centre IV, doctors were recruited and all of them have run away. Right now, there is no doctor on the ground but on the list of Government, it is indicated that they have posted people there. 

Secondly, attempts were made to sponsor health workers for upgrading but after their studies, they do not go back. The question therefore is; is there any arrangement between central Government and the district authorities on an individual that may want to go for upgrading? Do they get scholarships in the name of hard-to-reach areas like Obongi, disadvantaged areas like Karamoja? Scholarships are sometimes given to people specifically for those places. But after a person uses it for upgrading, they reject going back to the rural setting because they feel that they are now consultants. They need to remember that the springboard is from that rural setting. What do we do?

Lastly, the question of health referral systems; Uganda has a good system from Health Centre I; which is a village health unit, health Centre II, to the national referral hospital. What is the policy of referrals in Uganda? You find that a health centre can jump a district hospital to go to the regional hospital or to a national referral hospital without – (Member timed out)

5.22
MR WILLIAM ZINKURATIRE (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): I have three concerns to raise besides thanking the committee. 

    i) I did not hear the committee talk about whether they checked attendance list and whether it is simply pen and paper. One can come and register and go without working. I know a case in Wakiso, there are friends of mine who are working in health facilities of Government but will frankly tell you that, “For me I work for only eight days in a month.”
    ii) Another concern is, when the committee goes on parliamentary work, they should not leave any stone unturned. I do not know whether you were able to check – you talked about having checked the stores and the theatre, treatment rooms and the wards. I wonder if you also managed to get time to check the wash rooms and whether the ratio is equivalent to the patients. 
    iii) I did not hear the committee talk about waste management. Last night, the people of Kawempe were complaining that the waste from Kawempe Hospital is affecting the surrounding area. I thank you.

5.24
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to join my colleagues to thank the committee for the report. Some of these referral hospitals like Mbale which serve hard-to-reach, hard-to-stay, hard-to-work districts are grappling with the challenge of attraction and retention of health workers. I have seen in the report a recommendation by the committee for re-centralisation for recruitment and deployment of health workers. This falls far short of the spirit of decentralisation.

Decentralisation had the spirit of bringing services nearer to the people. When you talk of adequate supervision, the district health officers fail to supervise some of these staff whose salaries are wired from the cenrte. There is no way they can effect serious discipline on them. That is why you see the laissez faire attitude towards work by the health workers.

There was another point raised in the report on the non-functional equipment that are lying idle in some of the health facilities, yet they would have been recommended by the boards of survey for disposal. The challenge is that the line ministry and the centre engineers - they ask for huge export funds from the poor facilities. It is usually the reason for the delay to put off some of these non-functional medical equipment, like x-rays. In Bududa Hospital, they are lying there. They are actually a disaster. They could be another disaster besides the land slides. Thank you.

5.26
MS SHEILA MWINE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee. I gree with my colleagues on all that has been said. However, I would like to point out one or two things you asked us to talk about - those that have not been talked about. 

I would like to talk about health out-reaches and camps that are usually conducted by charitable organisations. Members of Parliament also conduct health camps from time to time. We need support in this because we are giving a service to the same people that the hospitals are supposed to be reaching. We are not treating diseases that are new. However, we find it difficult to access materials, medicines and even things to use. You find that you have to plead with districts, with the doctors to give you support in this and yet we are treating the people. I, therefore, would like the minister to take this up because we do give support. Once in a while in our interest, we want the population but also want that service delivered to those outreaches. We need to sponsor outreaches, especially in districts where we do not have referral hospitals like Kiruhura. 

The Health Centres IV do not have the facilities that befit them. Secondly, on the health seeking behavior of our population, most of our population is misguided by the churches and the traditional healers. They would rather not seek proper health services but go to the traditional healers. They end up going to health facilities when it is too late.

I would like to request the ministry to take this up and offer awareness and guidance to our population in their health seeking behaviour. I finally would like to talk about specialised units like the psychiatric units, the dentistry and other specialised units. Hospitals with good services are very far and yet these people need the services very urgently. With the stress levels and the drug- abuse related mental break down, they need these services brought near –(Member timed out)
 
5.28
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise two issues. One, I would like to appreciate my sister, hon. Sarah, for the good work she is doing in the ministry. However, you are well aware that we also have a problem at the border. Malaba is a very busy place and people are very vulnerable. We have diseases that affect people at that point. We need the health centres there to be upgraded to a status that helps us to manage the challenges that we encounter through cross-border movement.

Secondly, I would like to appreciate the ministry in partnership with National Medical Stores. I do not know if my colleagues also receive messages whenever drugs are delivered to their health centres. I do receive those messages and I always make a follow up. The only challenge that I have discovered is where you receive a message that 10 packages have been delivered to a health centre and when you make a follow up call, they don’t give the real details of what is in the 10 packages. That mechanism of following up the deliveries needs to be improved. We need to know the contents of the deliveries. This will be of great help. There is fear that engulfs them whenever I make a call. They always try to find out the caller. They fear that there could be a leakage there.

Finally, I think the ministry should also realise that we are the first line of intervention as far as medical ailments in our constituencies are concerned –(Member timed out.)

5.30
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaaka County South, Kyegegwa): Mr Speaker, I thank my brother, Dr Bukenya and his committee. My only concern is that in that report, I did not hear anything to do with the creation or the construction of the new health centres IV in the newly created constituencies.

I also did not hear a policy or an attempt at regulating drugs especially the energy drinks that have flooded the market. I also did not hear what the Government policy is on the increasing cases of diabetes.

5.32
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is on labour wards. I would like the Ministry of Health to take stock of the labour wards wherever they are and to see whether they are enough to serve that population. We all know that when; you cannot wait. Now, in my constituency, the labour ward was constructed but it has a lot that is missing and it is being used as a store. When the women come, they are sent away to places which are quite far and it is not only happening there. It is pathetic.

The other thing that irritates me is not only there but other places the Mama kits are sold and yet they should be free. This should also be looked into. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should stop here. Hon. Nandala you have just risen now but there are Members who rose before you and I have not allowed them. I will not allow any further debate. Honourable minister, you will respond to these issues briefly.

5.34
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. James Baba, former State Minister of Internal Affairs is my brother in law. I used to tell him when he was in the cabinet, that why do you defend each and everything and then –(Interruption)

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to raise an issue which is totally irrelevant to what we are discussing right now, that is about the health care delivery system in connection to my previous post in Cabinet, and something we may have discussed in private to spill it now in the House? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, about the private discussions those are between the two of them. However, this House is very strict on relevance, whatever you do be relevant to the debate. Honourable member, you have not been relevant, so please be relevant.

MR MUGUME: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. However, Mr Speaker, the point is, I wanted to emphasise to the ministers, when we raise issues here being faced by our people, please stand and support us as representatives of the people. Whenever we raise the point you do not want to support and you know where the power belongs - power is in the cabinet –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The clarification I would like to seek from the Leader of Opposition is - you mean these ministers do not come from the hospitals you have been talking about to see the problems we go through so that they can also report or for them they see and say, “Let them die” or for them they are from Mars such that they cannot see anything. Where do these ministers come from? (Laughter) 

MR MUGUME: Thank you, hon. Nadala Mafabi. I think they are here and they are listening and at the right time they will answer. They must have heard the message.

Mr Speaker, I have some few comments I would like to make. First, I would like to support our colleagues who talked about health education. Mr Speaker, the challenge we have in this country is lack information, which causes some of the diseases we have especially in our communities even amongst ourselves.

Recently, I visited a clinic here in Kampala and I tried to ask about issues related to diabetes, cancer and hypertension. The problem is just within our eating habits - just food. The doctor will tell you what you are supposed to eat in the morning, break time, lunch then in the evening. This is the information that we want. 

He told me that he recently visited Apollo Hospital in India and half of the patients in that hospital were from Uganda. What we need - I agree with hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine and hon. Jacqueline Amongin that at least, the ministry should design some activities of health education especially for women. Involve the local governments and come up with some sensitisation activities so that we can see many people attending these health education classes.

Mr Speaker, I would like to report that as I speak, there is a problem in Kisizi hospital. Floods cut off power leading to the death of three children who were on oxygen and up to now, you cannot access the children’s ward, surgery ward and men’s ward and this is a very big referral hospital. It servers the whole of Kigezi region - it is a missionary hospital but up to now you cannot access that hospital. I do not know whether the minister has information from there.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you in particular, and Parliament as a whole. We have talked much about health issues in this country - the Tenth Parliament has been here for a while, we have actually gone to visit these hospitals, but I do not know what the problem is. This is a challenge to all of us.

However, for this case, the minister should come up with a comprehensive plan for the health sector in this country; it is a big challenge and it is costly. In our communities, when you are diagnosed and told that you have diabetes, hypertension and cancer, you start to write your will because you are not secure.

Just one tablet - I have a relative who is diabetic, just one tablet is Shs 30,000 or 25,000 and you need that tablet every day for the rest of your life. Where can you get that money?

Even if you can afford when you are still serving, after three or four years, where are you going to get that money. I think this is a time for all of us to think and see how we can help our people. Mr Speaker, I would like to emphasize the point of congestion in our health facilities. This sometimes leads to sharing of wards by male and female patients as well as adults and children. 

Continued rise in the boda-boda accident victims now almost accounts for up to 90 per cent of the unit cases at Mulago Hospital. The Government should regulate the boda-bodas. We know there is politics behind these boda-bodas but we need to come up with a policy on these boda-bodas. Otherwise, most of our people have lost their lives and we raised these issues. Of course, these are followed by the iron-bar victims, which is also a problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, please briefly summarise.

THE MINSITER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its very elaborate report and we appreciate the recommendations therein. A number of colleagues have spoken on various items. I may not respond to each because some were repeated. However, allow me first of all to begin with the issue of the refugees. Indeed, we have a huge refugee population in the country and our Constitution does not permit us to discriminate against refugees because these are people who did not come here intentionally but were driven by difficult circumstances such as war. 

We are also signatories to the protocols regarding refugees and, therefore, must abide by these protocols. However, regarding the funding or support to healthcare for the refugees, we have been in talks with the various agencies. We know that United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), for instance, supports healthcare in the refugee camps. However, because these people are free to move out, they sometimes move to our health facilities and do not restrict themselves to these facilities. We are still in discussions to see how best to support this huge refugee population.

Mr Speaker, the other issue that has been raised across the board is the issue regarding the stock outs of drugs. You well know that we had challenges during the 2015/2016 financial year where due to our currency fluctuation against the dollar, the National Medical Stores had a huge financing gap and this money was not readily available. We discussed this matter on the Floor of this House. This contributed a lot towards the stock outs, especially towards the end of the last financial year. That has since been resolved and this financial year we hope to move in a better manner. 

However, Members need to note that National Medical Sores receives only 40 per cent of our drug needs as a country. Therefore, it is impossible for them to go beyond the budget that is given to them. Therefore, on the issue of stock out, I would like to be very clear here that we may not completely have it out and this is why our focus as the Ministry of Health is really on prevention and I would like to thank the committee for bringing that out very clearly. 

We have had the village health teams since early 2000. Mr Speaker, initially, these village health teams all agreed to do a voluntary job but as you know they have now been demanding for a pay because when partners go to the districts, they give them some facilitation. We are now coming up with a new strategy of the community health extension workers who will be better trained, given a small facilitation monthly and the village health teams will remain to do voluntary work. Of course, let us cross the bridge and discuss that detail when we bring the paper to this House –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. Do we still get donations from partners of this country such as Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA)? I remember we signed an agreement between Uganda and Denmark when they came and built Entebbe Medical Stores and supplied drugs – the essential drugs programme. Is that programme still continuing or not?

MS ACHIENG: Mr Speaker, we get support from our partners and that is a fact. However, you know that the areas of support are restricted. It is not to cover our entire disease burden as a country. Most of our partners have been supporting us in the HIV/AIDS interventions, malaria and TB. However, you find that areas such as Hepatitis B and non-communicable diseases are not supported.

Mr Speaker, regarding the general hospital capacity, there was a question as to when we are expanding these hospitals because the population has increased. All this depends on funding. You are aware that we recently renovated and constructed new buildings in a number of regional referral hospitals. We have really increased the bed capacity in these facilities and we shall do this in a phased manner. On the question of “when”, I can only say “when funds are available” –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister as one of the members who has been key in signing most of these on behalf of the Government is that I remember I was with her in Senegal agreeing on the NDCs and the Abuja Declarations on aligning 15 per cent to health. The clarification I would like to get is, aware of the health situation in the country today – if we can get loans to cater for situations including refugees – what is it that the Ministry of Health cannot do in terms of bringing a comprehensive report requesting for funds to handle specific areas that directly address the concerns of the people? In addition, when we ratify and sign most of these instruments at the international level, how do you take them on as the Ministry of Health to ensure that they are realigned to our national planning and allocation of funds so that we seem to be moving forward as country in terms of advocating for the health of the people? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will put the question to this motion at exactly 6 O’clock.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Health does not allocate funds to itself. It is this House that appropriates and, therefore, we move with what we have been given. However, the Member is raising the issue of funding and, yes, we are aware that under the Abuja Declaration, we should be getting 15 per cent but as the Ministry of Health. You must know that we work with other institutions such as the Ministry of Water and Environment, which are also relevant to the health of the population. 

Mr Speaker, we have previously received loans because it is through loans that we managed to renovate and reconstruct some of the hospitals like Moroto, Kiryandongo, Mityana, Anaka and several others. Due to the time factor, I may not go into the details of that. Recently, Parliament passed a loan and we are in the process of mapping out the health facilities, which we are supposed to upgrade to health centre III status and others to health centre IV status. We shall inform the House in due course when we are done in a months’ time from now.

Regarding the issue of staffing and understaffing, I will handle it together with absenteeism that has been mentioned in various health facilities. We are aware of this challenge. You have heard about the biometric system, which we are putting in place. However, we also know that that will not be the final solution to our issues because even if I clocked in, I may likely be away and only come back to clock out.

I have said this on the Floor of this House and I would like to repeat it that, we do not have a policy on the issue of doctors working in different health facilities. We cannot move strongly against them because of the low pay. It is a matter that we have discussed. We have agreed at Cabinet level that after the roads, the next sector to focus on, and we hope that in the next financial year, we shall be able to do something to improve the salaries of these health workers. Once that is done, then we can be able to strongly stop the issue of moon lighting. Otherwise, it is a bit of challenge right now.

Regarding the health camps, I would like to indicate to Members of Parliament that we do appreciate the health camps that they conduct in their constituencies. However, our challenge is that most of them have been requesting for support in terms of drugs, which is not catered for in any budget line. You can see that we have about 48 per cent of the medicines that we require as a country. Therefore, for supporting the health camps, we normally liaise with the districts to see if they can pick something here and there to support Members in the health camps. Because of the big volumes of letters we receive from Members of Parliament, we are coming up very soon to give our position and guidance on how to move forward with health camps.

The ambulances in this country - we have given ambulances to health centres IV and hospitals. However, these ambulances are poorly maintained due to inadequate funds. They are not fueled. When patients need to move from one facility to another, they have to foot the cost. I would like to inform the House that we are coming up with an ambulance service. Already, we presented a paper to Cabinet and we were asked not to come up with an authority but have a small team within the Ministry of Health. Recruitment has been done; we now have a commissioner in charge of ambulances and we shall soon come to this House with the new policy on the ambulances so that we can have a standalone ambulance service away from the health facilities because they are also mismanaged by the in-charges of these facilities. They do not have transport and so, they use these as their transport.

Colleagues have raised individual issues of maternity and equipment not being functional. I was on the Floor of this House about a month ago, regarding the equipment that are nonfunctional. Mr Speaker, one of the biggest challenges is that we do not have in some instances, staffs to operate these equipment and in some instances, the equipment were procured and placed in facilities where they are not supposed to be. I reported to the House that we are going to move through. We have already got a report from our teams that were sent to the field to have some of these equipment that were placed in health facilities without the requisite staff there, moved to other facilities so that they can be utilised.

On the issue of referral hospitals raised by hon. Fungaroo, I would like to indicate that we have a referral system in this country. However, there is a challenge in enforcement. People move from their villages straight to a health centre IV as long as the service there is good. People move from their villages without going to the health centre III straight to the hospitals. Mr Speaker, once Mulago, a specialist hospital is fully functional, we shall start with it so that no one goes to that facility without a referral from the lower health facility. We have let this happen because of the challenges in staffing at lower health facilities and because of that, we have not come in strongly to object to this.
On the issue of Kiruddu, Kawempe and Naguru, it is being discussed at Cabinet level. These were originally health centres IV but now, they have been elevated with these loans that we received from the African Development Bank to referral hospitals. We are due to present a Cabinet paper on this so that Cabinet pronounces itself on where these facilities should belong. As you all know, teaching hospitals are supposed to have senior consultants - and placing them under KCCA may not be the right decision.

In a nutshell, we need increased funding to our health facilities in order for us to properly provide services to Ugandans. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that the report of the sectoral Committee on Health on oversight visits to public health facilities in Kampala District and eastern Uganda be adopted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Today, we have done well. It is only one item that we have not been able handle because it was withdrawn by the minister responsible since they were not ready with it; item 4(1). This House is now adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.00.p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 September 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 
