Tuesday, 4 September 2012

Parliament met at 2.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I want to thank you again for what we were able to do and achieve last week, which was historic. If we continue with that spirit, by the end of this session, we will have accomplished a lot of work for the people of this country and those dealing with this country. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS SCHEME REGULATIONS, 2012

2.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS BOARD OF TRUSTEES (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme Regulations, 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this particular document will be sent to the appropriate committee.

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will alter the Order Paper to allow the Minister of Finance deal with item III first. She has a meeting to attend immediately after the presentation.

2.21
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will go straight to the report. The purpose of this ministerial statement is to update Parliament on the Youth Venture Capital Fund that I proposed to Parliament in the financial year 2011/2012 budget.

The Government of Uganda established the Youth Venture Capital Fund to support small and medium enterprises (SMEs) managed by Ugandans aged 18 to 35 years old, who are also known as youth. This support would enhance employment creation and the provision of basic services and goods, while generating tax revenues and increasing benefits to the economy. 

In the last financial year, the fund totalled Shs 25 billion comprised of a Government of Uganda Shs 12.5 billion funded from a grant from the German Development Agency (KFW), with equal contribution of Shs 12.5 billion from the participating financial institutions. 

In the financial year 2012/2013 - in this one we have just entered - an additional Shs 6.5 billion has been provided for the Youth Venture Capital Fund equally funded by both the government and the participating financial institutions. This brings the overall revolving Youth Venture Capital Fund to Shs 31.5 billion.

In addition, a new scheme, the Graduate Venture Capital Fund has been established in this financial year 2012/2013 to provide a further Shs 32 billion for graduate entrepreneurs. This one is equally contributed by the Government of Uganda and the participating financial institutions. It is for those graduates from Ugandan universities with a degree that is not more than 10 years old.

Eligibility criteria

A fundamental aspect central to the Youth Venture Capital Fund is that it finances bankable project proposals presented by youth entrepreneurs and, therefore, must be appraised by financial institutions for financial viability. It is a revolving fund so the funds must revolve back so that others can borrow. 

Initially, eligible youth entrepreneurs were those who had attained ordinary level certificates or O’level and were from ages of 21 to 35 years. This criteria was amended after consultation with stakeholders to ensure that entrepreneurs from the ages of 18 to 35 years are eligible for loan financing and the educational requirement was removed. 

The other terms and conditions under which the funds can be applied for by eligible entrepreneurs are the following:

The purpose 

Must be growth or an expansion of an already existing business.

The duration 

A maximum of four years inclusive of a maximum of one year grace period.

The currency

All loan facilities are denominated in Uganda shillings.

Loan amount

Maximum credit facilities that can be provided to an individual entrepreneur or sole entrepreneur is Shs 5 million only, while a legal entity or a registered company with at least eligible shareholders/partners can access up to a maximum or be eligible for a maximum of Shs 25 million only.

Interest rate

The interest rate for this past financial year was lent out to eligible beneficiaries at a fixed rate of 15 percent per annum. This compared with other prevailing interest rates in the commercial market of up to 30 percent.

The facility fee

It is one percent of the loan amount and it is applicable only to those people who have succeeded in getting a loan. If they do not get a loan they do not have to pay any fee.
Contribution

Each borrower must demonstrate evidence of having already invested an amount equivalent to 10 percent of the loan amount requested in his or her particular business venture. So, if I was to request for Shs 5 million, I would have had to show that I have already put either money or in equipment, Shs 500,000. This encourages the borrower to have what they call an ownership of the business.

Security

Personal guarantees of the borrowers and a charge on their business assets. Each borrower is also required to provide two reputable local guarantors for the facility. The guarantors do not have to provide collateral. Further, these requirements may be waived by individual banks where the borrower is able to provide acceptable alternative security.

Borrowing

The fund only supports first time borrowers in the spirit of helping start-ups and ensuring that as many people as possible can apply for the funds.

Progress report

Mr Speaker, I am happy to say that the Youth Venture Capital Fund has registered notable and recordable success since its inception. Loans have been made and repayments have started to be paid back. 

Project implementation started in February 2012 due to the need to establish a legal framework and to incorporate stakeholder views. There was extensive discussion with stakeholders. 

The progress report received from the three participating financial institutions that participated in financial year 2011/2012 indicates that the proposals have been received from all parts of the country and reflect a wide range of enterprises and sectors as shown in the tables below.

Table 1 shows the disbursements so far as of 30 July 2012. The number of loans disbursed is 2,829; the value of the disbursed loans is Shs 11,060,918,380. 

Mr Speaker, with your permission, I will round up.

The number of loans and applications being processed is 1,947. The value of these applications being processed is almost Shs 7.5 billion.

The number of applications with incomplete information is 559. This is from the three banks which have participated this past financial year. At this point, I would like to report that we have received interest from at least 10 other financial institutions to participate in this financial year.

Table 2: The number and values of loans dispersed by region

In the central region, they were 1,225; western - 745; Eastern 427; southern 185; northern 247; for a total of 2,829 loans. 

Mr Speaker, you will note that this shows a concentration in the areas where there are jobless youth and has also shown where most sensitisation is required in the future. 

Table 3:  Enterprises funded by the sector

All sectors - a wide range of sectors in the economy have been funded by this fund - trade, agriculture, services industry, manufacturing, building and construction. As you can see, the majority so far are in trade and industry, but with a good representation from agriculture and the service industry with manufacturing, building and construction as a smaller share.

Table 4: Disbursement by bank

This shows which banks have been disbursing the most. Centenary has disbursed the most followed by Dfcu and Stanbic. This has shown that the more banks which are able to participate, the better. 

In section 4, I would like to look at the operational challenges the fund has encountered and from which lessons have been learnt for the future. 

Whereas the performance of the Youth Venture Capital Fund has been positive with good uptake, participating institutions have reported a number of challenges:

a)	Presentation of stage-managed proposals where youth applicants have been used as a cover by older people to obtain these funds.

b)	Some applicants have been found to be older than 35 despite their frustrations.

c)	Wrong perception 

Some youth still think that the main criteria is to be a youth regardless of the proposals’ eligibility. The banks reported that a youth would tell them that, “I have bought a proposal for Shs 50,000. So, why are you telling me I can’t get the money?” 

d)	Definition and role of guarantors 

A guarantor in this case must be a person of good repute within the local community and will help in monitoring as well as providing information about the borrower. He or she does not have to offer loan security.

e)	Awareness

Some rural areas have not yet received sufficient information about the Youth Venture Capital Fund and some bank officials have not yet conceptualised the terms and conditions under which the funds operate.

How are the above challenges being addressed?

First, in order to ensure greater effectiveness in the implementation of the fund, the following proposals have been agreed upon with the participating financial institutions and other key stakeholders.

The main innovation is that all future venture capital funds must be channelled through the Bank of Uganda. Bank of Uganda in turn will consider withdrawal requests from any financial institution that wishes to participate and is willing to abide by the fund criteria especially with regard to interest rates and matching contributions. These were formed this way so that the network can go countrywide wherever there is a financial institution which is willing to participate. 

As I mentioned earlier, we now have a total of 14 institutions ranging from commercial banks and micro-finance banks, as well as some other financial institutions which have been coming for meetings and informed our officials that they wish to participate and will provide counterpart financing. By funding through the financial institutions, we have been able to double the amount of money available for these enterprises. 

The second challenge is being addressed by carrying out extensive sensitisation and awareness campaigns to ensure adequate awareness about the fund so as to accelerate uptake especially in the Northern and Eastern regions. Youth Venture Capital business forums have already been successfully conducted by the government and financial institutions or the FIs in Mbale, Jinja, Kampala, Lira, Gulu and Arua. It is, therefore, agreed to continue conducting such forums across the country and, in addition, to other sensitisation approaches including but not limited to radio talk shows, press releases and sharing successful stories through testimonials from successful youth entrepreneurs. 

At this point, I am happy to report that just yesterday, Dfcu Bank held the first of 10 workshops to monitor and mentor people who have already borrowed money from them. They had 30 entrepreneurs from Kikuubo for a whole day workshop where they were receiving financial training and exchanging success stories. The media was well-represented - TV, press and radio. I am sure you will be reading about it. We have included at the back a small brief about what Dfcu is doing in this respective.

Centenary Bank has also pledged to start holding such workshops in the month of October. So, it will be possible for hon. Members and other stakeholders to attend the workshops, and see how the youth are doing their businesses, and help carry the message to other youth across the country.

Thirdly, monthly technical level meetings between Government and participating and intending financial institutions are being conducted to review the performance of the Youth Venture Capital Fund and develop criteria for the Graduate Venture Capital Fund.

Fourth, regular updates to the key stakeholders including honourable Members of Parliament for the Youth are being done. They are fully on board.

Before I submit, I would like to turn the page to what we call frequently asked questions. Here we have summarised some of the burning questions which have been asked by stakeholders. A person can go there and quickly refer to whatever problem they might have. If you like, I can go through it, but I think time will not permit.

I would like to go to a statement page where you see all the logos of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as well as Dfcu, Stanbic and Centenary, as proof that they have signed on to this. As you will understand, the MDs did not want to put their signatures on public documents since they run lending institutions.

It shows the hotline contacts; it shows the available branch networks. I would like to emphasise at this point that the managers very much request that any complaint be channelled to the hotlines or to the Ministry of Finance for quick resolution. Because once you know the specifics of a complaint, you can easily deal with it. For instance, just last week, one applicant was told by a branch manager that the money is not there. That manager was identified and has been disciplined by her management. So, we would like to appeal to all honourable members and other stakeholders to use this hotline contact. If they do not get satisfaction from that, then they can revert to the ministry.

After the available bank branch networks, there is a short description of the workshop which was carried out yesterday by Dfcu; the first of 10 to be done by Dfcu with Centenary Bank and Stanbic to follow. 

Mr Speaker, we feel in the ministry and in the financial community that this venture has now started an upward projectory after teething problems, and we are also very happy that we have been able to present this report. I think this is the first time such a venture has been able to be reported to Parliament. And I think it answers the questions we asked, Why doesn’t the Ministry of Finance run this? Why don’t the local governments run it? Why isn’t it in the Ministry of Gender and Youth? 

The answers to those questions are in the list there; Government is good at governance, but it is not good at evaluating, selecting, monitoring and ensuring repayment of bankable projects as I am sure we all know to our regret. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you honourable minister. Honourable members, this matter has been on and off; today we have got a comprehensive statement from the minister. I will allow debate on this subject for honourable members who want to contribute. This should be the proper time to have the discussion. I will give it 30 minutes, each Member taking three minutes. I will start with the honourable Member for Isingiro.

2.40
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report about the Youth Fund. When we had the recess, I managed to go through my constituency, Isingiro District, and I had meetings with the youth. In the entire Isingiro district, I did not meet a single person who had benefited from this fund. I only landed on one person who had put in his application and this was a person close to Mbarara Town. 

So, when I compare what I found in the field to what is presented here on page 3 - the number and value of loans dispatched by region - when you look at central, western – you will realise that Central took the biggest share with the West following. My interpretation of this is that those benefiting from this fund are mainly those people who stay in towns. So, those who are staying away from towns are not likely to benefit from this scheme. So, my proposal is for us to have another arrangement for our youths who are not in towns. It is very difficult for us to pass this money knowing that our youths are not going to benefit from it. 

2.43
MRS CECEILIA OGWAL (UPC, Woman Representative, Dokolo ): Mr Speaker, sometime ago, the youth - some of them from this Parliament - threatened to walk naked because they were not satisfied with what Government was telling them about the Youth Fund. Today, as the minister reads this statement, which to me is very important and relevant to the issue for which they were going to strip naked, I do not see the youth representative - I have seen one. But where are the rest of them; why are they not in the House. They should be here so that we who are elders can back you up knowing that you are actually here; and we pray that you do not strip naked again; do not threaten again because this statement has been brought to us and we do not see the youth MPs here –(Interjections)– if they are here let them stand; that is only one, where is the second one? 

4.45
MR MUSINGUZI YONA (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality Ntungamo): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to know whether it is in order for my senior and motherly friend in politics to insinuate that the youth fund was presented by only the youth and it is not a national cause. We are all here because we all have children who should be beneficiaries of this money. So, it is not about who presented it, but we are talking about it as a national issue. I know she is in PAC and she should be aware. So, is she in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable Member for Dokolo District was simply concerned that the threat was issued in this House by the Youth Members of Parliament and she does not want that threat carried forward because the situation has now changed and the opportunity has been accorded now. So, I think she was merely showing concern. And, these Members are entitled to be in the House at this time since no permission was sought from me or the Speaker to be away. I think the concern of the honourable Member for Dokolo is proper. Please wind up.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I appreciate your wise judgement on the concern I have expressed. Definitely, this is a national concern. But though it is a national concern, you must also be aware of the fact that when we were making the Constitution, we were aware that there is a sector of the community called the youth whose interests are unique from the rest of the populations. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the procedural point I am raising is that should we continue to debate this very important matter when the very people who are most interested in this matter are not here? And if they do not present themselves to today, I want to plead with you, Mr Speaker, as a matter of procedure, that it should not appear again and that they should not raise any voice inside the House or outside the House or threaten to strip naked, because the matter has been brought in broad-daylight and they are not here. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.46
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative, National): Thank you Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my senior – my mother actually, and she is a very close friend of mine. I am a little perturbed why today she is talking in that tone. I do not know whether she is putting us in order for failure to attend the proceedings of the House. 

But I beg your indulgence Mr Speaker. I am here and my colleagues are perhaps engaged in some other important business as well. I know that two are out of the country, and the other one has been on sick leave. But I am here fully constituted to represent the youth. Therefore, I want to beg the House to accord me the opportunity –(Interjections)– this issue has been a debate of the whole House and not only of the youth Members of Parliament. Therefore, I beg your indulgence that we proceed with this debate because Members are ready to make their contributions. If you can allow, I want to make my contribution – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I had allowed you to do.

MS AMODING: Okay, let me proceed by just making one comment. I think it might be premature if I make my submission now without first listening to what other Members of Parliament are going to say to this debate, especially since we are going to come up with something which we consider more sustainable and appropriate for our country as the Youth Representatives. 

At an appropriate time – we have informed the minister as well - that we are planning to move a private member’s Bill. Actually, it is the honourable minister who said it. She has allowed us to go and do further analysis and benchmark in some other countries again. Therefore, we are in discussions with the Minister of Finance to present to you honourable members what we are proposing to be a national fund to address this problem in a more sustainable way. And I think that those proposals will be better. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know very well that you are not entitled to contribute twice to a particular debate. So, that means you have concluded your debate on the subject. 

2.48
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for her statement though belatedly. I just have some few questions in way of clarification to pose to her. 

The first one is that when you look at the segment of the population aged 18 to 35 years, they are a huge proportion of our population. I just wanted to ask the minister whether she knows how many youth should be served with this fund, and by her serving only 2,829 in one year, What is your success rate? How many youth were you able to reach as a fraction of those who should have benefited from this fund?

Secondly, when you look at her table on page 3, Table 1 shows levels of disbursements; my calculation shows that as of 30 July 2012, out of the Shs 25 billion that had been allocated, there is a balance of Shs 6.48 billion unaccounted for. When you add the value of loans disbursed which is Shs 11.06 billion plus the value of applications being processed as of 30th July and then you offset that from Shs 25 billion, you remain with a balance of Shs 6.4 billion. 

I want to know the fate of that money. I am asking because a group of youth from Kanungu came to my office and they had submitted their application to Centenary Bank in Kanungu and according to the bank, it was successful but the bank officials told these youths that Parliament has delayed sending the money and so they cannot access the money; and yet here you are telling us there is still a balance. So, what is happening? What is the fate of that Shs 6.4 billion? Is it going to be carried forward into this financial year?

Lastly, I think there was also money for the youth in Kampala to the tune of about Shs 16 billion if I recall. However, you have not commented on it because we have seen a television footage in which the youth have been fighting at KCCA offices for this money. How has it performed in addition to the Shs 25 billion for the rest of the country? Maybe we would benefit to know how the money for the Kampala youth has worked. I thank you very much.

2.51
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): I thank you. I have a very big complaint from the people of Ntungamo Municipality about this youth fund. The minister has told us the criteria that they have been using on this youth fund, but I have more than 50 youths who opened accounts in Centenary Bank. Because, after we had been briefed by the minister that the money will be there, we went and sensitised the masses on the criteria. 

More than 50 youths went and opened accounts, and they spent too much money if you are to add it, but none of them was given the loan facility. To their disturbance, there is someone who is more than 50 years, who benefited from the youth fund and yet the 50 youth did not. When I got that, I moved around the whole municipality asking whether there was anyone who had been given this money, but no one said, “yes”. They all answered  , “No.” 

I went to the bank and asked if they had given money to anyone and they said that they had given very many people. I want to know which criteria is there for the ministry to make sure that the money that they have sent to the bank to be given to the youth at a small percentage, is benefitting the youths and not the businessmen because the businessmen even at 20 percent they would accept. 

Is there a mechanism the government is using to follow up the money to see that the money is going at 15 percent to the youth? We have just given money to an investor who is looking for profit. I want to know if that is not the case, then the people of Ntungamo Municipality should be given the money. I do not know if it is for other districts and not for Ntungamo Municipality –(Member timed out.)

2.53
MRS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): I thank you. I have three issues but I will try to wrap up. I would like the minister to tell us what we can do to some of the bank workers who advise the applicants to seek for the formal loans instead of the Youth Venture Capital Fund. 

We would like to have the data by district. Mr Speaker, this has a great implication on our political status and it also gives an explicit target district for improving interventions other than bundling us in western, central and whatever.

Are there applications that get their considerations from Kampala? Which ones are they and what happens to a youth who fails by any circumstances to pay back this loan?

2.54
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): I thank you. I want to thank the minister for this long-awaited report. However, on page 3, the tables presented show a lot of ambiguity. What we demanded were specific questions and it would have been prudent if the minister categorically presented this data district by district because as Members of Parliament, we are concerned about how our districts are benefitting. I was at home on 12 August 2012, and did attend the youth’s celebrations, but only four youth members in my district have received this fund. Only four!  

I also wish to know why the ministry is not empowering the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as the user ministry where this fund is expected to fall. What is the justification as to why these funds should be under the Ministry of Finance? 

The minister has also talked about the Graduate Venture Capital Fund. She has also just talked about the challenges of information dissemination to our districts. So, what are we doing with the take-off programme for these new funds?

Lastly, if you see the location of the funds or money that is going region by region, I am scared. Other regions are getting more funds because they are faster, based on proximity, where they are able to access information. If we relate this to other projects or the programmes like NUSAF, why are we not allocating this money region by region or district by district so that each of the districts will be benefitting from these funds? I thank you very much.

2.57
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): I thank you. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the fact is that the youth are very bitter in this country as we talk and for this country, that is very dangerous. It is like a hungry person who has been so hungry and you promise food and there is no food. This is really an issue to be handled with great care and urgency. 

I also take note that Northern Uganda, going by the poverty index, is the poorest region. It is as if what is in the Bible – that for those who have more, more will be added, and for those who do not have, even the little will be taken away. The little that is now given to Northern Uganda is really beshaming. 

This brings me to the issue of finding out what the intention of this fund? Getting to the bottom line, we have talked about it and everybody is concerned. What is the final intention and objective of this fund? I noted from the minister’s statement that probably only the existing business owners among the youth can benefit from this. As we are aware, the youth are either those who are just completing school and starting life or have just dropped out of school or have never gone to school. 

Now, if you are going to go for those who are already somewhere, how about the orphaned, the poor man’s son or daughter; Where do they start from and how do they benefit from this? I think it would be very unfair to leave out completely those who do not have a start-up fund. 

Secondly, there is a condition here that funds will only be available to the first borrowers. My concern is that we are trying to encourage efficiency and innovation. In business, not everybody can be successful. But for those who are keen and are successful and want to expand, how do we cater for such a category of keen and innovative youth who have gone into business and want to expand their business. 

My concern and humble advice is –(Member timed out.)

3.00
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for availing this report. I expected this report to be more detailed, like my colleague said. Apart from knowing how much went to central or to other regions, I expected to know how many people or the names of the beneficiaries according to districts because these were questions that were raised early this year, and we would like this to be done.

Secondly, I am seeing a difference in figures. On page 3, the first figure is Shs 11,060,918,380 but when you go to the bottom of that page, that total is different. I do not know what brings that difference. I would like that clarification. Otherwise, I thank the minister for the report.

3.01
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister has tried to distance herself from the money which was advanced to KCCA, but I am aware that when Parliament was appropriating money, it appropriated Shs 44 billion; Shs16.5 billion went to Kampala Capital City Authority. Out of the Shs 16.5 billion, Shs 3 billion was allocated as job stimulus fund for the Kampala youth.

Mr Speaker, after these groups were vetted by Kampala Capital City Authority, youth were made to borrow money to go through the registration process. These youths borrowed money; registered with the government organ that registers companies; they registered partnerships. After some time, this money was withdrawn from KCCA. 

Now, we have youths who borrowed money to register after being advised by KCCA. As we talk now, they are being arrested for not paying their debts and the whereabouts of this money is unknown.  So, can I ask the minister for Kampala to also give a comment on what is happening in as far as this money for Kampala is concerned? 

The second issue, Mr Speaker, is about what the minister talked about as work spaces in Kampala. This Shs 13.5 billion was meant for works spaces in Kampala, but as I reported the other time, the money which was supposed to pay for work spaces and improve work spaces, did not do what it was supposed to do. They mentioned a market in Gaba – it was part of this – money was spent, but land for the market was not bought. They were supposed to improve the market in my constituency in Namuwongo. They showed it as something done, but nothing was done. 

So, Mr Speaker, I want to request the Minister for Kampala and the Minister of Finance to investigate the Shs 16.5 billion that was sent to Kampala, where it went and what it did. But I know -(Member timed out.)

3.04
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am one of those few men and women representing towns. I want to bring to your notice and the House that for Mbarara Municipality, I can say it in broad daylight that not more than 10 people have received this money - and yet this is in town. You will wonder what is happening in Isingiro, in Ntungamo and in Ibanda. 

When you look at these figures and the way they are presented – they seem to have just put us in a film – we look like we are in a film where they give numbers in general. Western Uganda stretches from River Nile up to Kisoro. (Laughter) You can imagine only 249 people have benefited from this fund in the whole of Western Uganda. 

I will not stand on my two legs and say youth have gotten money when they have not gotten the money. If I say it, I will be telling lies to the country. 

Secondly, the problems in towns are the same as the problems in villages. What is killing me are the elderly youth getting this money when they are meant to be getting money for the old people. You can imagine, a person like Gen. Moses Ali, getting money as a youth and yet he is old. (Laughter) I am being honest. Some people above 55 years of age are receiving this money. Some of them have used youth as conduits to get this money to boost their businesses. That is why I am opposing this 10 percent of the loan requested, which must have been spent by a youth. These youth have not gotten any money from anywhere. You want them to spend 10 percent of the money they are requesting for, but where do they get this money from? Why do we bury our heads in the sand, Mr Speaker, when there is a problem, and our buttocks are out?

The other item is the issue of guarantors. Some youth have left Rukungiri, Mbarara and are here in Kampala, and have been here for more than 10 years. Their parents are not here. Now, who will guarantee them? Mr Kirumira or Mr Sudhir? Those ones have got some property. The people who know them are the LC I chairpersons. Some other people –(Member timed out.)

3.07
MR SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start with page 1 of the minister’s report. Where she says that initially they were demanding for O’level certificates and that now this is not a requirement. This is not true. Just two weeks ago, I visited Stanbic Bank Mbale with a group of youths that had come and wanted me to accompany them so that they can access this fund. They told us that they still want the O’level certificates. I tried to explain to them that this is not the case, but they said no; that they are still waiting for a letter from either the Minister of Finance or the President withdrawing this as a requirement. May I seek clarification from the minister whether this has been done because they are still demanding for the O’level certificates from youths.

Secondly, I have seen some good amount of money given to the youth of Eastern region. I am wondering, why in my district, none of the youth have accessed this fund. So, if my district is also put under Eastern region, where it belongs, and yet none of my youths have accessed this fund, this makes me sick. And that is why, it would be good if the minister indicated district by district, for example, how many youths in Manafwa District accessed these funds.

Lastly, what is the role of the minister in charge of youths, in as far as this youth fund is concerned? It is like he has no hand in this; it is like the Minister of Finance has taken charge while the line minister in charge of the youth is just watching. And when he goes on to explain about this fund, he has no facts. I recall one time when he was asked how many youths had accessed this fund, he could not give the number.

3.09
MS GRACE FREEDOM KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start from page 3, Table 1 of the report. The last row of this table talks about the number of applications with incomplete information. But I am wondering why a staff of the bank would talk about incomplete information. I am saying this because I would think that such a staff should guide the applicant of the loan on the issues on that form. Such staff should also educate the applicant about the missing information. So, I would not have treated this as a point on its own; and that makes me question the competence and the technical support which we expect from the banks to give to the youth.

The other point is about accessibility. I thought the Minister would have addressed it too. There are some districts that do not have any branches of these banks and Zombo District is one of them. So, where would the youth in such districts go? To the neighbouring districts – accessibility has been a problem.

But I would also imagine that there would be a workload on the staff in these banks who would now be looking at addressing the issues of neighbouring districts. I would like the government to answer this: When will districts without banks such as those offering these loan facilities get such bank services.

My last point concerns something that appears on page 7 where the Minister talks about monthly technical level meetings between Government and participating or intending financial institutions. I would like to understand how this addresses practical issues that this programme is facing. But my question is, why would it be limited only to national level? If this loan is being dispatched to the district level, wouldn’t we also be able to replicate this committee at that level? I am saying this because in my opinion, this would help solve questions of awareness and challenges that can be addressed at that level rather than bring it to national level just for reporting purposes.

3.12
MS MARGRET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for presenting this statement. But I would also like to congratulate her upon revising the age limits from 21 to 18. The age of 21 was blocking so many youth from applying for these loans. I wish to also thank her for reducing the qualifications because 80 percent of our youth – and I hope so because I have them in my district – do not have the O’level qualifications. So, I think that was a good consideration.

The second issue is about my proposal to have coordination desks for this fund in each district. This will help the districts to get equitable allocation of these resource. We shall avoid the issue of the central region  benefitting more than say, the west and so forth. That strategy will also help reduce on the cost of the distances that the youth have to travel from rural areas to Kampala; it will also reduce on the cost of borrowing.

Lastly, there is the issue that funds will only be for the first-time borrowers. But I don’t know what the minister means here. I need a clarification on that because I know that one borrows to create wealth or because they are able and have the capacity to pay. So, what is this supposed to cure? I thank you.

3.15
MR GEORGE STEPHEN EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for her response to the long-awaited report. However, I would like to seek some clarification from her on the category of the youth who are supposed to benefit from this fund. This is because we have both the urban and rural youth. When I look at the percentage of those who have so far benefited, it implies the beneficiaries are only from urban places.

I represent a constituency where majority of the youth are based in rural areas, and as I talk, no youth from Bukedea has benefitted from this fund. So, Madam Minister, how shall we have affirmative action to make this fund reach out to the rural youth? This fund has encouraged rural/urban migration. The youth are not productive now because they all think of rushing to towns in order to access this fund. I believe we should move faster to sensitise them.

There was also a comment from the minister to the effect that we must have guarantors and the conditions are laid out here. But how can a person for example, from Akede Village be able to guarantee a loan? This kind of mandate can only be executed by people in responsible positions such as civil servants or those who have retired yet we don’t have such people in Bukedea. So, the programme is still defined for only the urban youth to benefit. Those are my concerns. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.17
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. To the honourable minister, I would like to say that I have very serious concerns because when we come here and agree on a Government programme to be advanced to our people, some of us take it very seriously. But now I speak as a victim of taking you very seriously. 

When this programme was announced, I went down to Fort Portal and mobilised all the youth who wanted this money. I also got them to meet the bank officials and went through all that it takes to access this money. Some of the youth – quite a big number – had all that was required, but there was no money. I kept walking to the banks, but I received the same answer, “There is no money”. Government hadn’t remitted this money. So, I asked myself why I had wasted my time to mobilise the youth, on behalf of Government, as a responsible leader, but at the end of the day, I look so deceitful before the people who elected me to this House? I really looked so bad.

So, I think it is high time we learnt how to tell the truth. If there is no money, let us not come here with reports of this nature just to please – we are not here to please people. We should be realistic. If there is no money, there is no money; and once that is told - these youth are Ugandans who know that the economy is not doing well. We all know this and as business people, we are going through difficulties. We can’t access money from the banks and these are the realities out there. 

So, why should we continue deceiving ourselves and the people? We can’t provide leadership in this manner. Otherwise, we are going to end up not being trusted and people will lose confidence in us, which is very bad. 

So, honourable minister, as a lady and as a mother, come out very clearly here and tell us the truth other than keeping us on these figures, which we can’t find on the ground. I am really pushing that we change our approach. We must be very realistic and sincere to each other. We are here to help each other and I don’t see why you should be subjected to this kind of situation.

I am appealing to you to be frank with us so that we explain to the country the situation.  Ugandans are good people; they will understand and they can tolerate. I thank you, Madam Minister.

3.19
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister said that some of these challenges are going to be addressed by conducting sensitisation and awareness. I would like to find out from her who is going to do that sensitisation and awareness. Does the Ministry of Finance have the capacity to do sensitisation and awareness in the entire country? And later, who monitors and evaluates how these youth are really performing? Perhaps that is something that we need to find out. How is the ministry relating with the line ministry in terms of empowerment? They already have organised structures - the Ministry of Gender and Youth is entrenched right from the national level up to the communities. How are they working together to ensure that they reach out to the youth because these are the people who have been dealing with the youth. 

Perhaps, honourable minister, I am not interested in knowing how many youth from Sheema District have benefitted. I want to know the names and ages of the youth who have benefited because people have said that those above 40 years are benefiting. I would like to know the names of the youth and their age groups. If the ministry and banks do not have the material to print for us that information, can we access this information so that we know that such youth have accessed the fund. I have been in Sheema and many youth have told me they have not accessed this fund. So, who has accessed these funds in the country? 

You are saying you are going to conduct sensitisation. How can you empower the MPs? You have not reached my constituency; I am not even empowered with the information that I am supposed to use to tell the youth what is happening, because we are here asking several questions. So, how can you empower us with the information that we should be using? How can you retool us with information so that when I reach Sheema, I will have the same message as the MPs from Busia or Ntoroko. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will ask the acting Leader of the Opposition –(Laughter)

3.22
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Honourable members, I want to thank members for their contribution and importantly for really pointing out issues which are pertinent and very critical in our operations as leaders of this country. 

Mr Speaker, I have sometimes wondered what happens when people who think they are Christians or they are Godly can give information that is not true and also document what is not true. 

I represent the people of Busongora North in Kasese District, but for the last one year that I have been in the House, I have been closely monitoring activities in my constituency and also in Kasese District, and I have noted that the information that is presented here in this statement is merely a fabrication.

I have seven sub-counties in my constituency, and I have youth groups that are there and I know the youth who have businesses there, and I have interacted with them closely, but none of them has got this money which is purportedly being reported here in the House, and I wonder whether this is a fabrication or whether it is being politicised or what it is really meant to achieve.

When you turn to page 2, Mr Speaker, you will realise that the contribution of 10 percent, which the applicant is supposed to present, is untenable especially to individuals who are just starters. The 10 percent of Shs 5 million is approximately Shs 500,000 and this Shs 500,000 is untenable to these people who are actually dealing in businesses, which in my view – from an assessment which I have made in my constituency, for example, people who have reasonable businesses have operated for more than 10 years and have not even realised capital of more than Shs 5 million which is being talked about here. So, I am wondering how –(Member timed out.)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I allow the honourable minister to make a response and then we can see if there are still some outstanding things. 

3.24
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank all the hon. Members for their comments. I think it is now imagined that the Youth Venture Capital Fund sits at the intersection of a youth and business. It is in that small circle that one is both a youth and a business person, and this is where it has been operating and will operate. It is only one initiative out of the many that are being looked at to see how to stimulate the economy because as one of our members said very correctly, this is not a youth matter; it is for the whole economy. The purpose of this fund was to help entrepreneurs go up the ladder. It is a help-out and not a hand-out. 

As for the questions on the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Youth, the Minister for Youth was the one who gave the report at the youth conference in Kabale. He had all the figures with him. The commissioner for youth sits in the technical working group with the commercial banks and the other institutions to devise policy. These are all the lessons that are being applied now. 

The fund is a revolving fund. The money that is paid back goes out again, but the reason why people are not allowed to borrow more than once is so that more people can get the benefit of this admittedly limited fund. Mr Speaker, I just want to mention at this stage that whereas the Uganda youth fund is Shs 25 billion –(Interruption) 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, Madam Minister, for giving way. I want clarification from you. You have just said that the stringent conditions we are giving to the first borrowers is to encourage others to get an opportunity to borrow from this revolving fund. But as far as we are concerned, we think all those who are borrowing are fresh borrowers. Actually, what was confusing us was as to whether you are referring to those ones who have borrowed from other banks and not from this venture fund. So, do you have some people who have already borrowed from this venture fund? 

Actually, in your report on page 3, whereas you said the programme is a success and that other people have started paying back, it has contradicted what you indicated on page 2 when you said the duration is four years, including a grace period; and you have said that the implementation begun in February this year. Definitely, the grace period hasn’t elapsed. How can they start paying back when the grace period hasn’t elapsed? So, give us a clarification as to whether you are referring to the first borrowers of this Youth Venture Capital Fund or borrowers from the other banks, which would be meaningless –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you debating now?

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I clarified that the year of grace is a maximum. Some people did not get a “maximum” grace period of one year so that is the clarification on that.

As for the first time borrower, it is first time borrower from the fund since it is not really possible to know if a person has borrowed from another institution faraway; that is not participating.

As for the question of accessibility, that is why originally we had the three banks that were willing to lend at 15 percent and to put matching funds. The microfinance institutions, which are quite many in the rural areas, at first said they did not want to operate at 15 percent and they did not want to put counterpart funds; but now, three microfinance institutions have joined the club and indicated their willingness to participate.

As to the reason why the report is being read belatedly, we did first submit a report in May, but then at that time there were some figures that we were circulating from an outdated report. So, we withdrew it in order to clarify. When the report came back in June, the House was very busy with other matters - (Interruption)

MRS ACHIENG OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister for giving way. I just wanted to inform the honourable minister that one of the reasons why the paper was deferred while you were away, and hon. Omach was presenting it, was because Members wanted to know how many youth had benefitted per district. And, I remember, as a result of that, hon. Omach promised to come to this House. I am speaking as a Member of Parliament and I represent youth from Tororo.

I am one of those who is actually bothered by the youth every other day about this fund, so it would be very important for us to get clear details per district of how much has been disbursed and if possible, even getting to know the names. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I would like to say is that for the first time a report is in the House ready to be debated and critiqued, and to be given recommendations for the future -(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On a point of procedure, having heard from the honourable minister and member of the Cabinet on the undertaking by the Minister of Finance holding the Floor, and having reinstituted what was promised on the Floor of Parliament that the minister will come to this House with a full list showing district by district how this Youth Fund is going to be distributed, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to let the minister come back with that full list as earlier stated?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not for the House to comment on some of these things or even the Speaker. Our understanding was that this matter was referred to Cabinet before it came here and in the circumstances, the Speaker finds it very strange that information that should have been given to the Cabinet is being given to another minister on the Floor of Parliament. It is not regular for these kinds of actions to be conducted in the House in this manner.

In the circumstances, honourable minister, I am going to ask you to respond to the issues that have already been brought, and then we see how we move next; because there are issues that have been raised now.

MRS KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, we have seen complaints about some bank branches in Ntungamo, Mbale, Fort Portal and Kasese. We are very willing and happy to get that information so that the record can be put straight where it went wrong. A bank cannot say that there is no money when the money is there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think in the circumstances and in view of what the Member representing Youth - National said, this matter might require more comprehensive coverage. It is really a big policy issue now. So, by the time this House comes to a decision on it, it must be properly processed. In the circumstances, I am going to defer any further engagements on this particular matter and allow the honourable minister to go back and consult, and also give the opportunity to the Member of Parliament, Youth – National, to harmonise and we see how to move forward honourable minister.

STATEMENT BY MINISTERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will remember that on the issue that is on the Order Paper item 4(1), the border conflict between the districts of Adjumani and Amuru, we assigned our Parliamentary Committee to deal with this matter. The Parliamentary committee has not completed.

Recently, we gave them an extension of the period within which they should report to Parliament and it would be premature for the minister to come with a statement on this particular subject before the report of the Parliamentary committee is ready. Therefore, we will not be able to deal with the border conflict issue between Adjumani and Amuru so we will go to item 4(2).

STATEMENT ON DELAYS OF RELEASE OF FUNDS TO GOVERNMENT-AIDED PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SCHOOLS UNDER UNIVERSAL SECONDARY EDUCATION PROGRAM

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is in response to a promise I made on the Floor of this Parliament about two months ago, and now I am happy that an opportunity has been given to me to respond appropriately.

The purpose of this statement is to explain the cause of the delays in the release of funds under the Universal Secondary Education Grant to all Government-aided public and private schools. 

The delays, which occurred in the early part of last financial year were largely due to technical processes following changes in the nature of transferring financial resources to schools. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would release USE funds to the Ministry of Education and Sports who would also release the funds to the local governments, who would then transfer the funds to the individual schools’ bank accounts.

With effect from last financial year 2011-2012, Government decided to send funds under the USE grant directly to all Government-aided schools using what is called the Straight Through Processing facility in brief, STP guidelines, and this is shown under appendix one. Under this arrangement, the grants are paid directly to the respective schools by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Background to this process of STP 

Government of Uganda implemented a Straight Through Processing (STP) starting from 1 July 2007 as part of its initiative to have all payments carried out electronically through the use of existing Information Technology infrastructure.

Previously, the ministry would make the releases to local governments, who would then transfer the funds to the individual schools, institutions and town councils’ bank accounts. With this process, there was a delay of approximately one month from the time a release was made to the time it reached the schools, institutions or town council. This was due to constraints in the interbank transfer mechanisms. 

It was also due to manual processes and bureaucracies involved in the transfer of funds from the general collection account to the local governments and then to the sector accounts and then to the schools, institutions and town councils’ bank accounts, thereby causing unnecessary delay. 

Today, the ACP reform has covered salaries and pensions payment for all centres and local governments votes and grants to town councils, Universal Secondary Education schools’ capitation grants and training institutions.

Government of Uganda now wishes to deepen the ACP process further  by including transfer of Universal Secondary Education, which is capital development; Universal Primary Education capitation grants; and those to tertiary institutions directly to beneficiary schools’ and institutions’ banks accounts. 

Process flow of Universal Secondary Education grants

The computation of USE grants continues to follow the formula described in the guidelines as issued by the Ministry of Education and Sports. At the beginning of each quarter, the Ministry of Finance advises the Ministry of Education and Sports on the aggregate quarterly cash limits for the grant to all local governments. Then the Ministry of Education and Sports on receipt of the grant cash limit prepares a schedule of schools by district and municipality showing the amounts to be transferred to each school and submits that to the Ministry of Education and Sports in a hard copy under the signature of the accounting officer. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reviews the submissions and then prepares release advice schedules by school per district and sends the schedule to the Accountant General’s office together with a signed copy from the accounting officer of the Ministry of Education and Sports for the actual transfer of the funds to the schools. 

The USE grant budget for financial year 2011/2012

The USE grant budget for financial year 2011/2012 was 89.96 billion. Total releases amounted to 80.96 billion, giving an overall performance of 89.1 percent. The gap was as a result of resource constraints. 

This financial year 2012/2013 the annual budget for USE grants to local governments is Shs 95.79 billion. The table below shows the USE grant budget and releases by quarter during the last financial year. 

Mr Speaker, I hereby lay the evidence of payment schedules by school, by district, for the second, third and fourth quarters when funds were released directly to USE schools. 

Delay of USE releases

The new initiative, that is, the ACP involved collection and validation of data about the beneficiary schools. The data was either provided late or without the required level of accuracy. Inevitably, this led to delayed start of the implementation of the facility in the first and second quarter of financial year 2011/2012. However, by the third quarter of financial year 2011/2012 all participating schools had started receiving the funds directly.

There was also a delay in release of the USE funds to schools in eight local governments of the 39 local governments that had insufficient budget balances to meet the release requirements during the third quarter of financial year 2011/2012. 

These arose out of the inconsistencies in the Local Government indicative planning figures submitted by the Ministry of Education and Sports, where the budget of 94 local governments had to be revised downwards in order to provide for the 39 local governments that needed more resources. The said inconsistencies were due to the use of different sources of data. 

Whereas the first submission of indicative planning figures for the number of students in available schools per district was based on enrolment projection of the academic year 2010, the subsequent submission was based on the headcount of April 2011, which was finalised in June 2011. 

In addition, inconsistencies were as a result of listing of some schools in old districts instead of the new ones. For example, schools in Lwengo District and Masaka Municipality had been listed under Masaka District. Accordingly, there was a need for a supplementary process to relocate resources from 94 local governments to increase the budget of the 39 local governments. 

Mr Speaker, there were also cases of unapplied electronic funds transfer (EFT) to payment instructions that had not been honoured by the banks due to invalid accounts information. It is the responsibility of every accounting officer to ensure that the bank account information of every school is valid. Invalid bank accounts will automatically lead to unapplied or what we call bounced EFT. Grants will be suspended until a valid bank account is submitted.

Honourable members, the USE grant is now being operated without any delays or any other inconveniences. The last release which was made in May 2012, was received on time except for a few cases where there was unapplied EFT. 

On other related issues, Mr Speaker, I wish to provide responses to the issues raised in the petition by the National Association of Private Universal Secondary Education Schools and the National Teachers Union as follows:

1. 	Outstanding arrears for the first quarter and second quarter 

The releases for the first quarter of financial year 2012/2013, which are being processed for release this month will facilitate the schools to offset the bills incurred during the second term and to open the third term pending the second quarter release in October 2012, which will cater for the remaining part of the third term. 

2. 	Unfairness in the treatment of Government-aided schools and the private schools in implementing USE programmes 

The private schools have to pay salaries for teachers and other support staff. The private schools, therefore, demand the increase of unit cost from Shs 47,000 to 150,000. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us deal with the first part of the statement because the issue of a petition that you are now presenting is before a committee of Parliament. It will come in a comprehensive way from the committee. So, let us deal with the issues that are before us. 

MR KASAIJA: Most obliged. Mr Speaker, may I now lay before Parliament the table of the releases that have been made over the last two quarters. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, that is the statement on the delayed release of funds to Government-aided public and private secondary schools under the USE scheme. This statement came twice before the House, but the information was lacking. 

I am still to ascertain whether what has been supplied by the minister now captures the subject so that we can go to the next matter. If the statement is okay with the Members - because on this particular subject there was a petition – there will be a more comprehensive debate if the committee comes out with a full report covering the whole subject. This information is important for the House because it was requested for. If you agree with me, we should now push this thing back and let the committee come back with a comprehensive thing so that we deal with it once instead of debating in piece-meal. Is that agreeable? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Thank you, honourable members; let us go to the next item.

PETITION BY KYAMBOGO UNIVERSITY STAFF ON THE MISMANAGEMENT OF THE UNIVERSITY

3.49
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. With me here is a petition by the Kyambogo University staff on the university’s mismanagement. The petitioners – university staff - have told me that their only confidence and trust is only on this Parliament and not anywhere else. As we speak now, the university students have been held on ransom – they are not at the campus because – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please present the petition. (Laughter)

MR MUSINGUZI: "The petition to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda; and I move under rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure.

The humble petition of the staff of Kyambogo University over the mismanagement of the Kyambogo University affairs, presented by Hon. Yona Musinguzi.

The merger of the three institutions to form Kyambogo University did not take into consideration their former administrative structures and as such, left the staff disgruntled, a fact that required a deliberate effort to unite the staff to foster a harmonious working environment. It was on this basis that a neutral vice-chancellor was appointed. 

Your humble petitioners are staff of the university who are aggrieved with the manner in which the Vice-Chancellor, Prof. Isaiah Omolo Ndiege, is running the university based on divide-and-rule along the institutional lines of the former three institutions of UPK, UNISE and ITEK, in deliberate disregard of his part to foster harmony in the university as one institution;

The vice-chancellor has disregarded the welfare of the university staff as has been witnessed by his efforts to block the approval of the finance and resource development committee top-up increment to the staff emoluments, totaling to Shs 800 million, which he diverted. Moreso, failure to promote members of staff eligible for promotion;

The incidences of deliberate sabotage of meetings organised by the academic staff, and the failure to put in place a good environment for further studies for the university staff;

The petitioners are further aggrieved with the vice-chancellor for presiding over financial impropriety to the university with over Shs 970 million unaccounted for in the financial year 2010/2011, while another statement of Shs 142 million was presented in the same financial year;

Further to this financial impropriety, your petitioners are aggrieved with the vice-chancellor’s misappropriation of Shs 37 million allegedly meant for staff training on the use of CCTV surveillance gadgets in 2009;

Moreso, the vice-chancellor does not respect the university council as the supreme governing body of the university, and he is very reluctant to implement the council decisions such as the approval of the housing policy, and the health and safety policy among others. This has led to a poor working environment in the university; general lack of academic facilities; and poor sanitation in the university. 

Now, therefore, your humble petitioners pray that:

1.	Parliament investigates into the issues of mismanagement of Kyambogo University and makes appropriate recommendations.
2.	Parliament urges Government to intervene and prevail over the university council, which rescinded its decision to re-open the university to enable the students who are innocently and adversely affected by this closure by the vice-chancellor, to return to the university. 

Your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray, and hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures."
.
I beg to lay a copy of the petition on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the original petition?

MR MUSINGUZI: With me here is the signed petition from the Kyambogo University staff, with the petitioners having appended their signatures. I beg to lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such; it stands referred to the appropriate committee. Committee members, you will realise that Kyambogo is in distress, presently. So, if you can act quickly without necessarily observing the 45-day rule and report to the House so that it can take a decision. In the meantime, we have authority under the law to take remedial measures to ameliorate the situation. 

Just today morning I received another petition from the students of Kyambogo University, which should be coming to the attention of the House, possibly tomorrow – connected to the same thing. So, I urge the committee to work on it quickly and then let the House know what the processes are.

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the past, Parliament has received a lot of petitions and in most cases, our laws and regulations are clear on what we are supposed to do. You have rightly said that you have also received a petition from the students, which will also be subjected to a committee for investigation. 

As a sector minister, I received the same petitions. I received the petitioners; and a different group; and all the data that you may require; and the governing council is already in the process. By the time it came to the point of closing the university, the governing council together with the Ministry of Education was already handling the issue. I am wondering if this issue is also going to be subjected to the committee of Parliament; how are we going to correlate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, at its first meeting, you should make a submission to the committee and seek its leave so that you can handle this matter. There is no way this Parliament can shut its doors to the members of the public that have issues. (Applause) Once they have chosen to access this Parliament, we cannot shut our doors. So, articulate those issues with the committee, and for those remedial measures, apply to the committee to give you time to deal with them. The committee chairperson will come and tell us in the House that we have taken the following decisions in the interim period to allow the ministry, governing council and whoever is involved to deal with this matter; but as for Parliament, this petition stands referred to the appropriate committee in the sector.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the students were meeting you in your Chambers, I happened to interact with them, but more so as parents of this country, we are going to handle these issues as you have rightful guided. But the biggest challenge is that the unversity has been closed indefinitely. We do not know how soon we shall have the university re-opened and it has no timeframe as per now, and yet the pain is that the school is indefinitely closed. The students were given only three hours to leave the university; our daughters are actually -those who could not afford transport back -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, isn’t that part of what should be handled by the committee?

MS ANYWAR: I am seeking your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that is the guidance I have already given. Let the committee deal with those facts we have outlined and give us a quick response to deal with the situation quickly instead of waiting for the 45-days rule. That is what I have guided. All those facts will be fed into the committee.

PETITION BY THE ORPHANS OF THE VICTIMS OF THE KANUNGU CHURCH INFERNOS

4.01
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I stand here to present a petition on behalf of the orphans of the victims of the Kanungu church inferno, but I must state I am not one of them.

The petition to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda; and I move under rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure.

The humble petition of the orphans of the victims of the tragic fire set in the church of the Movement for the Restoration of the 10 Commandments of God led by Joseph Kibwetere in Kanungu district represented by Hon. Chris Baryomunsi. 

The petition states as follows:

That the Movement for the Restoration of the 10 Commandments of God was founded and initially registered as a non-governmental organisation Vide instrument No.5914/768 on 17 December 1997, with a licence to operate countrywide for a period of five years, and was subsequently, incorporated as a company limited by guarantee under the Companies Act on 22 December 1998 Vide instrument No.39567;

The movement concentrated its operations in the Western districts of Kabale, Rukungiri, Bushenyi and Mbarara with its seat at the present day district of Kanungu, but was also operational in many other parts of Uganda including Kampala;

After joining the faith, your petitioners’ parents were duly influenced to sell off all their personal property and hand over all the proceeds therefrom to the church leadership allegedly in preparation for the end of the world leaving behind no property at all for the benefit of any of their family members, and so were your petitioners left;

On or about 17 March 2000 at Nyabugoto in Kanungu District, a number of followers of this Movement for the Restoration of the 10 Commandments of God were allegedly locked up in a church and set on fire while praying in their church and they perished in their numbers leaving behind many orphans who are now needy due to the tragic loss of their parents;

Your petitioners were orphaned at a very tender age and consequently, suffered loss of dependence, care, support and parenthood, and due to that loss, your petitioners have had no economic support and so they dropped out of school prematurely;

Your petitioners did as a consequence of that death lack all the basic needs of life and have since then led disadvantaged lives. Despite being able-bodied, most of your petitioners are living as paupers in towns with no proper means of livelihood; 

Your petitioners are aware that after their parents perished in the inferno, Government undertook to put in place a commission of inquiry to investigate those deaths, but to this day, that commission has neither been seen nor have its findings been made public. As a result, your petitioners have been left ignorant of who killed their parents; 

The District Local Government of Kanungu after the inferno took over the whole land which belonged to the church of the Movement for the Restoration of the 10 Commandments of God where your petitioners’ parents died from, but has since handed over part of that land back to the relatives of the perpetrators of that inferno;

Your humble petitioners have since 2007 made several attempts to present their plight to those in authority, including the District Local Government, the former ministers of Internal Affairs and the one of Disaster Preparedness, as well as to His Excellency the President, but your petitioners efforts have all been frustrated or blocked.

Now, therefore, your petitioners pray that:

1.	Parliament directs the Minister of Internal Affairs to present a report of the death that occurred on or about 17 March 2000 from the church of the Movement for the Restoration of the 10 Commandments of God at Nyabugoto in Kanungu District and other associated camps of the church led by Joseph Kibwetere.

2.	Parliament directs Government to resettle your petitioners who were left homeless by the victims who died in the Kanungu inferno on or about 17 March 2000 in the church of the Movement for the Restoration of the 10 Commandments of God.

3.	Parliament urges Government to develop a policy to entitle and enable victims who have suffered from the losses attributable to negligent acts or omissions on the part of Government or its officials in respect of the death of the church of the Movement for the Restoration of the 10 Commandments of God to recover some benefit or compensation from Government.

4.	Parliament directs Government to secure funds to be extended to your petitioners as a form of start-up capital to enable them start a settled and productive life.

Your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray, and hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.

Mr Speaker, this petition is signed by 36 people who come from various districts. Six of them are from Rwanda; a number of them come from Bushenyi, Mbarara, Buganda and the other parts of the country. I thank you, Mr Speaker and I beg to lay on Table the petition by the victims of the Kanungu church inferno. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The petition stands referred to the appropriate committee for quick action. As I keep saying, petitions are shorter issues that should come back to Parliament without strictly observing the 45 day rule.

So, we expect the committee responsible for this - I strongly think it will be the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. They should look at this quickly and get back to the House so that the issues raised by the concerned citizens are dealt with quickly. Yes? On what point do you rise hon. Lukyamuzi? 

4.09
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to raise a matter of public concern pursuant to Rule 39 of our Rules of Procedure. 

The New Vision and Daily Monitor of 27 last month respectively, through one, Batume Auctioneers, published the sale by public auction of Sembule Steel Mills, and all the properties, which is located in Rubaga South. The sale will be effected on the 26 September 2012 on the orders of Bank of Baroda for failure to meet the bank’s loan requirements. 

The company I am talking about, namely, Sembule Steel Mills was established in 1971 by two Ugandan brothers, Christopher Sembuya and his late brother, Henry Wilberforce Buwule. It is the only remaining indigenous steel milling company which has earned Uganda a name in the manufacture of steel products of quality. 

It is also on record, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the urgent question which has made you recite Rule 39 before I grant you leave to actually do it.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: The urgent question is that the company which I have tried to define is in danger because come 26th of September this month, Bank of Baroda is going to auction it publicly. The company I am talking about is in trouble -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To whom is the question addressed to? 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: It is addressed to the Government of Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules –

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Particularly the Leader of Government Business.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under this, the rule is “Questions to ministers”. So, you are asking the Government of Uganda. Who will take responsibility?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: The Leader of the Government of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, you have not given me sufficient time -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, ask the question you want to present to the minister.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, having explained the problems this company is in, and having also stated that this company got problems, but at one time, it was performing so well that President Museveni in the 1990s even invited presidents like the former President of Kenya, Arap Moi, the late President of Ethiopia, Zenawi, the former  President of Pakistani to visit, sample and see for themselves the wonders of Sembule Steel Mills before problems came. One of the main sources of –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the question? Please ask the question. That is all you have asked for.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Okay Mr Speaker, the question is -(Interjections)- that Uganda will soon make 50 years since Independence. (Laughter) It cannot be proud of its economic and political independence when one of the biggest local companies is going into limbo. Can’t the government rescue that company? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finally, Leader of Government Business, that is the question. I do not know whether you want to say something on it or whether – how is it going to be handled? The question is that you rescue Sembule Steel Mills.

4.13
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker as you can see, the issue is very pregnant and I do not know whether it will go into labour. But this company is -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What did you say? You do not want to go into labour? (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I said –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well that is for future readers of the Hansard.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: In brief, I will say that I will refer the matter to a higher authority for further consultation. Thank you. (Interjections) I said higher authority. I may be higher, but I know there are higher authorities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you will appreciate, the date is 26th this month and the question is put as an urgent question. I think we allow the government to consult on this and deal with it appropriately. The question is already before the government. Next item? 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS REGULATORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2012

4.14
THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATION & INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority Bill, 2012” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Mbara Municipality, fort Portal Municipality, Zombo - honourable minister, proceed. Justify your Bill.

MR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is a Bill which is –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there no minister supporting this Bill on your behalf? 

MR RUGUNDA: The whole frontbench is in full support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable Minister of Disaster Preparedness, the honourable Minister for Security. Good. Proceed.

MR RUGUNDA: Thank you, sir. Mr Speaker, the Bill before us is intended to consolidate and harmonise the Uganda Communications Commission Act with the Electronic Media Act because development in science and technology has clearly demonstrated that there is a lot of technological convergence between these two institutions and that it is now more convenient for the consumer to approach one body than in the past where you had somebody looking for a licence say for a radio or TV and would have to approach two bodies; one to get a licence for broadcasting, and another one for frequency. It is right, therefore, that because of the scientific convergence, we harmonise these two bodies and constitute them into one. In fact, this is the trend in the region and globally because of the recognition of these scientific developments. 

The broadcasting sector and communications sector have witnessed a lot of changes in Uganda in the last 20 years. We have moved from a stage where we had about 30,000 Ugandans with poorly-functioning telephone lines to about 16 to 17 million Ugandans now with telephone lines.

We have moved from where we had a monopoly of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, and now we have well over 100 radio stations. This is also true of television stations.

The purpose, therefore, of this Bill apart from focusing on the convergence and also constituting one body from the two bodies – we want to ensure that there is proper regulation so that there is sanity in the communications sector. This is, therefore, going to be primarily a regulatory body for the communications sector. 

So, at a later stage, we will be coming up with other issues, but let me not pre-empt that. The critical point I want to make is to request colleagues in this House to strongly support this Bill because it is responding to the new scientific developments in the field of information technology. It is going to make it convenient for the consumer so that the consumer does not have to approach many bodies for purposes of guidance and regulation, and that is going to simplify the management of the sector. So, Mr Speaker, it is my great pleasure to move the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority Bill, 2012” be read the second time. We will refer this Bill to the committee to report, after which, we will open general debate on the principles of this Bill as elaborated by the minister. 

4.19
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Vincent Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I take this opportunity to present the report and our key findings and recommendations as we considered the Uganda Communications Regulatory Bill, 2012. 

Mr Speaker, the Bill was referred to the committee on 14 March 2012, and the committee considered the Bill under rules 118 and 119 of our Rules of Procedure. Honourable colleagues, I beg your indulgence; by the time we completed the report on this Bill, we were still using the old rules of procedure. So, I beg your indulgence because the rules that we used in consideration of this Bill were rules 118 and 119. 

Mr Speaker, in the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed the Bill with various stakeholders and those included: Ministry of ICT; the beneficiaries, who are the Communications Commission; the Uganda Law Society; Media Council and all the telecom companies, including Makerere University, specifically the School of Computing and IT; National Association of Broadcasters; Uganda Broadcasting Corporation; the New Vision, Multi-Choice Uganda and the Human Rights Network for Journalists. 

Mr Speaker, the committee reviewed the Bill in the context of convergence as the minister has mentioned, which has made possible through digitisation, to allow different types of content - audio, video and text - to be stored in the same format and delivered through a range of technologies that is computers, mobile phones and televisions. 

More so, the committee made reference to regional and international best practices expressed in instruments of the regulatory bodies whereby broadcasting and telecommunications have already been merged. These bodies included: The Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (ICASA); Communications Commission of Kenya (CCK); and Office of Communications (OFCOM) in United Kingdom.

In considering the Bill, the committee held a number of workshops, but specifically, the object of the Bill is to consolidate and harmonize the Uganda Communications Act, Cap. 106, and the Electronic Media Act, Cap. 104, to dissolve the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) and the Broadcasting Council (BC) and reconstitute them as one body to be known as the Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority, and to provide for related matters.

Globally, the communications sector has gone through phases of reform. The first phase was primarily responsible for increasing efficiency and access of services through attraction of private investment. Besides attracting private investment, the second phase focussed on offering consumers more choice by increasing service providers. I think that is the point that the honourable minister made in terms of the number of players we have in the economy. These regulatory regimes where designed to centre on different specific services such as telecommunication and broadcasting each with a different regulator. 

The third phase of sector reform is the initiation of a converged policy and regulatory environment. It is this third stage of reform that the new Bill seeks to address. The third phase of a converged regulatory environment has been adopted by many countries including Kenya and Tanzania through the Communications Commission of Kenya and Tanzania Communications Regulatory Authority, respectively.  

These two regulatory bodies merged their communications and broadcasting functions into one single entity because of the convergence of technologies that allows multiple services or applications to run over one single platform. Broadcasts can now be performed over telecommunications platforms; phones can now be used to listen to radio and to watch video; thus the necessity for the regulatory functions to be harmonised.

Harmonisation will address the issue of duplicity witnessed in the previous licensing regime, where a radio operator in Uganda would apply for a license from the Broadcasting Council, and then apply for frequency from Uganda Communications Commission both at a fee. In the new proposed configuration the two overlapping activities will be performed in one place, and that will lead to reduction in cost and bureaucracy, and efficient management of spectrum resources. 

Mr Speaker, in terms of observations and recommendations, the committee has scrutinized the old Communications and Electronic Media Act in relation to the new proposed Bill to ensure suitable harmonisation, and have made recommendations aimed at minimising the burden of ineffective regulation. These key observations and recommendations are related to the title of the Bill, communications tribunal, protection of infrastructure, separation of broadcasting and telecommunications, content regulation and last but not least, offences and penalties. 

Mr Speaker, in terms of the title of the Bill, the Bill is entitled “The Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority Act, 2012”. The committee benchmarked with countries that have harmonised their Communications Act with Broadcasting Act. The committee recommends that Uganda Communications Commission should be maintained since it is a well-recognised international brand and it already caters for both communications and broadcasting. Moreso, other countries like Kenya and the USA that have gone through the same process have maintained the original names of the organisation like Communications Commission of Kenya, CCK and Federal Communications Commission, FCC respectively.
	
Mr Speaker, on the establishment of the Uganda Communications Tribunal, the committee noted with regret that whereas the UCC Act of 1997 had a provision for the establishment of the Uganda Communications Tribunal, it has not been established to date. The new Bill continues to make a case for the tribunal to hear and determine communication matters arising from the decisions of the regulator or the minister. The Bill also makes the decisions of the Tribunal appealable to the Court of Appeal.

The committee recommends that the ministry should expedite the establishment of the Tribunal and that it should be done in a period of one year from the date the new law takes effect. The committee further recommends that the frequency of the sittings should be based on the business to handle, that is, either on a quarterly or session basis when there is enough business to handle.

Mr Speaker, in terms of protection of communications installations, the committee observed that the sector is currently grappling with infrastructure vandalism in terms of fibre cuts, base stations, theft of batteries and fuel, among others, at telecommunication and broadcasting installation sites.  This has contributed to deteriorated quality of service and increase in the cost of doing business. In other jurisdictions such as Kenya and Tanzania, the offence is set at the same standard as terrorism and economic sabotage, and has helped in stabilising communications and broadcasting infrastructure in those jurisdictions.

The committee recommends that Government comes up with a Bill to specifically address infrastructure protection in order to protect communications infrastructure, among others.   

Separating of broadcasting and telecommunications services 

The Committee observed that this Bill lumps broadcasting and telecommunications services together, which may create wrong regulation for either. The two services are different in most aspects and have peculiarities that require separate regulation.

Mr Speaker, the committee, therefore, recommends that this proposed law be clear on its regulation of the two services to ensure smooth regulation of the two sectors. It is indeed in this vein that the committee proposed the regulations that will arise from this Bill be tabled before Parliament to ensure proper distinct provisions in regulating broadcasting and communications is done.

Mr Speaker, in terms of regulation of content, the committee observed that Technology has created various dynamic avenues for content to be disseminated. Content can now be channelled through the Internet, over radio, television and phones, among others. These channels have led to what is referred to as content convergence that necessitates regulation to protect public morality and national values, but most importantly, to ensure adherence to minimum broadcasting standards. The committee, borrowing from good practice from countries that have implemented the converged regulatory environments, recognises the need to regulate content and provide a due process for perceived content offenders. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that a content committee be set up under this proposed law to regulate content. The content committee will look into complaints raised by consumers or Government against a given content provider. These complaints will range from inappropriate programming to matters of national security. 

The other aspect that the committee looked at deeply was offences and penalties. The committee noted that the penalties provided for in the Bill are insufficient given the extent of damage and loss occasioned by the criminal acts of the offenders as they steal or vandalise equipment or installations, which in turn negatively affects the quality of service of operators.   Secondly, in most cases, the fines on second conviction are even lower than the first.

The committee recommends that the penalties in this proposed law should be reviewed upward to be deterrent enough to discourage such offences which grossly affect operators’ businesses and service provision. In addition, offences related to interception of communication should be aligned to the penalties in the Interception of Communications Act.

Conclusion

The Bill upholds the spirit of convergence which is part of the global information scenario that has shaped changes in policy and regulation in the communications industry the world over. It is assumed that merging the Uganda Communications Commission and Broadcasting Council will lead to faster-paced innovation and improved products and services for consumers, at affordable rates. 

Most importantly, the Bill promotes technology neutrality that is important in the facilitation of economic growth and participation in the knowledge society. Not only will the Bill aid Uganda’s networked readiness, but it will also avoid the duplication of duties and responsibilities by reconstituting the two bodies into one.

The Bill also upholds the fundamental human right to access communications services by all persons at fair prices and addresses unfair competition.

It is accordingly imperative for the Government, Parliament and other stakeholders to address the gaps in this Bill as recommended by the committee through its legislative solutions aimed at creating a new regulatory framework capable of responding to convergence as well as guide future policy direction. 

With those remarks, Mr Speaker, I thank you and I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A big congratulation to the chairperson and members of the committee for the manner in which they have treated and supported this Bill. Honourable members, this will be an appropriate time for us to debate the principles of the Bill and then later on, at a different stage, we will come to the actual provisions where we will be able to do the amendments.

I see that the committee has proposed 25 pages of amendments and that means that a lot of debate will be generated in the course of passing the Bill at committee stage. We should maybe try and limit debate at this stage, which covers the principle which is agreeable to both the minister and our own committee. We could limit debate on this and we go to the key part of the Bill since there are so many proposed amendments by the committee. 

We will limit debate on the principles of the Bill on the second reading motion to 20 minutes. Is that okay? 30 minutes? Okay, each member contributing for three minutes. 

4.33
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I thank the committee for the report and the minister for his stand. I support the principles put here, the harmonisation of the different entities – those who have been regulating the communication sector - is a good thing. 

However, after I listened to the presentation and also read through, there are some areas that need to be included as they seem to be omitted here. How do we consider radio call service providers? There is also some degree of communication and broadcasting because one person speaks to different stations. Do we consider them under this? 

Then, mobile phones also have some other multiple uses; good and bad ones. The one of mobile money – banks are rivaling with mobile money service providers. How do we consider them here? The entities that you examined and interacted with I can see if I am not wrong, there is no bank mentioned here. So, there is need to consider the voice or the views of the banks in the issue of banking, and the rivalry between banks and telecommunication service providers, especially in the area of mobile money services. 

There is this question of security. You put it there – after the Minister for Defence and Security - I am glad that you have considered it on page 5. Mobile phones being used as switches to switch on bombs – where a mobile phone connected to a bomb is called from far and when it vibrates, the bomb goes off. Maybe that is the angle from which you have brought it here.

From the perspective of privacy of individual persons – there  is a right to privacy. The issue of tapping and listening to conversations of people – yes, it can be used to catch terrorists when they are planning to hit somewhere. But how do you ensure the safety and privacy of people who must be private on certain things that they talk about. Will this area not be abused, for example, in a political context –(Member timed out.)

4.36
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): I thank you. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister and also the committee for the report they made. 

Technology is always advancing and it always changes with time. I remember when we passed the Electronic Media Act, we did not know – in section 2 - we could not define the term “broadcasting” and “telecommunication” and so, I would like to thank the minister. So, what has been happening in the public is going to be addressed here because the amplifiers which are being used in the community – in the law, electronic media has been taken as broadcasting, but as you know the definition of broadcasting, it must have a frequency; it must be different from those amplifiers which are used by the local community. 

What has been happening is that people who are using these amplifiers in the community to pass on a message, have been taken to court and have suffered because of the law we passed. So, this is why I thank the minister because he has really been alert in helping the community. We were going to get an uprising from the community against the law we passed, which lumps community amplifiers with broadcasting.

Secondly, technology advances business of low-cost entrepreneurs. So, if this is going to address the low-costing entrepreneurs in communication, then I think members in the community will appreciate it; because any business with the cheapest communication costs , has an economic multiplier effect that helps Government to build its purchasing power and supports people to do business. Where there is a communication gap, it is very difficult to operate a business. The business community and the people we represent need cheap means of communication –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable member.

4.38
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 4, when I look at the protection of communications installations, it is a very important principle. Of course, you have met all these telecom companies and they have raised their concerns. When I look at what you are recommending, it is quite general because you are now talking about another Bill to address infrastructure protection. When you go to page 5, on offences and penalties, you are again recommending that they should review upwards as a deterrent enough to discourage offences. 

You had cited something very good on part 4.3, where you looked at other countries; they treat these offences as terrorism and economic sabotage. I am wondering why you could not concentrate in reviewing with a view of enforcing what these other countries are doing rather than just trying to list these offences that are committed and are causing a lot of losses. This puts me a little bit in balance and if you could take this much more seriously, it would instil investors’ confidence because of the stringent measures against sabotage. Those are my views. Thank you.

4.41
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is on page 3, item 4. I would like to thank the committee and the minister for the report. However, under observations and recommendations, it is noted that the Communications and Broadcasting Act provides for the protection of infrastructure, signal distribution, separation of broadcasting – but mine is basically on signal distribution. 

Now that citizens are entitled to their right to information, other areas of this country, up to today, do not have signals; for example the constituency where I represent, Kongasis in Bukwo District. We have pleaded for a UBC signal for all these years up to today. Maybe the harmonisation of this may bring us the signals. I ask the minister to take this matter seriously since it is one of his cardinal responsibilities. 

We cannot continue to live in a blackout. We don’t know what is happening; even my people don’t know what is happening here in Parliament. Even when our athletes are running, the Kipsiros, nobody sees them; they just get to hear of them as stories. I think this is unfortunate. 

Moreso, we have the standard of – I do not know whether they regulate the condition of boosters. You find that MTN, Airtel, for more than one week, are all off in the constituency and you cannot communicate with anybody. I do not know how this happens that you find that MTN and Airtel are off at the same time, and you cannot communicate to anybody. I do not know whether they dumped poor machines there, but I think that should also be subject to scrutiny. 

Mr Speaker, those are my concerns. Of course there are some other parts in the country that have similar problems and not only Bukwo. Thank you very much. 

4.43
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My issue is a clarification and it is on page 3. The committee observes that since 1997, the Uganda Communications Tribunal, according to the UCC Act, was not established. 

I am wondering, since then up to now, have there been any cases before the tribunal. And if these cases were there, who was handling them. Because, when I proceed onto the recommendations, the committee is saying that the frequency of sitting of this committee should be based on business to handle, that is, either on a quarterly basis or on sessional basis when there is enough business to handle. 

So, I am just wondering, is this tribunal relevant. Maybe the committee should convince me on that. Thank you.

4.44
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of ICT and the chairperson of the committee for coming up with this report. 

On page 4, when it comes to protection of communication installations, what pains me, Mr Speaker – Ugandans like traveling out of the country. If you ask anybody in my village that where do you want to go? He or she will tell you, “London”. And when they go there they come back with a lot of excitement because of the good things they have seen and the installations that have not been vandalised for years and years. But for us here, when you put up an installation, tomorrow morning you will not find it; it would have been removed; and yet people want to have signals. 

Mr Speaker, the minister and the engineer, whom I see inside this House, Engineer Mutabazi, you have no option, but to protect the installations already in place in this country or even make them better. 

Combining these two organs makes sense, in that you have a control point, which is one, but there must be a penalty for anybody who decides to vandalise an installation. Say you are in Walk-to-Walk and you decide to cut off something, that becomes a problem. I think there should be a penalty and I am very happy that when I am talking about this, even hon. Fungaroo is nodding in agreement. 

I am 100 percent in support of this Bill and I wish you good luck. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.46
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I am seeking clarification from the minister and the chairperson. I remember in the first year of our term, I raised the matter about telecom companies cheating our people through lotteries. In fact, those things are not regulated. I do not know whether Government is collecting any revenue from this business that the telecom companies are engaged in. I don’t know whether they are promotions, but I think it is one way of robbing our people and crippling our country. Because most of these telecom companies are not owned by Ugandans; they are owned by people abroad. I do not know whether the minister came up with something to regulate this in the Bill. Thank you very much.

4.48
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Kevinah Taaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the committee for a very good report they have made. My comment is on page 5. In the conclusion, there is a phrase that says, “Most importantly the Bill promotes technology neutrality and is important in the facilitation of economic growth and participation in the knowledge society.”

Mr Speaker, I have not seen how we can develop, economically and technologically, without talking about education because we need IT in the education sector. We have just heard that Kyambogo University lecturers are on strike and the university has been closed. Sometime back, the lecturers went on strike when the third-year students were about to finish their degree courses without touching a computer. So, I don’t know what the minister is going to do about merging the information on technology with activities of the Ministry of Education and Sports for economic growth to be realised in society. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, can we listen to the Member from Otuke? Member from Sheema North, you are a member of this committee so you will not contribute to the debate.

4.50
MR JANCITA OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Mr Speaker, I would like to make a comment on the protection of communication installations, which appears on page 4. I have noticed that in this country we have several masts and installations concentrated near one another and near people’s residences. I am wondering whether the committee and the minister concerned have taken into consideration the health implications of such installations and masts. 

I am also wondering whether all these players or companies cannot share these installations and masts rather than multiplying them, something I suspect can be a health hazard to the communities in which they are installed. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

4.51
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I just want to focus on three issues, and one is on page 3 about the establishment of the communications tribunal. There are many players in the sector, but I have not seen the public. When constituting that tribunal, it would have been fair for us to envisage how the public will feed into it. I am seeing the companies mentioned, but there is no single mention of the public. How will issues from the public come in?

Secondly, I would also like to comment on the protection of installations. Much as we are talking about their protection, we have not talked about the protection of the individuals and communities around those installations. It would have been better for us to slot in components on health of the individuals and environments around the installations.

Finally, Mr Speaker, let me look at the regulation of the content. In this case when my mobile phone, for example, is overloaded or I am supplied with messages that do not appeal to my sight, What could be the penalty for that? So that we do not receive information that we don’t want or which does not appeal to us. That is the submission I wanted to make, Mr Speaker.

4.53
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I want to comment on is in respect of education. In Rwanda, children begin learning how to use computers right from Primary One. So, I just want to ask the minister to tell the House where science and technology fall. I am saying this because recently, the President of this country inaugurated a car manufactured by students of Makerere University, which was a science and technology venture. But how can we develop this country without science and technology? Thank you very much.

4.54
MR JOHN AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have two concerns to put to the chairperson of the committee. These relate to what the honourable member from Otuke County said about the radiation or emissions from these electromagnetic installations. I have noticed that most of these masts are scattered where people reside. Some of them have been constructed on land or highlands that belong to certain clans. 
For example, in Kabala in Kalong, Agago County, MTN and UTL planted their masts on one of the mountains, which belongs to some clan leader. However, this clan leader has been asking for a royalty or some compensation from these service providers for the clan. My question is, have we captured some legislation that will empower the authority to regulate the planting of these masts? Or that will see the authority ensure that these telecommunication companies meet some social responsibility or obligations? Or one that will enable it follow-up on issues regarding either compensation or meeting the needs of the clans or people whose land or rocks are being used by these service providers? 

You know the cultural set-up of our country;  some people honour or preserve some places such as rocks, high hills and mountains for their cultural norms and behavior. Maybe at this point - I don’t know whether the committee interacted or interfaced with the different telecommunication companies to find out their views regarding these matters. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I will now allow the minister to make some responses before we take a vote on this matter. I don’t know whether the chairperson of the committee also has some issues to put up, but I think he has been covered.

4.57
THE MINISTER OF ICT (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do appreciate the very useful and friendly and constructive comments that have been made by colleagues. I will make responses to a few of them.

Hon. Fungaroo raised issues to do with security. He sensitised us about the importance of the telephone in the management of security and it being a danger to security but that it can also be used to alert us of these problems. So, it focuses on using science for the preservation and protection of humanity although bad elements will try to use it for other things. 

The honourable member also raised the issue of radio calls, but I would like to say that those ones have been covered by the Bill.

The issue raised by brother, hon. James Kakooza; yes, there is going to be clearer regulations and separate focus for broadcasters and also for other communication devices. So, there is going to be more sensitive monitoring.

On the question of protection of communication installations, I would like to say that yes, but unfortunately we have had vandalisation of very valuable equipment. You have heard of how electricity wires having been cut; and how transformers having been vandalised. 

So, this is a very serious matter which goes beyond the communication sector, and I fully share the comments that deterrent punishments should be made, of course in addition to educating the public so that the public can protect what belongs to them. (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Ndugu Rugunda, for giving way. I would like clarification on the issue of protecting installations of communication gadgets against vandalism. On page 4 you have talked about this matter; can the committee provide for us a list of all the telecommunication masts that we have in Uganda. 

Still referring to the point on which I wanted clarification, the earth satellite station in Ombachi, Arua, has been left to decay. It is being vandalized, and in my view that is the responsibility of the government. You have left a very important step in the development of science and technology in Uganda to decay. Why do you leave Ombachi earth satellite station to decay? 

Secondly, as minister of technology, we would also like you to explain to us why UBC TV does not cover the whole of Uganda. This question I think was asked by someone from Kongasis. Can’t you upgrade? Don’t you have the technology to upgrade UBC to also cover Obongi?

This also goes to the minister; we, members of the Opposition, are not going to benefit from the improvements even if we asked. This is because accessibility to government owned and controlled service providers like the UBC, Radio Uganda and others is highly limited. When members of the press who manage these places invite members of the Opposition go for talk shows, they are threatened with sacking. They are asked, “Why do you bring this man here; this one is going to talk against Government?”–

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now contributing to the debate?

MR FUNGAROO: So, the clarification I am seeking here is: should we continue improving what we are not going to use or should we withhold the fire?

DR RUGUNDA: I must say I am in absolute agreement with Ndugu Fungaroo about the necessity for UBC to be accessed in every corner of Uganda and even beyond. The point is noted, but Ndugu Fungaroo will understand that these are matters that he and I are free to talk to each other about. So, that is really a very valid point and I am sure our colleague, the Minister of Information and National Guidance, is doing everything possible to ensure that this is achieved. 

Let me run through the issues briefly. We have discussed Ombachi a number of times. I have had the occasion to visit Ombachi, a very imposing and beautiful site I must say, but I will need to get information on this. My suspicion is that the technology is very much advanced beyond the Ombachi technology –(Laughter)- and we should get technical advice. However, you may find that that installation could help the country in other ways other than being a broadcasting or communication centre. But let us not speculate; let us ask the responsible technical officers to pursue the point that Ndugu Fungaroo has raised so that we get a satisfactory answer to this very question. (Interruption)

MR ACHILE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable minister. Ombachi would be of great use to this nation. In fact, there was a time when it was tested and the whole of West Nile was actually viewing the screen. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When was this?

MR ACHILE: This was in 1980, but I strongly believe that Ombachi is still viable.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you. I think the debate on Ombachi will be sorted out by the technical team and I am as anxious as you are to get the actual answers. We want to make the best out of it for the service of the people of West Nile and for the service of the people of Uganda.    

There were issues raised about problems of communication in the Kapchorwa area, Kongasis and the others. Yes, it is true that the telephone companies we have do not quite reach every part of the country and sometimes there may be local problems there, but this is a matter that we can pursue with the concerned companies.

The issue raised by Ndugu Bitekyerezo on vandalism of installations; I have already made some comments on it. On the issue of who was handling the disputes before the tribunal, it is true that a tribunal has not been formed and by the way, I fully support the view that it should be formed. The Uganda Communications Commission and Ministry of ICT have been handling these issues, but I agree that we should now upgrade this so that issues of dispute can be resolved by a competent and authorised body.

Cheating through lotteries; yes, I must say some people are misusing our phones. We have already discussed this matter with the communications commission to ensure that we are protected from unsolicited messages and all sorts of things that disturb you at awkward moments. Customers and clients should be protected from uncalled for disturbance. 

The question of computers in our schools is a legitimate point. Government has a programme and the Rural Communication Development Fund to ensure that all government secondary schools to begin with, have computer labs. As I speak, about 900 or so secondary schools in Uganda have received computer labs. Another 400 or so should be receiving computer labs within the next several months and after that stage, we intend to expand the outreach. The whole idea is to make computers available to schools at all levels and the people of Uganda. 

In that context, the Uganda Communications Commission has assisted in some areas to establish internet cafes and other communication centres and district business centres to enable people to communicate. The other day, I was in Kasese and I was pleased to see at Mpondwe border post a solar powered internet café by the Uganda Communications Commission. I was also happy to see that it was promoting regional cooperation because our brothers and sisters from DRC are crossing to come over to use this solar powered internet café. So, all in all, our target is to reach schools, reach the population and reach communities.

The issue of masts; it is true that it is actually an embarrassing situation. You see six masts on one hill and you wonder why they are there, but it is a result of the competition that has been going on amongst the communication companies. However, sanity is beginning to prevail because so far, two major companies have invested in masts; one is the American Tower Company and the other is Eaton. They are investing in towers so that the telephone companies and operators can focus on the business they know very well and those who specialise in masts can provide shared services. I think this is going to make the environment better and our hills are going to be beautiful again.

The question of consumer protection and regulation; our focus is to ensure that we regulate the companies involved in broadcasting and telecommunications while at the same time we protect the interests of the population that use those services.

Mr Speaker, the last point I want to make is on where the National Council for Science and Technology lies. First of all, we should commend them; we think they are doing good work. Through their auspices, there is an electric car - I saw it carrying some passengers the other day and I hope it will be commercialised soon. But to answer your question more specifically, it is under the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Finance sometimes takes responsibility of incubation of certain projects and departments, but I think in due course it will be rationalised to be perhaps under the Ministry of Science and Technology or under some appropriate organisation. 

I thank colleagues for their ideas, views and contributions and for supporting the motion. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Minister and thank you, chairman and members, for making these elaborate contributions, which have helped us better understand the principles of the Bill. Members, the motion is that the Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority Bill be read the second time. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE 

THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS REGULATORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2012

Clause 1

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose some amendments to clause 1. We substitute the word “Authority” with the word “Commission” and rephrase the definition to read as follows: “Commission means the Uganda Communications Commission established under section 3.”

The justification is for consistency with the amendment to the title. Thereafter, substitute the word “Authority” wherever it appears in the Bill with the word “Commission”.

The other amendment we would like to make as a committee is to insert the definition of “board” -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we go one by one? We start with the amendment to substitute for the word “Authority” the word “Commission”. Honourable minister, do you have any objection?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: I support the amendment, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, we would like to propose that we insert the definition of “Board” immediately after the definition of the word “authorised”: “Board means the board established under section 8.” The justification: for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is a straightforward amendment. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: The next amendment is to redraft the interpretation of the word “broadcaster” as follows: “Broadcaster means a licensed person who packages and distributes or distributes television or radio programme services for reception by subscribers or the public, regardless of the technology.

The justification is: to restrict the definition to a person engaged in broadcasting who has been licensed for that purpose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister and members, is this agreeable?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Agreeable, Sir.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is agreed by the minister. I will put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: The other amendment we have is to substitute for the word “and” the word “or”. The justification is that the use of “and” is restrictive and “or” makes it all encompassing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, Mr Chairman, you need to direct us, for purposes of the editing, so that we know exactly where this appears. On the definition of “broadcasting”- You need to put it on record.

MR BAGIIRE: On the definition of broadcasting, we propose that we substitute the word “and” with the word “or”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, “video or data”; is that what you are asking?

MR BAGIIRE: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: On “communications”, insert the phrase “data communication” between the words “telecommunications” and “radio” appearing in line one. The justification is: to cater for data related communication such as the Internet, SMS, Unstructured Supplementary Service Data (USSD) and Process Supplementary Service Request (PSSR).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question out and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Rephrase the definition of “communication services” to read as follows: “Communication services means services performed consisting of the dissemination or interchange of audio, visual or data content using postal, radio, telecommunications media, data communication and includes broadcasting.”

The justification is: for use of appropriate language that aligns the interpretation in a manner that caters for the changes in the communications industry; also to cater for data related communication like the Internet and related technologies.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: On (g), insert the definition of the word “content” immediately after the definition of the phrase “communication services” to read as follows: “Content means any sound, text, still picture, moving picture or other audiovisual representation, tactile representation or any combination of the preceding, which is capable of being created, manipulated, stored, retrieved or communicated electronically.”

The justification is: the word “content” has been introduced in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Under (h), insert the definition of the expression “dominant position” immediately after the definition of the phrase “data”. So, it will read as follows: “Dominant position means a position of market power enjoyed by an operator, which enables the operator to prevent effective competition being maintained in the relevant market by giving it the power to behave, to an appreciable extent, independently of its competitors and customers.” The justification is: for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that an amendment is made to introduce a new definition for the phrase, “dominant position”.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE:  The next amendment is (i), Director General.

The committee proposes that we substitute the phrases “Director General” and “Authority” with the phrases “Executive Director” and “Commission” respectively. Thereafter, replace the phrase “Director General” wherever it appears in the Bill with the words, “Executive Director.”

The justification is that change of title comes with numerous costs and inconveniences, which include change of numerous internal and external facilities and user materials for the office of the Executive Director. It is also a consequential amendment arising from the change of title to the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: On (j), rephrase the interpretation of “eligible person” to read as follows: “Eligible person” means a person who-
a) 	has not been adjudged bankrupt or has not entered into a composition or a scheme of arrangement with his or her creditors; or

b) 	has not been convicted of an offence whose penalty exceeds six months imprisonment or a fine exceeding twelve currency points or both.

The justification is that the definition is subjective and open to abuse. Secondly, being under criminal proceedings may not mean that the person is guilty.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this is a new definition. I will read it for the purposes of the Hansard: “Eligible person means a person who-

a) has not been adjudged bankrupt or has not entered into a composition or a scheme of arrangement with his or her creditors; or

b) has not been convicted of an offence whose penalty exceeds six months imprisonment or a fine exceeding twelve currency points or both.”
 
I will put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Amendment (k), emission of electromagnetic energy; insert the words “radiation or” immediately after the word “deliberate” appearing in line one. The justification is that radiation is the principal means of emitting electromagnetic energy.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Amendment (l), exhibition; rephrase the definition of “exhibition” to read as follows: “Exhibition means a display of art, video or data to the public, with or without sound, by means of any electronic apparatus.”

The justification is: for clarity and to make it more inclusive by catering for display of data.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Amendment (m), owner; delete the definition of “owner”. The justification is that it is redundant having deleted clauses 48 and 51 that relate to land in favour of reference to the Land Act and Land Acquisition Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, are you agreeable to this?  

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Chairman, I agree with the amendment.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment to delete the word “owner” from the definition section.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Amendment (n), proprietor; delete the definition of “proprietor”. The justification is that it is redundant having deleted clause 29.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Amendment (o), public broadcaster; delete the definition of public broadcaster. The justification is that it is redundant having deleted clause 47.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we have not deleted clause 47. 

MR BAGIIRE: We are proposing to delete clause 47. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we stand over it? 

MR BAGIIRE: Amendment (p), radio communication; substitute the word “emitting” appearing in line one with the word “transmitting”. The justification is: to be more specific because it is possible to emit electromagnetic energy that is not for communication purposes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Amendment (q), radio communication apparatus; in paragraph (a), substitute the word “emitting” appearing in line three with the word “transmitting”. The justification is: for consistency with the amendment made to the definition of “radio communication” as a technology.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Rephrase paragraph (b) on the interpretation of the phrase “radio communication apparatus” to read as follows: 

“(b) Radio communication in the form of messages, audio or visual images is received or transmitted by that apparatus or station.” The justification is: for use of appropriate language and for consistency with the amendment made to the definition of radio communication.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: In paragraph (c), substitute the word “emit” appearing in line three with the word “transmit”. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising from amendment to the definition of radio communication.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Amendment (r), telecommunication system; insert the word “data” between the words “music” and “and” appearing in paragraph (a). The justification is: to make it inclusive.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Under (s), insert the definition of the word “person” immediately before the definition of “postal article”. It reads: “Person includes any individual, company, association, or body of persons corporate or un-corporate.” The justification is: for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Amendment (g), insert the definition of the word “tribunal” immediately after the definition of “telecommunication system”. It reads:  “Tribunal means the Uganda Communications Tribunal established under section 67.” The justification is: for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We stand over the whole clause because of the other amendments that will be dealing with it and then we shall come back to it.  

Clause 2

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we rephrase the opening sentence of clause 2 to read as follows: “The objectives of this Act are to develop a modern communications sector, which includes telecommunications, broadcasting, radio communications, postal communications, data communication and infrastructure by-”. The justification is: to clearly specify the facets of the communications sectors being regulated by the Bill.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: I support the amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, under clause 2(f), the committee proposes that we insert the word “and” between the words “priced” and “quality” appearing in the last line. The justification is: for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, under clause 2(g), the committee proposes that we insert the following expression at the end of paragraph (g): “...and information and communication technology in the country.” The justification is: to make the provision all-encompassing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes amendments as follows:

(a) Substitute the words “Regulatory Authority” appearing in the head note and in sub clause (1) with the word “Commission”. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment to the title of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have not yet amended the title of the Bill; so, should we stand over this also? We can vote on it so that it can give us the implication of adjusting the title when the question is put later. I will put the question to this proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Under clause 3(2) (a), re-write the first word as “acquire”. The justification is: to correct a typographical error.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes amendments as follows: 

a) Under clause 4(1) (c), insert the word “spectrum” immediately before the word “resources” for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Redraft sub clause (1) (f) to read as follows: “To establish, amend, administer and enforce a national numbering plan and electronic addresses plan, and assign numbers and electronic addresses.” The justification is: to streamline the management of country top level domain names.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Rephrase paragraph (h) of sub clause (1) to read as follows: “To coordinate and collaborate with the relevant national and international organisations in matters relating to communications.” The justification is: for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Rephrase paragraph (i) of sub clause (1) to read as follows: “To set national standards and to ensure compliance with national and international standards and obligations laid down by international communication agreements and treaties to which Uganda is a party.” The justification is: for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, you are asking us to delete the existing clause 4(1) (i) and replace it with what you have just read? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

MR BAGIIRE: Delete the entire paragraph (n) under clause 4 (1). The justification is that it was overtaken by technological advancements and is therefore not in line with technology neutrality. The explanation is that it is not in order to prescribe what technology telecom companies should be using.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, if you agree, I will put the question.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Chairman, I agree with the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: The committee proposes to rephrase clause 4(1) (r) to read as follows: “To represent Uganda’s communications sector at national and international fora and organisations relating to its functions, and to coordinate the participation of any interested groups.” The justification is: for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: The committee proposes to rephrase clause 4(1) (t) to read as follows: “To establish and administer a fund for the development of rural communications and information and communication technology in the country.” The justification is: to make the provision all-encompassing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Rephrase clause 4(1) (v) to read as follows: “To carry out any other function that is related to the functions of the Commission.” The justification is that the word “conducive” is subjective and gives too much liberty to the regulator. Also, the use of the words “related” and “connected” creates unnecessary repetition; the word “related” suffices. The other justification is that it is a consequential amendment to the title.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we introduce new paragraphs (w), (x), (y) and (z) after paragraph (v) as follows - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, unless the minister has something to say, I think you can proceed and read all of them before we vote on all of them at once.

MR BAGIIRE: These are the new inclusions: 
“(w) Establish an intelligent network monitoring system to monitor traffic, revenue and quality of service of operators.” The justification is: to empower the Commission to monitor local and international traffic for establishing revenue and quality of service of operators. The committee had in the past asked the Commission to implement this but the law had not provided for. 

Additionally, similar IN systems are being implemented in Rwanda, Senegal, Malawi and Ivory Coast. In Ghana, the country realises US$ 6 million from incoming international calls per month. 

The second inclusion is, “(x) To regulate value added services provided by communication operators.” The justification is: to enable the Commission regulate value added services provided by communications operators such as mobile money and mobile banking.

The third inclusion is, “(y) To operate and manage the Uganda institute of ICT.” The justification is: to ensure continuous capacity building in ICT but most fundamentally to promote UICT to a level of an ICT innovation centre in the realm of NARO, in the sense that what NARO is to the Ministry of Agriculture, UICT should be to the Ministry of ICT. 

The other justification is to avert what is termed as digital colonialism, given the amount of foreign technology, especially software, Uganda is consuming to date yet we have IT innovators that can innovate on behalf of the country.

“(z) To set standards, monitor and enforce compliance relating to content.” The justification is: to provide for content regulation.

“(aa) To encourage and promote infrastructure sharing amongst licensees and to provide regulatory guidelines.” The justification is: to realise optimal utilisation of existing infrastructure and environmental sustainability.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable chairman, it was not included in the opening paragraph of the proposed amendments. So, you might have to correct that, for the purpose of the Hansard. It does not stop at (z); after (z) there is (aa). Up here you are stopping at (z). So, we need to confirm that it is going to (aa) after (z). Okay?

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chair, I beg to confirm that indeed it goes up to (aa) and we would like to introduce new paragraphs as (w), (x), (y), (z) and (aa) immediately after paragraph (v).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have already dealt with (w), (x), (y) and (z). Have we dealt with (aa)? You have read the amendment in (aa).

MR BAGIIRE: Yes, I have.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment (aa) as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Clause 4(2), redraft the provision to read as follows: 

“The Commission shall- 
(a) at least once every three months; and 
(b) within three months after the end of each year, or at the request of the Minister, submit to the Minister a report on the performance of its functions.” The justification is that it is for clarity.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Chair. I seek clarification from what the chairman has just read out. Is it within three months of each year or each financial year? These are two different things - a calendar year and a financial year? When you go by principles of auditing in international financing, when giving reports they always go with the calendar year and not financial year. I do not know which is which.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chairman, the original drafting is prescribing the period- “The Authority shall at least every three months, within three months after the end of each year, or at the request of the Minister, submit to the Minister a report on the performance of its functions.” 

I think the purpose was to provide a minimum period within which these reports should start flowing in - at least once every three months. Now, the next phrase is answering, “once every three months beginning from when?” It says beginning from at least three months after the beginning of the -

MR KABAJO KYEWALABYE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The year referred to here cannot be different from the year of operation of the organisation. So, if the organisation is operating according to a financial year, that means that automatically, the year referred to here is the financial year because the organisation is operating according to the financial year. 

The financial year begins 1st July and ends 30th June. It cannot be any different. However, if the honourable member would want to have it clearer, we can propose an amendment where we would add, “within three months after the end of each financial year”. This would be for clarity. Actually, the year referred to here is the financial year. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see we have two sets of years. The Uganda Human Rights Commission and the Inspectorate of Government annual reports are not based on the financial year; they are based on the calendar year. So, are you referring to the calendar year or the financial year in this particular performance report?

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, in this context, it is the financial year.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then we need to put the financial year. Would you like to look at it again and see how we can improve on the financial year issue? 

“The Authority shall, at least once every three months and within three months after the end of each financial year, or at the request of the minister, submit to the minister a report on the performance of its functions.” I think by inserting “financial year”, it sorts it out. This is because it is saying you report every month but you are given an initial three months at the end of the financial year, just like the Auditor-General’s report. That kind of sequencing is important. 

So, the only amendment that might make sense is the one of inserting “financial year”, but splitting it like this gives it a completely different image. It is as if you are creating two different periods for reporting. Hon. Kakooza, would you like to propose this amendment?

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you. I think the redrafting should read: “The Commission shall, at least once every three months and within three months after the end of each financial year, or at the request of the Minister, submit to the Minister a report on the performance of its functions.”

This will be consistent with international finance reporting because the electronic financing systems now report after three months. It can enable the minister to evaluate what the performance is depending on the funds given to him or from the Commission. I thought it should be a financial year.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, which means we expect three reports and not four.

MR KAKOOZA: Exactly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If that is the clear understanding, then we can take a vote on this. The minister did not intend to have four reports; he intended to have three reports.

MR KABAJO KYEWALABYE: Mr Chair, my understanding is that actually, there will be four reports because after every three months, there is a report. The final report, which comes three months after the end of the financial year, is like a report which summarises the whole year. So, there is a report after every three months, which means by the time the year ends, there are four reports for every three months and then there is fifth report, which is the report for the whole year, which is supposed to come not later than three months after the end of the financial year. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In which case, the issue of “within three months after the end of the financial year” should capture clause 3 and not clause 2. If the grace period of three months after the financial year has ended - the Commission is given three months within which to give the final report - then those three months would only apply to the final report, leaving the other reports to be three-monthly. In which case, they do not need any grace period because from the start of the financial year in the first month, second month, third month, they should report. Are you now saying that after that first month, second month, third month they should report at the end of the three months so that there are four reports in a year? 

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Chairman, why can’t they consider the quarter system, which we are more familiar with, other than just talking about three months? What about every quarter?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Maybe you could even say, “The Authority shall submit four quarterly reports.” 

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. According to accounting regulations, the report you submit three months after the financial year means you are giving a report of the last quarter of the previous year, the last part of the previous year. This is the report which is given three months after the end of the financial year.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What about the final report?

MS TAAKA: That is the final report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that is of the last quarter; you are saying it is of the last quarter. That is the three months report.

MS TAAKA: That is the report at the end of the financial year.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us understand this; is the final report a combination of four reports or is it just the report of the last quarter of the financial year?

MS TAAKA: It is a combination of the financial year.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then the distinction has got to be made.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, when we have this part (b) highlighting “within three months after the end of the financial year”, you realise that logically, the reports are supposed to be cumulative. When we have a report of the first quarter and then we are compiling the report for the second quarter, the one for the second quarter should also reflect the progress which was made in the first quarter. In this case, if again we have a report which has been compiled within the three months of the last quarter, it may not be necessary then to have another report after the fourth quarter; it would be really redundant, in my view, Mr Chairman.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I think what the committee wanted to indicate here is that within three months of every financial year, there must be a report. It is mandatory that every company, every institution, must give an annual report every year according to financial standards. So, what the committee meant is at least once every three months and within three months of every financial year. It is in between; it is not after but within every financial year. So, every three months, there must be a report. So, the final one, the fourth one, is automatic.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us go step by step now. There will be quarterly reports; okay? Quarterly reports means there are going to be four reports. Will there also be a final report which is called the annual report? Will it be there? 

MR KAKOOZA: Because every institution of Government must give an annual report on the performance every financial year of the funds which are submitted to that institution or that commission, the report must be here. However, for the benefit of the minister who is entitled to know the performance and the funds given within the commission or within his ministry, he must get a report every three months within that financial year.   

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Although I agree with the sequencing of reports as my colleague who has just been on the Floor has said, he keeps on referring to financial. In this case, the reports are in the context of the body, which we are referring to as being a regulatory body. The reports we are talking about here are therefore not financial reports. This is a regulatory body and that regulatory body is reporting to the minister about its activities and about the performance of the whole communications sector in general. 

On the sequencing of the reports, I agree with him, but the reports are not financial reports; the reports are talking about the performance of the communications sector - the regulatory issues and all those issues in general. Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, we have worked with organisations before and we have participated in compiling reports. What I have noted, from the period I have interfaced with real work in this context, is that we should be mindful of the content. Which content, for example, do we bring in the three months after the end of the financial year? After all, when we have the first quarter report, the second quarter report and the third quarter report, the fourth quarter report should be reflecting, cumulatively, what has been achieved and the challenges right from the first quarter up to the fourth quarter. So, to have another report after the fourth quarter report, I do not see any logic in that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let me give you the example of the Inspectorate of Government, which is under Article 231 (1) of the Constitution: “The Inspectorate of Government shall submit to Parliament at least once in every six months a report on the performance of its functions, making such recommendations as it considers necessary and containing such information as Parliament may require.” Is it the kind of reporting which is anticipated by this provision or is it a financial report?  

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The reports we are referring to here are sectoral performance reports. The reason we are proposing they are presented in the manner we are proposing - at least every three months - and also giving the minister leeway to ask for a report at any given time, is because of the nature of the industry. The industry is dynamic, so reports may be needed at any given opportunity. However, when you go to 4(3) that is where the financial part comes in: “The minister shall lay the annual reports of the Authority before Parliament.” This naturally includes the financials.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear, honourable member?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to agree with what the chairman of the committee has submitted. I think the reporting in part 2 of the clause refers to the ordinary performance reports and part 3 then talks about the annual report, which includes of course accounts. 

The problem seems to be on the structuring of part 2. When you look at it, you have the quarterly reports and then the report being talked about in the second part - the one supposed to be submitted within three months at the end of the financial year; to me, this seems to be a consolidation of these quarterly reports. If that is the case, then we would have two parts in sub clause (2); one part to provide for the three-monthly reports and a second part to provide for the annual report, which is to be produced within three months of the conclusion of every financial year. I think that would be a little clearer. 

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 4(2) (a) is clear; it tells us that this report is a quarterly report. It says, “The Commission shall – (a) at least once every three months…” 

In part (b), I find the confusion is stemming from the word “financial”. If we do not insert this word, “financial”, we could then say, “within three months after the end of each year, make a performance annual report” and then we continue with the rest. 

At the end of every year, we need an ordinary performance report. However, after every three months, the board will have to produce a report; but now we want them to give an annual report, which part (b) covers - within three months after the end of that year, make a performance annual report. So in my view, the word “financial” should not be inserted there, so that it does not bring confusion. Thank you. 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I think what sub clause (2) is trying to cure is to let the minister be aware of what is happening in the ministry depending on the management and finances within that commission, and that must be clear. A financial year is made up of the twelve months within a budgetary statutory instalment, but if it is a calendar year, it would be different. 

This is a Government institution, so how does it report? It reports in a financial year. That is why we amended and said that at least once every three months, the minister must get a report and within three months, it must be a financial year and not a calendar year. If you say that it is in a calendar year, then the minister does not receive it statutorily from the body beyond a financial year. So, by accounting standards, it must be within a financial year. That is why I moved an amendment and said at least every three months, the minister can request for a report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think we are dealing with two situations at the same time, which is not proper. My further reading of the Bill shows that the report we are talking about here is strictly the performance report; the financial one is covered under a different section. 

Look at clauses 81 and 82, where it provides for the audit. Clause 80 says, “The financial year of the Authority is the period of 12 months beginning on the 1st day of July in each year, and ending on the 30th day of June in the next calendar year”.

Clause 81 says, “The Authority shall – 

(a)	 keep proper books of accounts and all records relating to the transactions and affairs of the Authority;

(b) 	within three months after the end of the financial year, prepare annual financial statements for the preceding financial year; and

(c) 	within three months after the end of each financial year, submit the annual accounts to the Auditor-General.”

Clause 82 then deals with audit. So, I think the issues are now separated. What we are dealing with here is actually the performance report and we cannot insert “financial” there. We just need to deal with the issue of making these clauses make ordinary sense in terms of reporting. If it is no longer a financial year, the performance reports are annual in the sense that they are calendar years. Just like the Inspectorate of Government has two reports every year; report number one comes after June and then the other one. 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, that is why I asked the two questions; is this a financial year or a calendar year?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, do not ask anymore; deal with the issue before us now. 

MS KWIYUCWINY: Mr Chair, after listening to what members have proposed, I would now like to propose that sub clause (2) reads as follows: “The Commission shall, at least once every three months and at the request of the Minister, submit to the Minister a report on the performance of its functions.” I propose that we delete part (b) from that recommendation. 

HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I was also going to say the same thing, that the Commission shall receive, at least once every three months, a report. If it is every three months, then it is going to receive four reports in a year. So why do we have to say “at the end of every year”? We are not talking of the financial year, so part (b) would be very irrelevant. 

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When we make quarterly reports, in the final quarter of the year is when the summary of the whole performance for the year is presented. In this case, when we think of having another report after three months, I do not see it fitting. So I support the proposal that we have four reports. The report of the final quarter should summarise the overall performance and then (b) should be deleted because it will not be very relevant. 

MR AMOS OKOT: I thank you, Mr Chairman. Having gone through this debate, I see that this clause is not very smart if we are to say after every three months. I, therefore, think that we should rephrase it by saying, “The Commission shall at least once every six months…” –(Interjections)- Let me finish; it is my opinion – “…and within three months after the end of the year, make a performance annual report and  at the request of the Minister, submit to the Minister a report on the performance of its functions.” 

This is the justification: We are asking for a performance report and we are saying, after every three months let somebody report and then the reports come in that period of one year - about four or five reports. Again, we have given the minister the power to ask for the report when he sees it fit to ask for it. 

I think for this to be realistic and achievable, we should borrow what the Constitution says on the Inspector General of Government. It is clearly indicated that after every six months, you give a performance report and the minister can ask for the report. Parliament can ask, through the minister, to give the report at any given period of time which is deemed fit. My proposal would be six months rather than three months. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that changing the months does not cure the problem we are dealing with. Can I propose this: “The Commission shall submit to the Minister a report on the performance of its functions. The report referred to in sub clause (a) shall be made every…” We can say, “The Commission shall make quarterly reports to the Minister on the performance of its functions…” You see, you can take out this other provision and bring the areas for reporting separately. That is what I am trying to do but I cannot think through it when I am also –

MR TASHOBYA: Looking closely at the redrafting proposed by the committee, I think it actually captures what we are trying to talk about. It captures the reporting of quarterly reports, that is (a), and it captures the report at the end of the year, and it also captures the reporting at the request of the minister. It would appear to me that on second thought, this is well considered drafting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What are the situations? The situations are these: One, there will be four quarterly reports from the minister; that one is a requirement. In addition, the minister can request for a report; that is giving discretional power to the minister to request for a report. The third aspect is that there is a final report – the annual report - which is to be presented. The issue is that, how do you now structure them because in sub clause (3) in the Bill, there is a final report? 

MR TASHOBYA: My considered opinion is that part one is to provide for the laying of the report before Parliament. Part two is the submission of the report to the minister, in which I see no contradictions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What I am saying is that there is a provision for an annual report, which is to be laid by the minister. Now, is the final report a stapling of the three reports or a final report that is compiled? That is the question that I am asking. Do you just pick the first and second quarters and bind them into one volume and then say that that is the annual report that the minister will lay?  

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, in my own understanding, the final report, or let us call it annual report, is supposed to give a snapshot of the industry’s performance for the whole year. It is also supposed to report on how the Commission has fulfilled its functions during that year - the challenges that it has met and so on. 

That report, when given to the minister, will also help the minister in reporting to the whole country, maybe during the budget time - that during the year, the communications sector has grown by this much and these are the challenges, and maybe because of taxes, the figures of subscribers did not grow as much as we had projected, and so on. The final report is not necessarily just an accumulation of the four reports but a snapshot of the performance of the sector and the Commission for the whole year. It is not necessarily an addition of one, two, three and four; it is not. I do not know whether I am making myself clear. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is what I also thought. 

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Chairman, to be scientific, we expect these quarterly reports to provide the database for the annual report. Why should the Commission spend a lot of time collecting information every quarter that at the end of the year, they are not going to make use of and they search for other information? This means that either their system has a problem or they did not deliberately track the performance. You track performance basing on day-to-day affairs and it is the accumulation of this that can inform you at the end of the year. 

I feel that it is proper, as a monitoring requirement - standard worldwide – that a minister has every quarter to have this information. Even the committee at a given moment can demand for a quarterly report from the minister. So this provision is there and we need to be informed. By the way, this is a very sensitive sector and we really need to know what is happening. I am of the view that we go by the requirement of three quarterly reports, and then of course the annual is already provided for, and we do not have to spend a lot of time on this matter.

MR SABILA: Mr Chairman, I believe three things are healthy; one, to have quarterly reports. Every quarter, there should be a report because it helps in evaluating the department at a given time. Two, we should have the request by the minister so that at any time that he wishes to have a report, he can request for it. Finally, we should have an annual report, which is a summary of the four quarters. That one is typically a summary saying that within the year, this and that happened, these were the challenges and so on. I think that is the way to go. I thank you.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also confirm that we need an annual report. I think the quarterly reports are obvious. The annual report is going to give us the performance over the year, not only programmatic but also financial. This annual report is also going to give us a comparison between years while the quarterly reports give us an analysis between the quarters. So, the annual report is very important. 

I would like to suggest that what was recommended before in part two, that this report be given within three months of the next year, should actually be taken to part three so that the minister lays this report in Parliament but within three months. I think we should give that period so that the report does not come when it is stale or when it has been overtaken by events. 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to state that indeed the practice at UCC today is that they prepare four quarterly reports and in addition to that, they prepare an annual report. However, for purposes of clarity, I want to propose that we redraft the provision to read as follows:

 “(a) The Commission shall submit to the Minister quarterly reports on the performance of its functions.

(b) The Minister may, at any time, request a report on the performance of its functions.

(c) The Commission shall submit an annual performance report to the Minister within three months of the end of the year.” (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, were you reading from my text, which I was trying to draft? I think that is the idea that is meant to be captured in this particular clause, and then the reporting remains under part three.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, I am sorry for having to rise up. I agree completely with the chairman but there is only one issue; to me, it is still a financial year and not a calendar year. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This one is a calendar year; there is no debate about that. We will put the question to the amendment proposed by the chairman finally. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to propose that under clause 5(1), we insert a new paragraph to read as follows: “(e) classify communications services and licenses.” The justification is: for proper regulation of each communication service.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, do you agree to this?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: I support the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment from the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR BAGIIRE: Clause 6, powers of the Minister; the committee proposes to redraft the entire clause to read as follows:

“(1) The minister may, after consultation with the Commission, give to the Commission guidelines on sector policy as may be appropriate.

(2) The guidelines referred to under subsection (1) shall be in writing and shall be published by the Commission in the Gazette prior to their commencement.”

The justification: to safeguard the independence of the Commission.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, sub clause (1) is very normal to most of these institutions. If you go to Electricity Regulatory Authority and all these other institutions, they have this provision as it is in the Bill. I have read a few of them.

MR TASHOBYA: I would like to support your guidance on the matter, that the Authority being a government institution must work within a framework, which is a policy coming from Government. So I would agree with you, Mr Chairman, that clause 6(1) as it is is normal practice as required of a government institution. Supposing, for example, for purposes of argument, the Commission refuses the guidance of the minister, and this is a government institution? So, I want to agree with you that sub clause (1) should stand as it is. I do not see any problem with it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the only consequential amendment that would apply in this regard would be the issue of “Authority” or “Commission”. 
 
MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, I think the reason why the committee was being cautious was because the sector which the Commission is regulating is a technical sector. So, we want to avoid a situation where a minister can give a guideline which does not conform to, say, an international treaty or some technical specification. That is why we had put this as it is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, this is policy - give policy guidelines – and the minister is the person responsible for policy direction of this sector in this House. 

The amendment would be consequential. We do not need to take a vote on the changing of the word from “Authority” to “Commission.” We do not need to take a vote on that. So, we will take a vote on clause 6 as it is.

MR BAGIIRE: We concede on that one. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 6 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to redraft clause 8(2) to read as follows:
“(2) The Board shall consist of the following –

a) 	A person with experience and knowledge in telecommunications, broadcasting or postal communications, who shall be the chairperson;

b) 	A representative of professional engineers recommended by the Institute of Professional Engineers;

c) 	A person from the academia knowledgeable in the field of information and communication technology; 

d) 	A person knowledgeable in the field of economics, financial management and public administration;

e) 	A representative of the ministry responsible for information and communications technology, who shall be an ex officio member; 

f) 	The Executive Director;

g) 	A representative of consumers recommended by the Uganda Consumers Association; and 

h) 	One eminent person of good repute and proven integrity representing the public.”

The justification is that the industry has changed and the Commission requires a dynamic board with a focus on consumer protection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is there any justification for removing one lawyer?

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the argument was that whereas these individuals have been listed here, there is no reason as to why a lawyer should not be on the board. However, the argument was that UCC has a full-fledged department with five lawyers in the Commission and we thought it would not be necessary to include them on the board. However, the one eminent person of good repute and proven integrity could be a lawyer.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I just want to get clarification from the chairperson of the committee. He has given the justification for removing a lawyer, that there are lawyers in the Commission. So, may I get clarification from him whether there are no engineers and these other specified persons in the Commission?

MR BAGIIRE: Indeed, there are engineers in UCC, but the reason we actually preferred to have engineers was – actually, the argument was that we might as well do away with them but we agreed that we leave them there because of the nature of the sector, and to keep guard on any technological advancements. However, like I have said, this does not mean lawyers will not be represented on the UCC Board; they could come in as representatives of consumers recommended by the Uganda Communications Consumers’ Association. We did not want to have a board where consumer interests do not take precedent.

MR MBAHIMBA: Mr Chairman, I have an observation on clause 8 (2)(e) and (f). I look at the executive director as an employee of this board and in my opinion he is an ex officio member. If that is the case and we are providing for another ex officio member in (e), it means we have two ex officio members. That is not good because if there is a tie on an issue and there is supposed to be a vote taken, we will have a hiccup because we will be remaining with only six members.

On the same clause, I observe that we only need to realign (a), about a person with experience. I would wish that we state it as follows: “…chairperson, who shall be a person with experience” instead of ending with “chairperson.”  Those are my observations, Mr Chairman.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Chairman, without a lawyer, there is a big question mark about the board’s ability. You specifically need a lawyer in here.

Secondly, there are so many private broadcasting institutions in this country now; you need somebody to represent them on this board. Thank you.

MS KABUULE: Thank you so much, Chair. My observation is on (a), (c) and (d). You are talking about a person with experience and knowledge in telecommunications; how much experience is required and how are we going to measure that experience? Also, how much knowledge do we need? I am saying this because when you talk about a chairman with experience, I may have one year’s experience but another person may have ten years’ experience. So, how are we going to measure this experience and the knowledge? That observation also applies to (c) and (d). I need to be smart on this.

MS OLERU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am just wondering how the composition of this board will be because there is a procedure that we usually follow in passing Bills where boards have to be created. Usually, we get interested in the gender balance but now that we have already drafted this one this way, I am already getting worried that if we do not get specific, women and other interest groups might not be represented. Let it be stated from the beginning.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That one has been taken care of by another provision.

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. People with disabilities are supposed to be represented in all the statutory bodies. In the area of ICT, Uganda is lagging behind because we do not know about things like JAWS and all these other applications. So, I would like to propose that we add one person here who is knowledgeable in ICT that concerns people with disabilities. The blind people, for example, cannot transact using most of our ATMs but if they put a system in place, then some of them will be able to use them. So, this person will be able to give guidance concerning the systems. I beg to move.

MS LUMUMBA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. Allow me ask the chairperson of the committee to make a clarification on (e), about the representative of the ministry responsible for information and communication technology who shall be an ex officio member; why?

On (f), why should the executive director be a full member of the board yet he or she will be the implementer? At the end of the day, he or she will be the one to present to the board the quarterly and annual reports and yet the same person has voting powers. I need an explanation on these two. What I am saying is that the executive director, in the usual practice, is the secretary to the board and has no voting powers.

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Chairman, the executive director is usually the secretary to the board and that is standard practice, which we cannot change. 

I need a clarification on the composition of this board. Do we have a provision that talks about a mandatory number? If not, what is wrong with adding the lawyer? If adding the lawyer is wrong, then I would suggest that we remove the representative from the ministry. This is because we already have the executive director working under the same ministry – (Interjections) - This is a commission under the ministry. I am just proposing.

This is a very sensitive business terrain which has legal implications. So, we cannot afford to have a board that might be very costly. These people might begin to commit terrible mistakes, which will take us into compensations, and you know the compensation saga that we have gone through as a country.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the only way we can move forward is to propose amendments. The general debate should end.

MR RUHUNDA: Okay, I propose an amendment to add paragraph (i) to take care of one representative, who shall be a lawyer knowledgeable in information technology legal matters. I beg to move.

MR MBAHIMBA: Mr Chairman, my amendment is in regard to sub-clause (f), on the executive director who will be an ex officio member.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The standard provision is that the executive director is usually a full member and secretary to the board.  

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, first of all, there is already provision for a secretary. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The secretary of the board?

MR TASHOBYA: Yes, and it is common practice. Really, these institutions, commissions and authorities have heads of institutions, executive directors, and so on and there are also board secretaries. Actually, there is a provision in this Bill, and I think that should be the practice, that we have a chief executive officer, in this case an executive director, and we also have a board secretary who also has other functions in addition to being a secretary of the board.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have we resolved that one? I do not know where the chairperson of the legal committee is coming from because what I see here is about the secretariat, which is in clause 14 –(Interjections)- Clause 17? This is not for the board. 

There are two things here; there is the Commission and then there is the board of the Commission. Initially, it was the Authority and then the board of the Authority. The institution, the Authority or Commission, has a secretary who is appointed as such, but the supervisory board has its own secretary who is not a secretary to the Authority or the Commission. Those two are different. Let us resolve this issue of the secretary to the board.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, the board, as we conceived it in the committee, does not have the secretary whom he is talking about. The secretary who is there is only a secretary to the secretariat as you have already explained. So, in this case, the executive director - Of course, they can call in the company secretary just to help them administratively, but the company secretary is not part of the board as it has been constituted. 

Mr Chairman, there was also a proposal that the industry should be represented. The problem we had with that is that this is a commission which is regulating the industry. So, supposing you had MTN sending a representative to the board, how is that board then going to regulate that industry? There would be conflict of interest. That is why we do not have a representative of the industry on the board because of that conflict. This is the regulator we are talking about. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR KAKOOZA: I think clause 8 (2) is about who should constitute the board. I would like to move an amendment. We can have (a), a person with experience and knowledge who shall be the chairperson. We can also have (b), a representative of professional engineers recommended by an institution of professionals. However, we can leave out (c) because (c) and (a) almost have the same meaning. We can then have (e), a representative of the ministry responsible for information and communication and technology, and we stop there. We then go (f), the executive director; (g), a representative of consumers recommended by the Uganda Consumers Association; (h), one eminent person of good repute and proven integrity representing the public; and then (i), a person with disabilities with knowledge in ICT. I beg to move. 

MR MAWANDA: Mr Chairman, one of the members of this committee, when they moved an amendment that a representative from the private operators be on the board, said that they discussed it and found that there would be conflict of interest. Can I get clarification on what exactly they mean by conflict of interest? We expect a lot of input from these people in as far as managing this sector is concerned. I thank you very much.  

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to support what hon. Kakooza was saying. If we remove a person from the academia and replace him with a person with disabilities who is knowledgeable, those would be eight members. Eight is an even number, so we need another person so that we have an odd number, like a lawyer. Mr Chairman, out of the eight, I propose that four are women. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we stand over this clause? 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I see that we could reconsider (a) and (c) so that they are incorporated to bring only one person, because I do not see any significant difference there. 

Secondly, paragraph (h) says, “one eminent person of good repute and proven integrity representing the public.” Mr Chairman, there could be a challenge in actually realizing this person; how would this person be sieved to come to this board? One of the challenges that we foresee in this committee is that there is no one representing ethics; so we need to have someone representing ethics. I would suggest that it would be fair to also bring in a person from the faith section, so that it would be up to the faith based sector to now actually bring up this person; otherwise, I think that it would be very difficult, Mr Chairman, to arrive at this person.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Chairman, (a) and (c) are the same and (e) and (f) are also the same. An executive director normally does not vote; so he is an ex officio member. 

Secondly, fundamentally, when forming a board, you must represent the consumers and you must also represent the owners on that board. That is fundamental. I think that is what we should follow in this case. There is nothing complicated here. 

Women representation is a constitutional right; at least one third of any board must be women. As you choose these people, whoever is choosing them, you must also be conscious to have somebody with a disability. Somebody could be the executive director but with a disability. So, that has got to be catered for at the time when the board is being formed.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. First, I want to propose an amendment on (h) to read as follows: “One eminent person of good repute and proven integrity representing the public who shall be a lawyer.”

For the rest of the provisions, we were looking at the future and also at the changes that occur in technology. That is why we looked at a person with experience, that is (a), and who is knowledgeable on all the facets of communications, that is, telecommunications, broadcasting and postal communication. The representative from the engineers was because they have a dynamic platform where they discuss technological developments. 

Concerning the person from academia, we wanted one of the individuals – actually, the reason we were looking to the academia is because Government has introduced ICT in schools at A’ Level. So, that is why we wanted an individual from the academia, and UCC is also involved in provision of ICT services in schools. Actually, that is the sole reason as to why we were looking at a person in the academia to be part of the board, to basically guide that process of ICT in education. This is the sort of issue that the honourable from Busia was raising.

Of course, we need a person knowledgeable in economics, financial management -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, if you get a professor who is knowledgeable in ICT, how relevant is it to secondary education and HSC?

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, we could not document exactly what the criteria is in the law, but we are confident that the minister in charge will handle this. After this law, they will draft regulations and out of all these clauses, regulations will be categorically clear. It is for that reason that the committee demanded or at least wants us to demand that when these regulations are made, they are tabled on the Floor of Parliament to ensure that they are consistent with the spirit in which the proposals are being made.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I agreed with the amendment proposed by the chair in as far as paragraph (h) is concerned. However, I propose to add an amendment to it which states, “...who shall be a lawyer recommended by the Uganda Law Society.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, why would you want the lawyer to have the qualifying statement, “one prominent person of good repute and proven integrity who shall be a lawyer”? Why would you want to give the lawyer all those preliminary qualifications? Is the presumption that there are lawyers who are not – (Laughter) - Please, let us not just patch this up. The legal profession is a very noble profession, so such qualifications would be uncalled for. Do not allow the Chair to get involved in this debate. The lawyer has to stand; and the usual provision, by the way, is what is in the Bill, that is, the person is supplied by the Uganda Law Society. That is what is normally in the provisions.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I do agree with you that we stand over this provision as the minister and the chair internalise it. However, I can give information. I happened to be one of the investigators of the NSSF Board when the minister was held accountable together with the board regarding the reporting system; the board did not act and the minister followed the play.  So I agree with your suggestion that we stand over this clause on the board so that we allow the chair and the minister to internalise and agree on the people who should be on the board. 

By all standards, the board makes decisions and sees the reports from the management of that institution and it must be thorough. So, the composition of the board must be clearly stated for people to take a decision. So, I would agree with you, Mr Chairman, that we stand over this and the minister and chairperson harmonise their positions and come out with a clear constitution of the board because it seems to be still wanting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think we need to defer this clause so that we can have better consultations. If you had heeded my call, we would have moved miles on other provisions. This entire clause 8 is stood over.

Clause 9

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 9 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that under clause 10(2), we delete the expression “on the recommendation of the Authority”. The justification is that the Board supervises the Authority and therefore the Authority should not recommend or determine the vacating of the office of a member of the Board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this is a straightforward proposal. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause 10(4) is rephrased to read as follows: “Where a member resigns, dies or is removed from office under this section, the Minister may, in accordance with section 8, within three months appoint another person to replace the member and to hold office for the remainder of the term of that member.”

The justification: to avoid unnecessary delays by the minister in appointing a replacement and to widen the provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that is clear, honourable members. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee suggests that we substitute the word “may” with the word “shall”. The justification is that the members of the Board must be paid.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much. Mr Chairman, my view is that the provision is okay as it is. It is a permissive provision to provide for payment, but when you say “shall”, it is like making it an office of gain, which actually it is not. So I think the “may” permits the payment but “shall” distorts the whole purpose and function of the board in an institution. 

MR BAGIIRE: I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 12 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that under clause 13 (1) (a), we delete the expression “as the Board”. The justification is that the expression is redundant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR BAGIIRE: The committee proposes insertion of a new Part III immediately after Part II with a head note to read as follows: “Establishment of a content committee.”

Our new clause 14 will read as follows:

“(1) There shall be a Content Committee.

(2) The Committee shall consist of the chairperson and four other members appointed by the minister on the recommendation of the Board.

(3) The chairperson of the committee shall be appointed from among the members of the Board referred to in section 8 (2) (b) (c) (d) (g) or (h).

(4) The other four members of the committee shall consist of the following:
a) A representative of consumers recommended by the Uganda Consumers Association; 
b) A representative of Government; 
c) An eminent person of good repute and proven integrity representing the public; and 
d) A person knowledgeable in the broadcasting sector.”

Clause 15 will, therefore, be on tenure of office and shall read as follows: 

“The members of the committee referred to in section 14(4) shall hold office for a term of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment for one term.”

Clause 16 - Functions of the Committee

“(1) The functions of the Committee are to -

a) 	Advise and make recommendations to the Board on content related aspects or decisions;
b) 	Handle complaints from operators and consumers on content related aspects;
c) 	Promote public awareness on content regulation of publication made by means of electronic media; 
d) 	Oversee the minimum broadcasting standards set out in Schedule 4; and
e) 	Perform any other function related to content as may be assigned by the Board.

(2) The Committee shall, in performing its duties, report to the Board.”

Clause 17 - Remuneration of the Committee

“The members of the committee may be paid allowances as may be determined by the Minister on the recommendation of the Board.”

Clause 18 - Meetings 

“The committee shall regulate its own procedure in relation to meetings.”

Clause 19 - Disqualification from appointment

“A person shall not be appointed a member of the Committee who – 

(a) Is engaged in a broadcasting organisation directly or indirectly as owner, shareholder, partner or otherwise;

(b) Is insolvent;

(c) Is incapacitated by mental or physical illness that renders the person incapable of performing the functions of a member of the Committee;

(d) Is otherwise unable or unfit to discharge the functions of a member of the Committee.”

Clause 20  - Vacating office of a Committee member

“(1) A member of the Committee shall vacate office, if the member –
(a) Is declared insolvent;

(b) Is convicted of a criminal offence in respect of which a penalty or imprisonment of six months or more is imposed without the option of a fine;

(c) Is continuously and persistently unable to discharge the functions of the office of a member of the Committee;

(d) 	Subsequently becomes disqualified from being a member under section 19;

(e) 	Fails to disclose to the Committee any interest that member has in a contract or proposed contract connected with the Committee or any other matter;

(f) 	Misbehaves or abuses the office of a member of the Committee.

(2) 	The Minister shall, on the recommendation of the Board, determine that a member vacates office under sub-section (1).

(3) 	A member of the Committee may resign from office in writing to the Minister.

(4)	Where a member resigns or is removed from office under this section, the minister may, in accordance with section 14, within one month appoint another person to replace the member and to hold office for the remainder of the term of that member.

Clause 21 - Interpretation 

“In this Part, ‘Committee’ means the content committee established under section 14.” 

The justification: to cater for the regulation of content.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Will the chairman also be appointed by the minister to this committee? 

MR BAGIIRE: On recommendation of the UCC Board. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The board should recommend one of its own to be the chair of the board? Secondly, I need some advice on this; can a human being be insolvent? 

MR KAKOOZA: You have actually stated what I wanted to state. That is what I wanted to ask. Insolvency applies to a company and not an individual though bankruptcy applies to an individual. You could be declared bankrupt but not insolvent; these are assets within companies.

Lastly, I would also like to seek clarification from the chair on clause 24; why don’t we be consistent with earlier amendments, like the one of the board, for example? Instead of one month, let it be three months, to enable the minister to vet, analyse and appoint a person to replace the one who either retires or is found incapable. I find one month rather too short. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, why doesn’t the other provision relating to the other members kick in once those situations arise? So we just cross reference to the other provisions for consistency.  

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you. Clause 20(3) says, “A member of the committee may resign from office in writing to the minister.” I would like to propose that we add “after giving one month of notice”, other than just waking up and resigning. 

MS ASAMO: Chairperson, in (c) where you say, “is incapacitated by mental and physical illness”, it would have been better to say “chronic illness”. When you use the words “mental and physical”, it may at times refer to disability. So, I would again propose here that we talk of incapacitation by chronic illnesses because a mental person can have a state of recovery. We have the case of hon. Mbeiza who is going to be become an RDC though she formerly had a mental problem. So, it cannot be made part of the law. Thank you.

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Chairman, I would like more clarity as to why this content committee is being established. The justification is not very convincing. We have a whole technical team led by the executive director and we expect, under him or her, well qualified and skilled human resource which should take care of the content on a daily basis. Are we just creating a structure to help people survive by creating jobs or what? I do not understand; I need more clarity on this, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can this board have sub-committees?

MR MADADA: This is a follow-up from the previous contributor on the content committee. I wish to find out whether you checked with the Broadcasting Act because there is a similar board to look at content. There is also the Media Council. Are we not repeating what is already existing and putting up a structure that will not be cost effective?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The minister has asked the question I wanted to put across. What actually is this content committee; is it an executive committee? Leave alone what the minister is talking about, looking at the structures and institutions in other laws, how does this committee relate with the board? How does it relate with management? I think the chairperson will guide us on this matter, but my view is that this may be a bit misplaced. 

Secondly, without prejudice, Mr Chairman, the original clause 14 was providing for the secretariat of the Authority. Now you are bringing this as 14 but in the subsequent consequential amendments, there is no secretariat of the Commission. I need some guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, after this new part, the rest of the clauses continue.

MR TASHOBYA: If you look at page 14, after those proposed amendments, the committee moves that the clauses from 14 in the original Bill - oh yes, you are right, Mr Chairman. However, I need a response to my first question on the content committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The committee proposes that clause 14 in the original Bill be consequently re-numbered and that the original Part III be re-numbered Part IV as per the above. So they have no amendment on 14.

MR TASHOBYA: I have withdrawn that position. I am reverting to my original question about the purpose of the content committee and its relationship with the board and management.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, can the board co-opt and can it have sub-committees?

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Chairman, indeed the board can co-opt and can have sub-committees. However, with regard to content, in the report that I gave earlier before debate on the amendments ensued, the committee made it clear that with the current technology, very many avenues of content have been opened up. There is content on the Internet, for example, which could be pornographic and therefore not good for our children. There is inappropriate content on television. There is inappropriate content all over the place. 

It is a global practice that all countries that have reconfigured their regulatory environment in a converged environment have actually had a provision for content regulation by way of either a content committee or content board. In the UK, there is a content board; in Tanzania, there is a content committee. 

It is also very important that content is regulated because with technology, we cannot leave content unregulated. Above all, we wanted to have a process whereby an FM station is not closed, for example, because it broadcast inappropriate content. Instead, the committee would look into such a matter and then advise the board, which then picks it up from there and takes action. That is the sense in which we are looking at the content committee. As much as the board can co-opt, it is important that there are individuals who look at content specifically.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I am still pursuing the issue of the sub-committee of the board. You can make it a function of the board to regulate content. You do not want to overload the system. A member of the board is appointed twice by the minister; how does it work? The same member is appointed by the minister on the board and then he is appointed on another committee by the same minister; I do not know how it works but it looks –

MR JAMES KYEWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I understand your point of view. The board is free to set up any sub-committee but this particular content committee is a special committee, and that is why we are providing for it specifically. Otherwise, the board can set up a sub-committee to investigate, for example, a procurement gone bad and any other sub-committee they want. 

The other issue is that in the current environment we are operating in, if you have a problem, for example with content on a mobile phone, where do you go? These days there are automated calls, where you pick up and it is not a human being speaking, - “If you want to have company, call this number” - in that case, where do you complain to? So we are setting up this special committee to handle issues like that one. Remember, we are combining the original Broadcasting Council and UCC into one body. So if you have a problem with what you have heard on radio or television or the content being shown on the Internet, what is the recourse? That is what we are addressing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, my other concern is how to regulate and contain power conflicts within institutions. You a board chairman appointed by the minister and you have a content committee chairperson also appointed by the minister. Now, you want one appointed by the minister to report to another one appointed by the minister. It may look simple but if you have a strong headed person heading the content committee, he will run down the board chairperson. That is the situation we want to avoid. 

It is not impossible to say, “The board shall have a content committee”. You can put it in the regulations that the board shall constitute a content committee and the content committee will be like this. It is not a sub-committee. A board cannot have a sub-committee because it is also a committee. A board can only have a committee handling a particular sector. Otherwise, you will end up with a board that is in conflict with the content committee permanently. That is what I personally foresee and what we are trying to avoid.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I want to support your argument. Also, the remuneration of the committee is set. You are going to pay people twice; it will be a subject of discontent in accountability because you are paying people twice. It will be questioned by the Auditor-General. So, if it is the board’s decision to receive complaints and make decisions, why do you produce another committee which is parallel and which will usurp the powers of the board and it will be put in place by the same appointing authority?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the minister should also inform us because not very many years ago, they had to merge the UCC and UBC board because at a particular -(Interjections)- Yes, by a Gazette notice. At one point, UCC had a board and UBC had a board and they were merged. What we want to avoid, actually, is a situation where we are going to have duplication of duties. 

The honourable minister raised a very pertinent issue; there is work being done by the Media Council and now we are creating a content board. How do we reconcile the two? Mr Chairman, we want you to respond to the issues being put across so that we know. We may also need to suggest that we sleep over this.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I am amused because we have members who are from the board and it is being proposed that they also be members of the content committee. I am wondering what happens to those members when the content committee will be reporting to the board. I do not know whether these members will also be part of that sitting or not.

Secondly, we have the committee reporting to the board and then the board reporting to the minister and the minister is again going down, as you put it. What happens in a scenario where the chairperson of the content committee defies instructions from the chairperson of the board? What happens, and yet they are appointed by the same person?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think we have made our contributions on this particular debate. It would be an appropriate time for us to go back and think about these matters again and come back when we are a little fresher. It is a good time for us to adjourn and continue tomorrow.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.23
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.23
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Communications Regulatory Authority Bill, 2012” and passed a number of clauses with amendments, and that the committee will be resuming with its work at an appropriate time. I beg to report, Mr Speaker. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.24
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. This will be an appropriate time for us to stop business. Thank you very much for sitting up to this time. If it were not for the issues that are very involving, we would have managed to go a little further but thank you very much for the distance we have covered. Let us start tomorrow. This House is adjourned to tomorrow 2 O’clock. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.25 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 September 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
