Friday, 13 September 2013

Parliament met at 11.16 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting and I hope we will be able to apply ourselves to ensure that we complete the items on the agenda for today. Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014 

11.19
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising to resent a report on the ministerial policy statement for Ministry of Education and Sports. According to Article 90 and Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the provisions of rules 138 and 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the mandate is given to the committee to, among several things:

    1. Examine and comment on policy matters affecting ministries and departments under its jurisdiction
    2. Examine critically government recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House. 

In line with this, the Committee on Education and Sports considered the ministerial policy statement for Ministry of Education and Sports and looked at the 10 votes that are listed here: vote 013, vote 111, vote 132 up to vote 500.

Before I proceed, I wish to lay on Table, the minutes of our proceedings in pursuit of our undertaking and also a copy of the report that I am presenting. I beg to lay.

In pursuing its task, the committee took the following procedure. Formally inviting the sector minister -

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Chair, the Members can read the procedures - just make an executive summary.

MR OPOLOT: The committee pursued the procedure as indicated there. The highlights of the report are also indicated on page 2 and therefore I would urge colleagues that as we try to save time, please pick equal interest in the layout of the report.

Madam Speaker, as you have guided, in the interest of time, in the presentation of this report, I will basically focus more on the challenges of the sector and then the committee’s observations and recommendations. I would therefore appeal to colleagues to turn to page 7 where we have the challenges of the sector and I request that I read this as part of the summary because for other things, I will just be mentioning.

The committee was informed that the sector encountered some challenges as indicated below:
Pre-primary and primary sub-sector
    (i) There is a lot of absenteeism of teachers and pupils.
    (ii) There is wide inequality in early childhood care and development provision. Centres are mainly within the urban areas.
    (iii) There is limited community participation in Universal Primary Education due to the misconception that this one is purely a government programme and therefore the parents are left out.
    (iv) There is persistent drop out of school children especially the girl child.
    (v) There is high attrition of teachers and students.

Secondary Education
    (i) There is scarcity of science teachers in the country especially in rural areas. 
    (ii) There is inadequate science equipment, chemicals and other reagents.

BTVET 

    (i) Inadequate funding
    (ii) Inadequate space for BTVET department
    (iii) Inadequate funding for instructional materials and popularisation of the BTVET strategy
    (iv) Existence of districts without any BTVET institution

Higher Education

    (i) Inadequate resources for salary enhancement for university lecturers leading to great attrition rates among others.
    (ii) Inadequate resources to raise staff levels at public universities to at least 50 percent for academic staff. 
    (iii) Inadequate funding and supervision of universities and statutory institutions.

Skills Development

    (i) Inadequate resources
    (ii) Examination bodies are faced with the challenge of insufficient funding that has not enabled them carry out their planned activities. 
    (iii) Negative social perception and stigma. The community considers vocational education as fit only for the academically less endowed. 

Special Needs Education, Guidance and Counselling

    (i) Lack of budget allocation for special needs education.
    (ii) Negative attitude towards learners with special learning needs.
    (iii) Inadequate funds to operationalise the functions and activities of non-formal education.
    (iv) Lack of substantive guidance counsellors at school level.
    (v) Lack of dedicated personnel for guidance and counselling at the school level.
    (vi) Lack of adequate funds to enhance the provision of standardised guidance and counselling services. 

From that, I want to refer us to page 10, item 8.0. Those are unfunded priorities. Members can pick equal interest in those as well. I now refer you to page 11. You can see table 2; there is a budget requirement for education and sports headquarters. That is vote 013: the allocation for the financial year 2013/2014.

Next to that we have vote 132. I will not go into the mission and vision statement but I will now roll you over to page 12 where we are again looking at the challenges under Busitema University.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chair, I think you are dealing with the Education Service Commission first. And I see the challenges on page 12. 

MR OPOLOT: So, page 12 of the Education Service Commission which is Vote 132 and I said I am moving from page 11 to 12 where we are looking at the challenges under the Education Service Commission:
    (i) The withdrawal of Irish Aid Funding from the commission that left a number of activities unimplemented.
    (ii) The lack of funds to implement the scheme of service for teachers.
    (iii)  There is a delay by the Ministry of Education and Sports in declaring vacancies
    (iv)  Failure to get stable candidates for some of the posts in BITVET and stable science teachers for secondary schools.
    (v) Larger numbers of applicants compared to the limited number of vacancies to strengthen the financial and human resources of the commission. 

Ignore this page and move to page 13 and you will see that we have unfunded vote priorities. I will not go into that but table 4 shows the allocations for Education Service Commission for financial year 2013/2014.

We move to page 14 where we have Busitema University that is Vote 111. I will again refer you to table 6 which gives the allocations for Busitema University for financial year 2013/2014 and page 16 we have Makerere University. And just like we have done for others please interest yourselves in the mission statement and look at page 18 for the budget allocation for financial year 2013/2014.

On page 20, we have Mbarara University of Science and Technology and I wish to interest in the allocation. Thereafter we have Makerere University Business School under Vote 138.

Madam Speaker, much as we are trying to save time give equal treatment to the information that is provided there. For other issues I know that at the end of the document I will present to you a number of challenges, observations and recommendations pertaining to each institution as we have laid down.

On page 22 we have Kyambogo University, we have table 12 which gives the budget allocation for MUBS for financial year 2013/2014. Then we have Kyambogo University which is Vote 139 and on page 24 we have the allocation for Kyambogo University for the financial year 2013/2014.

Then we have Vote 140 which is Uganda Management Institute and on page 26 we have its allocation for the financial year 2013/2014.

Then Vote 149, Gulu University, with the allocation on page 28 and on this page Madam Speaker, I thought you would allow me to go through the unfunded and underfunded vote priorities for all public universities.

The committee was informed that the following were the unfunded and underfunded priorities for public universities, that is, teaching and training support services, research, consultancy and publication, administration and support services, construction and rehabilitation of Government and administrative infrastructure, infrastructural development and ICT, recurrent non-wage to cater for students welfare and utility bills, funds for promotions for academic and non-academic to improve innovation and staff retention.

Then staff recruitment levels of up to 60 percent and Government contributions of 10 percent NSSF and fencing of university campuses.

Madam Speaker, on page 29 we have Vote 500 which is Local Government and I will refer you to page 30 where we have unfunded priorities under this vote and key among them is school monitoring and inspection, teacher recruitment at secondary level, education and sports management inspection, USE tuition support, construction and rehabilitation of teachers houses.

Having mentioned the unfunded priorities under Local Government, I want to refer you to page 31 where we have committee observations about the challenges that are faced.

Sorry, let us move to committee observations and recommendations on the ministerial policy statement:

I want to start with Vote 013 Ministry of Education and Sports and the first item is on the plight of teachers and quality of education. The committee notes with concern the continued reluctance by the Government to fulfil its earlier commitments towards improving the teachers’ welfare. This has led teachers into alternative ways of finding an additional income to make up for the little pay or abandon the profession all together. This situation has led to the persistent problem of poor quality education because of absenteeism and poor service delivery by teachers, and also budget leakages due to ghost teachers among other challenges.

The committee therefore takes exception to the development that attempts to erode a good working relationship and patriotism among the teachers.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chair, we request that you read the subject because the full report will be placed in the Hansard. Just read plight of teachers and recommendation.

MR OPOLOT: The committee strongly recommends that the funds for the 20 percent increment of teachers’ salary must be identified before approval of the sector budget for the FY 2013/2014 as these are not new priorities in budget. 

The committee recommends that UNATU be kept out of the management of the teachers’ SAACO funds but instead direct contact be established between the Minister of Education and Sports and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on one hand and respective district teachers’ SACCOs on the other hand so that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development directly remits the said funds to the teachers’ SACCOs. 

The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Public Service task UNATU either to register its members or provide evidence to the effect that all subscribed members are doing it voluntarily and with their consent, before any deductions are made on the teachers’ monthly salaries.

Recruitment of teachers

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Ministry of Public Service carry out manpower surveys to forecast and establish manpower demands and plan the staff requirements. This is key if improving the quality and relevance of education and skilling Uganda is to be achieved by the education system. Constant reviews of staff ceilings should be done to identify and fill the gaps.  

The number of science teachers in the country
The committee recommends that more science teachers be recruited and posted to the deserving schools and that Ministry of Education and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development accordingly effect the payment of allowance for science teachers.  However, the committee notes that emphasis should be put on the general improvement of all teachers’ salaries and welfare.  

Budget Performance

The committee recommends that all budgetary resources voted for institutions be released and in time to avoid disruption of programmes and accumulation of arrears upon completion of programmed activities. 

Budget allocation to the sector

The committee recommends that Government walks the talk in terms of allocation to the sector as human resources development is indispensable and is the backbone of the country without which all development aspirations can hardly be achieved.

Donor projects

The committee recommends that all the projects intended to be funded by donor support be expeditiously appraised before committing the government on programmes not fully evaluated.

Special needs education 

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that special needs education be granted a vote function with effect from financial year 2013/2014. The management of special needs education institutions should also be placed under the special needs education department in the Ministry of Education.  

Madam Speaker, you will bear with me that sometimes when we skip certain things, the flow fails.

But the committee calls upon the ministry to fast track the process of reviewing the policy and of rolling out special needs education in all parts of the country in the next financial year as promised by the ministry.  

Capitation grants

The committee therefore reiterates its earlier call for a review of the unit cost that is commensurate with inflationary rates. The committee further recommends for the release of funds to schools before the opening of school terms.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports revives the use of the Pupil Identification Card Numbers for purposes of tracking the pupils in case of change of school or voluntary dropping out of school as this will go a long way in addressing issues of ghost pupils and teachers.

Curriculum reviews 

The committee recommends that the sector popularises the teaching of local languages and that the ministry ensures appropriate measures are accordingly instituted to facilitate full learning and examination of the learners. 

The committee further recommends that the public should be sensitised about the new curriculum developments to ensure that the new curriculum takes care of the current job market requirements.

ADB (V) Higher Education Science and Technology Grant

The committee commends the sector on this development and recommends the expeditious implementation of the programme to access universities the much needed infrastructure to facilitate teaching and learning and also expand on the knowledge base of the universities.

Emergency classrooms construction and rehabilitation

The committee recommends that funds identified for emergency construction and rehabilitation be incorporated in the schools facilities grant to be transferred to the district local government to avoid duplication of roles by the different actors in the sector.

Staff recruitment 

The committee recommends that appropriate staff structures and staffing be afforded to these crucial institutions of learning to enable learning and training of students. This is to do with tertiary institutions.

Early childhood education

The committee recommends that the Government further prioritises early childhood education through stronger policy guidance, monitoring and supervision as well as public investment in direct service delivery. 

Students loan scheme under higher education financing

The committee recommends that all forms of higher education financing that impact on the national coffers be brought under the ambit of this law. This includes State House sponsorship, government sponsorship at universities and staff development programmes. 

The committee further recommends that Government spearheads the production of the national identity cards as this would go a long way in building a national database that is a necessary prerequisite for implementation of the students’ loan scheme.

Kampala Capital City Authority 

The committee recommends the urgent review of the KCCA Act to provide for the efficient management and reporting of personnel and budgetary programmes under the authority which falls under the education and sports sector. 

The committee further recommends that the inter-ministerial committee expedites its assignment in order to regularise the appointments of the teachers.

Reverting of health training institutions to the ministry of health

In view of the above observations of the committee, the committee recommends the review of the policy to revert these health training institutions to the Ministry of Health for quality assurance and supervision as is the case with other institutions.  

Operationalisation of Muni University

The committee recommends that the university be fast tracked to enable admission of the first cohort of students and be granted a vote function to operationalise its activities.

Physical education and sports 

The committee recommends that Government repositions itself to be the primary investor in and promoter of games and sports as opposed to the current reactionary approach. 

Specific institutions’ observations and recommendations

Uganda National Examinations Board

The committee commends UNEB for this progress and urges the board to go further to embed photographs at all levels of certificates at the different levels of certification because only U.A.C.E certificates have photographs embedded.

The committee recommends for improvement in the funding to UNEB towards the wage and non-wage bills. Further, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports considers the unfunded costs amounting to Shs 5.560 billion as top priority.

The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Treasury bridge the unfunded gap of the Shs 5.560 billion. 

National Council for Higher Education 

The committee recommends that the National Council for Higher Education should be supported to get its own vote separate from the Ministry of Education and Sports, since in the last 10 years,it has demonstrated that it can prudently use and give value for the public resources vested in it. 

The committee recommends that Government wholly takes up its mandate to fully fund the National Council for Higher Education as stated in section 8 of the Education Act. 

The committee accordingly recommends an increase in funding to the National Council for Higher Education as currently, the National Council for Higher Education relies heavily on levies from students in higher institutions of learning who pay Shs 20,000 per year which raises an average of Shs 4 billion. However, even with this levy, the council cannot implement its strategic plan.

On the construction of the office block and other infrastructure, the committee urges Government to explore public private partnership to undertake capital development under cost-effective methods including build, operate, own and transfer system as the council has its own land on which this development can be undertaken.

The committee also recommends that Government sets up a deliberate policy to support research and staff development in all higher institutions of learning to make higher education relevant to the needs of the country other than the current selective approach. In the same vein, deliberate efforts should be made to promote skills and vocation education. The committee also recommends that Government avails adequate funds for the recruitment of staff as it is its responsibility towards advancing education and training as stated in section 5 of the Education Act, 2008. 

The committee recommends that Government explores mechanisms of regulating and harmonising fees charged by the different universities - both private and public - in order to standardize tuition fees across the board. 

And finally, the committee further recommends that a joint admissions board geared towards standards enforcement and quality assurance be established to regulate the admission of students to private universities in the country. 

Uganda technical colleges

The committee reiterates the earlier recommendation by the Committee on Science and Technology that Government increases capitation grants to a rate of Shs 7,600 per student per day. The committee also recommends for an increase in the funding level to enable UTCs to conduct regular practical exercises and real life projects. If this is done, the UTCs will be able to offer training and also improve on the institutional infrastructural needs. 

The committee further recommends that Government develops the necessary infrastructure to support the growing population and demand for technical education. This is very necessary, owing to the fact that the existing UTCs were built in the 1950s and therefore most of the equipment, workshops, laboratories, office and other accommodation facilities are now inadequate and obsolete.

On staff retention, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should recruit the staff required in UTCs at the same time ensure that their pay is improved. It also recommends that the governing councils be given more powers by granting the colleges autonomy to enable the councils have effective control of its staff among other things. 

Following the government policy of making science subjects compulsory at O’level and with increased budgets of USE, Government must prepare and empower those technical colleges to absorb USE graduates. This can only be realised if there is an increase in investment into technical education. 

National teachers colleges

The committee recommends that Government functionalises the training colleges with prerequisite facilities as they greatly influence the quality of education with better trained personnel. Due attention should be put in improved staffing, salary enhancement and infrastructural development. 

The committee further recommends that NTCs be included in future development programmes to enable them improve on their infrastructure and replace all asbestos roofs, which are now a health hazard. 

The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Public Service should consider such category of vacancies to be filled since the placement of staff is budget neutral. This is on inadequate staffing due to people who have left or died. 

The committee also recommends that the capitation grant be increased from the current Shs 1,800 per student per day to at least Shs 5,000 per student per day given the inflationary tendencies. 

Health training institutions

The committee accordingly recommends that Government reviews its development funding to these institutions as well as the policy on moving them from the Ministry of Health to that of Education and Sports. 

The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Public Service undertake to pay all staff salaries including accumulated arrears, and also routinely update staff to reflect their status including promotions and transfers. As earlier recommended, the committee urges that Government reviews this policy with a view of either reverting these institutions to the Ministry of Health or strengthening the collaboration between the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education and Sports in the management of these institutions. 

The committee also recommends that Government makes full release and ring fences all funds voted to these institutions. This is because these institutions are already underfunded. 

The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development undertake to clear the outstanding utility bills in these institutions in order to relieve these institutions of the debt burden. 

Furthermore, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Public Service facilitates the training and learning in the institutions by appointing staff on replacement for those who retired, died, absconded or were promoted. And the committee reiterates its earlier recommendation to Government to functionalize the institutions with matching funding levels that can support meaningful learning and training in such higher institutions of learning. 

Capitation grants

I have already said something to do with this. 

Vote 132 – The Education Service Commission

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports identifies resources within its budget and facilitates these activities as they are crucial – the activities which were affected by the withdrawal of the Irish Aid funding.

The committee recommends that a National Salary and Awards Commission be fast-tracked to cure disparities in remuneration of all commission members and civil servants appointed to serve in Government. This will address challenges of selective awards by the different institutions and therefore build consensus in the service. 

The committee recommends that because the majority of commission members or commissioners are pensioners, Government should consider reviewing their compensations that should be commensurate with their status.   

General observations and recommendations on these specific institutions 

The committee recommends that careful appraisal be carried out by the Ministry of Education and Sports on the establishment and funding of public universities with special focus on those with constituent colleges. This is because such universities have special overheads that do not apply to other universities, thus the need for a special consideration in budgetary allocation. Cases in point are Gulu and Busitema.

The committee strongly recommends the improvements in the wage bill allocation to public universities that can enable them urgently recruit at least up to 50 percent of their staff establishment levels.

The committee further recommends that government remunerates and compensates the professionals at regionally competitive rates to attract and retain its trained professionals.

The committee recommends that the ministry urges the universities and other stakeholders to expedite the works given the dire need for these facilities due to the increasing number of learners in all these universities. 

The committee also recommends a joint admission of privately sponsored students to rule out multiple admissions with their associated challenges.

The committee also recommends that with the advent of the Higher Education Financing Scheme, Government should urgently review the policy on feeding and accommodation of government-sponsored students with a view of rechanneling all these resources into the Higher Education Financing Scheme so that all beneficiaries apply for these funds for tuition fees and the universities divest from offering meals which is not their core function.

The committee also recommends that research facilitation as noted under the NCHE should be given utmost priority by increasing funding to this crucial function. If this is done, it will help to build the capacity of the universities to carry out relevant researches for skills, innovation and development of society. 

Specific observations and recommendations of public universities 

Madam Speaker, I want to beg that – well I can see that I am about to complete; maybe I can read them – I was about to beg that colleagues read through them -(Interjections) –s ince my good friend has said, “Yes.”, I will still go back to my earlier intended request that for specific observations and recommendations for the public universities, Members should quickly look through them. But please bear with me – there could have been some disconnection but it is because we had to hurry through and jump onto the recommendations. 

Madam Speaker, I am sure that Members have read those specific observations and recommendations. I, therefore, beg to move and ask you to receive the report of the Committee on Education and Sports. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and Members of the committee. I will direct the Clerk to reflect the entire report in the Hansard. Is the Shadow Minister here? Hon. Mugume, use five minutes for the highlights and then we shall have hon. Latif Ssebagala.

(The entire report to appear in the bound volume of September 2013)

12.00
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Roland Mugume): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this good report. I want to add a few things as the Shadow Minister of Education. 

Madam Speaker, up to now, the plight of teachers in this country is still a problem. The teachers were hoodwinked by Government with promises that their 50 percent pay increment would be realised in three financial years: 2011/2012 for a raise of 15 percent, 2012/2013 for a raise of 20 percent and 2013/2014 for a raise of 15 percent. 

This financial year, Government has shifted goalposts; first they said the priority for this financial year is on infrastructure but following the NRM Caucus meeting in State House, Entebbe, the report we have is that there has been a four percent increase on teachers’ and police officers’ pay. And yet a pledge remains a pledge and an agreement should be binding. What Government promised was that in the financial year 2013/2014, the teachers would get a 20 percent increment. Why is the government now changing the goalposts?

Madam Speaker, as Members of Parliament, we know the work of the teachers because in our respective constituencies, we are aware of their role. So I think we should support these teachers in whatever problems they are facing right now.

As the Opposition, we had promised these teachers before, that in our government, we shall be paying primary school teachers a minimum of Shs 500,000. (Applause) The secondary school teachers will be paid Shs 1,000,000. And we want to call upon those who are listening and all stakeholders in this country that this time we are serious – because we see that you are just there and you do not want to listen to these teachers.

There is a problem in this country; up to now, State House scholarships have become political and as a matter of urgency, we need, as Parliament, to discuss about these scholarships. As a representative of the people of Rukungiri Municipality who is on the Opposition, my people cannot access these scholarships. So we need a policy on these scholarships. The Ministry of Education should decentralise these scholarships because I can assure you that I have taken more than 20 years without accessing State House. And you know that when you are not accessing that place, you cannot get these scholarships. So we need a policy on this.

Another point is about the hard-to-reach areas allowances for teachers who work in rural areas. These teachers, first of all, lack accommodation and the distance from their homes is very long compared to where they teach. These allowances were promised to these teachers but up to now, they have not received them. As the Opposition, we call upon the government to pay these allowances for our teachers.

Madam Speaker, there is another big challenge in this country when it comes to recruiting teachers. In some schools, they are supposed to have 78 teachers but you will find that, especially in the newly created districts, they are only two – the headmaster and the deputy. So it is a problem and I do not think that the learners are getting the knowledge they are supposed to get.

The quality of UPE and USE – and I am happy that the NRM members are listening - it is a problem. We need money to pay these schools especially the capitation grant for USE and UPE. For private schools, at least parents are doing something to save the situation, but for Government schools – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, sum up.

MR MUGUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our position is that we recommend that the Ministry of Education and that of Public Service to be given more resources so that we can get salaries for teachers and health workers. Of course, we also have to think about the police. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. Ssebagala, then Ekuma – committee members will not contribute; if you are on the committee, you will not contribute so please sit down. 

12.09
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleague, hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba, donated two minutes to me. So with your permission, I request to have four minutes. 

THE SPEAKER: I did not get that information. 

MR SSEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, the plight of teachers – this august House pushed the Government to have that increment of 50 percent which is modest. And indeed Government negotiated with the teachers and they agreed to pay it in phases. Madam teacher – (Laughter) – yes, a speaker is a teacher also. 

Whatever we discuss, as far as the ministerial policy statement is concerned, cannot be completed without addressing the plight of the teachers. Whatever we are going to discuss goes back to the teachers because they are the implementers of those policies. 

When I read through the ministerial policy statement, especially the vote overview, I realised that even in the Ministry of Education, we have approximately Shs 100 billion – those programmes can wait and we pay the teachers. 

On page 253, we have Shs 10 billion; it says, “Due to the fact that the donor component is providing instruction materials under World Bank funding, funds have been relocated to other outputs due to resource constraints.” That means they have relocated Shs 10 billion to other projects, which are not indicated, due to the intervention of World Bank. 

When you go to another vote, on the same page, funds have been relocated from rehabilitation and added to classroom construction to cater for the increasing enrolment. We know there is increasing enrolment, but when the teachers are not there, the students cannot be taught! 

So I propose that we do reallocation in this budget and cater for the interest of the teachers. We agree that many of us MPs do not have children in UPE schools, but our voters have children there. I believe that we can assist our teachers – Madam Speaker, you have also received messages – (Member timed out_).

12.12
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the report and thank the committee for their resolution that this report should not be passed if the teachers’ issue is not addressed. 

It is said that those who have never lost a loved one cannot understand the grief of being bereaved. As a teacher, I know the plight of teachers. Twenty percent is not too much to ask. I was listening to the chairperson of UNATU yesterday and he said, through the clean-up of the teachers’ payroll, some money was realised which had been allotted to ghost teachers. So I urge this Parliament to look for all monies that are redundant so that we can address the plight of the teacher! 

We should not wait for voting time and then help the voters. Let them see us walk the talk; then they will have trust in us. Furthermore, UNATU should not be in charge of the money which we have appropriated. Let the money be distributed to districts in the teachers SACCOS then we can have equitable distribution of it. 

On teachers accessing the payroll; as a teacher, it took me two years to get to the payroll. And the day I wanted to leave teaching is the day I accessed the payroll. So the teachers’ plight should be addressed. Teachers should not be recruited when we do not have the money to pay them. 

Lastly, I want to talk about early childhood education. We should know that it is only private operators who are doing this job and – (Member timed out_)

12.14
MR STEPHEN EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the chairperson and the committee for the good report they have come up with. I should not hesitate to thank the ministers also for being patient with the report. The ministers are comfortable, but there is a very strong recommendation by the committee that we should not approve this budget unless the 20 percent allocation is implemented. 

When I peruse through the document, I do not see any proposal by the committee to the effect that the teachers should receive 20 percent pay rise from this vote. Therefore, this budget cannot be passed. 

On universities, we saw Makerere University demonstrating because teachers’ salaries are not good. But I want to ask the doctors we have here and other education specialists - private students pay a lot of money as tuition fees. When you go around these universities, you do not see a lot of development; where do these funds go? When the semester starts, students have to stay at home because there are no funds. Madam Speaker, all public universities have students demonstrating and teachers striking. What is happening? How are these funds managed?

Madam Speaker, they have talked of research in our country. We are worried that if we do not allocate funds to this area of research- today when you get to the streets, you will find teaching assistants and lecturers moving round, fending for their lives. If we give it time, most of these professors are going to go away. Some are retiring and others are dying –(Member timed out_)

12.17
MR STEPHEN DEDE MAYENDE (NRM, Bukooli County South, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for these good findings and recommendations. I am 100 percent in support of this report. However, I want to differ from what the honourable shadow Minister of Education said that in private schools, there are parents who support those schools.

I want to assure you, hon. Member of Parliament that this is not correct. I also have a school, which offers these services. If you try to send any student out of your school, the RDC and DISO come. There is no way you can send awayv-(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving me way. Madam Speaker, private schools are doing worse than government schools. The evidence is that before private schools signed the Memorandum of Understanding with the government to provide USE, they were charging more money. Immediately they signed, the government pays only Shs 47,000 for each student in that particular school. The government is saying the directors or the head teacher must not charge any student. Therefore, private schools are doing worse than government schools.

In government schools -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are smuggling in a contribution.

MR OLANYA: Thank you.

MR MAYENDE: Thank you for giving me such information. Madam Speaker, due to time, let me assure this House that the government is spending a lot of money in government-aided schools -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: You donated your time.

12.19
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, PWD Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I want to thank the committee for a job well done and I have five comments to make on this report.

The first one is obvious about the teachers’ plight. I am proposing that we make budget cuts across the board of all the ministries so that we address the issue of teachers’ salaries. I know that right now, there may not be money specifically available for the teachers’ salaries but in the past, we have done this. This Parliament has ever made budget cuts across the divide to meet urgent issues so I strongly propose that this should be done so that we avoid the strike on Monday.

The next issue I want to talk about is on the teachers’ SACCOs. If we leave the responsibility with UNATU, teachers will not get the money. Leaving it even at district level is not enough. It would be very good if teachers from SACCOs at sub-county level were involved so that they are able to get the money easily without interfering with school programmes. So the issue of UNATU involving the SACCOs is not very good.

I want to talk about school inspections. During our time, school inspection was very good. Each county had a school inspector and, therefore, the schools were performing very well. Inspecting a school also improves teaching methods. The inspectors find out how the teachers are teaching so that they can improve their methods -(Member timed out_)

12.21
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this report. I would like to appreciate the committee for coming up with this report, which is actually very good. As a teacher, I support that the teachers’ salaries should be increased by 20 percent and I would really encourage and appeal to the ministry to see how that money is got so that our teachers get this money.

I would like to specifically look at page 44 where the committee recommends that National Teachers’ Colleges should be included in future development programmes to enable them improve on their infrastructure and replace all asbestos roofs, which are now health hazards. It is true that asbestos sheets are not good for the health of the students and all the people who work there. Research available tells us that asbestos roofs cause cancer and so they should have been replaced yesterday but not in future. So I do not agree with them that it should be done in future; it should have been done yesterday.

We have got asbestos sheets not only at National Teachers’ Colleges but these cases exist in senior secondary schools like Iganga Senior Secondary School, in primary schools like Berkeley High School in Iganga and also in Gulu where we visited some schools. The list also includes Lira, Kyambogo - All these should be looked at and not only NTCs.

Madam Speaker, regarding early childhood education on page 37, the committee has recommended that Government should prioritise early childhood education. This is actually very important because we cannot have primary children without having pre-primary -(Member timed out_)

12.24
MS ANNET OKWENYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to talk about the issue of the high dropout rates of the girl child in the country that was noted among the issues raised by the committee.

Madam Speaker, if you had dropped out in P.5 in Kamuli District, this country would have lost the very first female Speaker of Parliament in Uganda. We are now very proud that we own the presidency of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Association in the whole world. We would also not be proud of that position as a country, Uganda.

In Otuke District, which I represent, we have a very high dropout rate of the girl child. In fact, it is to a tune of over 40 percent. These girls are being married off at a very tender age and in the near future, that is going to affect the quality of the women we will have as a country. Very few of them will be able to make it to the national level and to also represent Uganda in various fora.

I would also like to raise the issue of UNATU. I am happy that the committee noted it because personally, I had a problem with UNATU. It seems to be a Kampala based organisation that is actually not represented in the rural parts of the country. Madam Speaker, I strongly support the committee recommendation that UNATU should take its hands off the teachers’ SACCOs.

I would like to concur with my colleague, hon. Nokrach that if possible we get to have teachers’ SACCOs at sub-county level –(Member timed out_)

12.26
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryadongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for presenting this report. However, I have a few reservations. I have been listening to the vice chairperson of the committee while he presented the report. I also have been trying to peruse through the report. I want to say that I have not seen anything to do with the co-operative colleges. So, I don’t know whether they are still part of this government or not or they were just skipped. I am talking in reference to Kigumba Co-operative College, which shares land with Kigumba Petroleum Institute. These are two institutions on the same land but with each living its own way. I don’t know what the minister has got to tell this country. The students in the other one are very special in terms of feeding, sleeping, their classroom environment and so on. But these ones look like they are living in slums – they look like orphans – I don’t know why! This is a very serious matter. The minister should come out clearly to tell the country the fate of Kigumba Cooperative College. How should these two institutions live together?

I also want to make a small comment on the education curriculum. I want to agree with the committee recommendation that the country needs to revise its education curriculum to make it relevant to the needs of the students and Ugandans at large. These institutions are just training job seekers and not job makers. When shall these institutions begin to produce job makers –(Member timed out_)

2.28
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. To me there is nothing more annoying than when two parties agree but one party fails to honour the agreement. This is what Government is doing. They agreed with the teachers to increase their salaries in a phased manner but Government has failed to fulfil its obligation. I think this is so annoying to every citizen of this county.

The solution should have been provided by the committee that has been handling the policy statement. Now that they did not do that, the onus is on us to propose. The committee should have proposed re-allocation of funds from the non-priority votes to increasing teachers’ salaries and we are here to pass such kind of re-allocations. So, I think before we pass it, the committee should propose these re-allocations. Those should be passed before we pass the sector budget.

The government, as if that wasn’t enough, made another commitment with the teachers - especially the teachers in hard-to-reach areas, the ones we represent – to get hard-to-reach areas allowances. But there is also discrepancy in fulfilling this commitment. While some teachers are being given this kind of allowance and others are not, don’t you think Government is losing the trust of the people that it is leading?

There is another issue as to why some schools are performing poorly especially schools in the rural areas. The issue is about the lack of adequate inspection. You find schools like those in my constituency - there are many islands –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: I think the island issue is important. Please half a minute to speak on the island issue.

MR BADDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The schools in the islands don’t access enough services like those on the mainland. You find a school that has never seen an inspector for over a year. I think there should be an affirmative action for these hard-to-reach areas so that school inspectors are given more money to go and inspect these schools. I don’t know how the system works. Who is supposed to hunt the hunter? Who is supposed to inspect these school inspectors?

MR JOHN BOSCO MUBITO (NRM, Budiope County West, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate and thank the committee for the good work done especially when it comes to the recommendation on the plight of teachers.

As we speak, schools are due to commence their third term and it is this term that children sit their final exams like UPE, UCE and USE. However, as we talk, teachers have organised a strike and it seems they even have the support of the parents. It is unfortunate that the minister is instead threatening the teachers. That is absurd because I expected the minister to motivate these teachers. The minister should be standing with the teachers in their cause. 

So, in such a situation, I expect Parliament to come out with strong recommendations to avert the situation that is likely to happen starting from Monday. I know that the parents are not in the media to talk about this matter. However, I am sure a very good number of parents is standing with the teachers. My recommendation agrees with the one that has been moved by hon. Nokrach that we consider a budget cut and re-allocation of funds to secure that 20 percent.

Lastly, there is the issue of payslips. Last week, some science teachers came to my office and complained about – they were promised some increments. Some received it for one month, but later that allowance disappeared. They cannot – (Member timed out_)

12.34
MR VINCENT SEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson and the committee for doing a good job. On the issue of salaries for teachers, I want to say that some commitment was made and everybody knows that. What we are asking for now is that that commitment be fulfilled. That is not asking for too much. I don’t know what the minister is going to tell us now because last time, a commitment was made here and now what? I really support the recommendation by the committee that this money should be found. 

Two, there is the issue of – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure in line with what hon. Vincent Sempijja has said vis-à-vis what the committee has stated on page 32 because it is very rare in this House that Parliament can differ from a position it might have taken – whether the minister can tell us where we are getting the money from. The procedural point is that it could save time because what we are saying seems to be persuasive - both sides of the House are in agreement. 

So, procedurally, I was seeking guidance- if the minister could interject at this point and tell us where the money would come from and then we go to other policy statements. I am seeking your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, actually although we are saying many things, our real thoughts are with the teachers and how to solve the problem in view of the third term. Children are going back on Monday; exams are this term - if you could relieve our fears so that we speak about other things knowing that the issue of teachers is settled. Are you still consulting? No, hon. Members, the minister is away with my permission. She went away before the ban. We effected the ban yesterday but she had left; but she told me in writing that the acting minister is hon. Bakabulindi. 

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have been listening very carefully to all the contributions concerning the teachers who are my voters at the same time. As we talk, there is a meeting taking place in the ministry, chaired by the permanent secretary, with the PS of Public Service and Finance and we hope to conclude this issue on Monday.

The reason we are coming to finalise with this budget - as we talk now, we are dealing with the report of the committee and we have not said that we are opposing what the committee is saying. We are saying we are in the process of handling what the committee is saying but this does not deter the House from continuing debate on the report and passing the report of the committee -(Interjections) - I am coming to that point. 

MR OGUTTU: Order.

MR BAKABULINDI: Oder to me?

MR OGUTTU: Order to you. Madam Speaker, you were very clear in your request that the minister tells us what they are going to do - whether they have the money that they are going to pay the teachers. Because that is the gist of this report and we have said if that money is not there, you go away with your budget. Is the minister in order to continue explaining- beating about the bush- when we have a specific request to him? 

THE SPEAKER: For instance, hon. Latif Ssebaggala said that there are funds which are available, now that the donors have supported another part of your sector programme, which you could use for the teachers. 

MR BAKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, if honourable colleagues had been patient, they would have seen how I was going to conclude. We have not even reached the stage of appropriation-(Interjections) - no. I want to make this point clear –(Interjections) - can I continue, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, I want to know where the Minister of Finance has gone because this is his business. Allow hon. Ssempijja to finish his point while we find out where the minister is.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, let me talk about something else now because that one should be concluded by the ministers. 
Another point is the issue of-

THE SPEAKER: You finish and when the Minister of Finance comes -

MR SSEMPIJJA: Is the issue of dropouts. Madam Speaker, I think the ministry should be more specific on numbers because just saying “there is a high dropout rate” is not enough. We know that in many schools, the enrolment in P.1 is sometimes 200 but in those schools, only 40 or 20 sit for PLE. We should know the numbers to help in planning for this country. Where do these people go? It is not mentioned anywhere but year in year out, people come here and say there is a high dropout rate. We do not know the numbers.

Lastly, on sports, we saw everybody coming up recently when the Cranes were going to play that match. I want to inform the Members and the minister that when you see the Cranes playing, it has not started there. There is a lot of work being done down there, unrecognised, and which is not known by anybody in this country. Bringing millions to the Cranes at the last hour is not enough. We need to prepare ourselves. We need to plan sports in this country. It is a high income generating project as far as some of us are concerned. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: The minister wants to complete something. Let the minister conclude what he was saying then we hear from hon. Odoi.

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I can assure you - you should trust me because I am clarifying on one issue. The report of the committee covers so many sectors but at the moment, I am talking about the issue of the salary increment for the teachers and that is why I want Members to be calm and listen to my argument. 

I have said that even as we talk, negotiations are taking place talking about relocating from what we have that has been given to us and we are saying we have heard the point and I am more concerned because that is even my college. I have said we are going back but let us continue the debate and cover other areas and we see how to handle the issue of either reallocation or looking for extra money to address the issue of the teachers’ salaries. This cannot stop the report from being debated because salary is a portion of the complete report. I thank you very much.

12.45
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Many years ago, I attended physics classes and probably the only thing I remember from my physics classes are the laws of motion: for every force of action, there is an equal and opposite force of reaction. How does that apply to the current debate? For as long as we pretend to be paying teachers, they will pretend to be teaching. It is a question of pretence. If you pay any worker an amount of money that is not even equivalent to his sustenance, he will only pretend to be producing. Therefore, we are endangering an entire generation that is coming after us. (Applause) There is absolutely nothing we are going to pass on to the generations that will come after us if we do not sort out the question of the teachers’ payment. 

The minister says there are negotiations going on but the understanding of this House is that these negotiations were completed last year. You had agreements with the teachers last year and by the time you sent out the budget call circular you already had commitments you had made to the teachers.

You should have reflected that in your budget for this year. A couple of days before the opening of the third term this financial year the minister tells us, “We are still negotiating and we shall resolve this matter by Monday.” I think that is not sincere and it is not reflective of the commitments you made to them.

12.47
MS ROSE AKELLO (Independent, Woman Representative Kaabong): Madam Speaker, I want to say something about the teachers’ salary. I am not a teacher but I am a parent of the children who are being taught by these teachers. 

I want to inform the minister who has just been telling us that a meeting is going on about negotiations. These issues of teachers have not just started today. These are issues which have been there since last year and it makes us really get disturbed when the minister begins telling the august House that the PS and other members are still negotiating or in a meeting about the issue of the teachers.

I want to give an example. I come from a district which is bordering Kenya and South Sudan and there is a sub county which is just at the tip where you find that a teacher moves on foot from the headquarters up to Kamiyoni Sub County but you find that this teacher suffers and stays for four months without getting salary! Even the hardship allowances, they do not get them.
My minister let us get to it and then you feel for the plight of the teachers. Let us not talk as if we are not having children in our schools. We have children who are suffering; for us Members of Parliament our children are here in Kampala but our voters’ children are in rural schools where the teachers are suffering. Mine is to tell Government that let us wake up; let us leave negotiation meetings and we say something which encourages the teachers to go and teach the children.

12.49
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you Madam, I want to support the committee recommendation on page 32 and I think whatever statement that has been coming from Government on TV and other places - Yesterday I was with the minister of education in the canteen, everything was showing defiance, then why did you negotiate and agree with the teachers? We are not now talking out of the blue; you negotiated, you agreed and the teachers waited for another financial year and the financial year is this one.

I think it is incumbent upon Government to go back sit with ministry of finance and see where to get this money; otherwise, I want to urge my colleagues, let us stay put and not accept any postponement of the teachers’ salary. 

I want to tell the minister of education that UPE is such a small grant given to primary schools. As soon as this money reaches the primary school, the teachers are on instruction to return 10 percent to a different bank. In Gulu, in all the UPE schools, immediately the head teachers receive this UPE grant through Centenary Bank they must return cash and deposit in Crane Bank and this is what is happening. 
I wanted to get this from the minister, the money is little enough, why do you deduct the 10 percent again from every primary school and if you wanted why do you send the money to the schools. Why don’t you just say this is what we are going to get. Now the head teachers get this money then you instruct them to go and deposit in another bank account -(Member timed out)

12.51
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If we are to respect the reports of committees it is very clear on page 32, recommendation number one that we should not pass this budget until the 20 percent increment for teachers is put in this budget.

On this note, I think we should not even be discussing other sectors in this ministry; let us first understand whether this money is there or not short of that then we go and pass that this budget should not be passed with this ministerial statement because the minister is talking of negotiations, these negotiations started long ago, last year - even I have a document which I want to lay on Table written by Claudius M. Olweny Chairperson National Negotiating and Consultative Council calling the meeting for negotiations. He is also advising all line ministries which are concerned and he saying in this regard and in order to avoid “unnecessary upheaval in the service, the council members recommended that Government reallocates funds within the budget to cater for the 20 percent salary enhancement for public officers” in that meeting and you have not done anything. They should not come here and tell us lies that they are negotiating, up to when?

Yesterday, the minister of finance said that there is no money to increase salary of teachers. Now some of these ministers have started running away. This time we are not going to hear anything unless 20 percent of these teacher’s salaries is increased. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, this is a document I am laying on Table which was written by Claudius M. Olweny Chairperson National Negotiating and Consultative Council. He was writing to the 1st Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service on 25th of June 2013 and the subject was 20 percent salary enhancement for public officers in financial year 2013/2014. I beg to lay.

12.54
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja East Municipality, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to contextualise the 20 percent salary increment of teachers. Government is stopped from moving away from its own commitment. The debate does not even arise. What we are dealing with are two things:

    1. Either Government finds money to cater for the increment; 
    2. if it does not, Parliament re-allocate within the ministries since we have the power to appropriate. 

So, even the negotiation the minister is talking about does not arise. It is just a question of the committee on education, the ministry officials sitting down and telling us what areas are being cut. Short of that my employers (the teachers in Jinja East) have given instructions not to support the passing of the ministry budget without giving effect to that Government commitment.

Early childhood centres; the committee says that Government has been supporting pre-primary and primary but they do not come out with particular specifics on how much has been invested into the early childhood centres. You will agree that the ministry is offering lip-service to early childhood centres and many of our colleagues including myself we take our children to private early childhood centres.

The effect of that is that we are creating two classes of people: those who pass through the private early childhood centres and get a good foundation and those being presided over by my good friend, hon. Muyingo and others. But the effect of that is that, we are creating a substandard class of people by not taking care of their interests.  

Finally, when it comes to Education and Sports, I have heard the President on very many occasions lament about unemployment but to him, he does not know that when you support education and sports and particularly sports, you are creating employment.  

I wish to confess that most of the sportsmen within the Uganda Cranes come from our area Jinja like Geoffrey Masa, Abbey Daira and Moses Oloya are all from our area because we have put extra effort to invest in sports. If Government knew that investing in sports is a very pertinent issue, it would go a long way in catering for unemployment.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anywar. Let me finish this side, I am coming.

12.57
MS BETTY ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of the teachers cannot be over emphasized. For sure and for heaven’s sake, this money must be found and given to our teachers. Teachers do not only teach but they also do parenting.  

As we are dilly-dallying to find the money for these teachers, there is a pending strike on Monday. I am aware that the RDCs are being instructed to harass our teachers. We want to make sure, as the institution of Parliament, that we protect these teachers in the event that they can undertake a peaceful demonstration for what they demand. We warn the RDCs all over the country to refrain from harassing these teachers or else they be held responsible.  

As leaders of this country and we are crying with our teachers, I would have wished that as a show of solidarity, we as Members of Parliament make some proposals and make some contribution of Shs 100,000 so that we stand with our teachers as a token for their suffering. We know that the government has the responsibility but I just want us to show solidarity. I know Members are not comfortable but this is my proposal.  

What I also wanted to say is that - 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. There are so many meetings taking place. 

MS ANYWAR: I also wanted to say -

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I rise on a point of procedure. The money that we are asking for increment of the teachers’ salaries is Shs 139 billion. So the procedural question I am asking is that a contribution of Shs 100,000 per MP comes to Shs 37 million - is it not procedurally diverting the attention of Ugandans where we need Shs 139 billion and yet we want to mobilise only Shs 37 million? I seek your guidance on that matter.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that would be a drop in the ocean and it is not even sustainable. I do not even know how it will be distributed among the army of teachers. Let us focus on the government finding this money.  

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to propose that as we are crying with the teachers, their children are not able to go to school. Can we make – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: You gave away your time. After hon. Olanya - 

1.00
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to appreciate the committee for the good work they have done. But also, allow me to lament briefly on the issue of intimidation and scaring of our teachers.  

I am a well-trained teacher. For effective teaching to take place, psychologically your mind must be settled. But as we talk now, it is unfortunate that the Minster for Education is not in - Jessica Alupo came up with a statement saying that right now, they are recruiting 900 reserve teachers. I would like the minister to tell us where these teachers are and where they are getting these teachers from?  

I am quite aware that teachers cannot be recruited on a reserve basis like we recruit in the forces. You can recruit reserve soldiers because getting soldiers is very easy. You go and pick anybody from the street and train him on how to shoot and kill and he is there. But for teaching to take place, there must be effective teaching and learning in a classroom.  

We need not keep on scaring our teachers. We need to stop intimidating our teachers. When teachers are crying for a salary increment, it is a matter of sitting on a round table and coming up with proper solutions.  

With that, I would like Minister Jessica Alupo to apologise to Ugandans and our good teachers who are working hard because she is undermining and intimidating our teachers – (Member timed out_)  

1.03
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much. I want to thank the committee for the report.  

Madam Speaker, my first point is on the function of inspection in schools. I am aware that for primary schools, the inspection function is with the districts and I am aware that each county - at least in Masindi - has an inspector of schools. But these inspectors are not facilitated at all. They are just there by name and once there is no inspection, even when the teachers are paid and the students are there, education cannot run properly. I would like to suggest that the issue of inspection should be taken seriously.  

At secondary education level, there is hardly any inspection in the districts and I was reliably informed that this is a central function but throughout the report, it is not even highlighted anywhere. How are we going to ensure these standards? I once upon a time heard about the Education Standards Agency - I think it is a directorate but it has not been highlighted in this report and I am not sure whether it is still functional or still exists but it is not seen on the ground.  

The other issue is on the children with partial disabilities who continue being marginalised at secondary school level. They do not enjoy the USE that other students enjoy. They are like children who are blind - there is a school in Iganga where they are required to pay everything including tuition and they are not subsidised at all but the committee has not picked on that. 

I want to ask the ministry to look into this issue so that the children with disabilities also enjoy the USE and other capitation grants.  

Lastly, I also agree that UNATU should not participate in the SACCOs of teachers. It is – (Member timed out_)

1.05
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you very much. On page 32, the committee recommends that funds for 20 percent increment of teachers’ salaries must be identified before approval of the sector budget for the financial year 2013/2014 because these are not new priorities. I support this recommendation 100 percent.

Secondly, before UPE was introduced, parents were able to educate their children. All of us did not go through UPE but Government came and told parents that they were going to pay and Government has failed to do this. I want to ask the ministry; why don’t you think about cost-sharing so that parents can pay something for their pupils in schools because you said you would educate our kids but you have failed to do this. We want Government to commit itself again on whether they are able to pay or they allow the parents to share costs with the government. 

When you consider the 20 percent increment in salary, just only Shs 54,000 per teacher, of course when you subtract the PAYE, the teacher is going to end up with something like Shs 290,000 and thirdly, Government is getting too much now. Before we even settle the primary teachers, you are talking about the students’ loans and before even UPE is confirmed, you are talking about pre-primary. You are handling too much yet you haven’t yet handled even the little that you committed to handle – (Member timed out_)

1.08
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report and my heart goes out to the teachers on their plight and not only the teachers but also lecturers in universities. On page 47, today it is the teachers, tomorrow it is the lecturers, the following day it will be the doctors. I think it is time that we harmonized our payment structures. 

The payment structure is not a simple subject; people have written books about payment structures. Let us have somebody who sits down and does a thorough job and we will get a harmonized payment structure for the whole country.

Secondly, I want clarification from the minister on the issue of participation by the community on UPE. My problem in the constituency has been that the President goes out and says what he has been saying about UPE and the population in their own wisdom think that they are not supposed to contribute anything at all. So, hon. Minister, you better listen to this and clarify to us. What is it that the community can do so that we don’t seem to be clashing with the President on what he says on how UPE should be handled? 

Thirdly, I want to thank the committee for the emphasis on technical education. Some countries like Sri Lanka have done their skilling and technical education so well that skilled technicians are now an export item to the extent – (Member timed out_)

1.10
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity. Let me take this opportunity to thank the committee for the work well done. Education in Uganda needs to be developed beginning with the foundation in this country. There is an oversight we are making in this country forgetting that once we improve on early childhood development, we will help with this question of poor education in this country. 

Some of these issues in these policy statements and reports will match success if we address issues of the teachers. Once you pay teachers’ salaries very well, these teachers will teach our children and we achieve what we want. I have seen one of the challenges in this report is the absenteeism in schools. If a teacher is only paid Shs300,000 per month, he also has children in schools, he wants to eat and most of these teachers rent houses. Really, hon. Minister, how do you think this person will live with the high standards of living in this country?

To address or to achieve vision 2040, we need to embark on education as the foundation. If we don’t do that then – (Member timed out_)

1.13
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank – (Interruption.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, do you have something to say?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Yes, thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, I have listened to the debate and I have listened to the gist of the matter and as a ministry, I wish to request that you give us some little time and we reorganize ourselves.

THE SPEAKER: How long is that time because we want to finish the corrigenda today? How much time do you require?

MR BAKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, by Monday, we shall be in position to give you the right answer. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I must thank the minister. I had all along got the impression that we were talking to the deaf but it seems this time the minister was listening and I must congratulate him. 

Having said that, I think we need to have a plan B as we consult and I am of a well-considered opinion that our budget committee takes this matter up, looks into the budget and identifies where some of this money can be got from. The general debate can go on to justify but it looks like we are talking the same language and at the end of the day, we need to identify the source of this money and as Parliament, we need to make a proposal and say, look here, from this budget, we could be able – 

MS KAMATEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. colleague for giving way. The budget committee sat and identified the source of funding except that the Ministry of Finance still adamantly insisted that there was no money. But the budget committee did its work. 

MR OKEYOH: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is that no amount of caucusing will change our position. We are destined to have a caucus on Monday and I think that is why the minster is pushing it to Monday. Please, for the sake of the people, let us – (Interruption) 

MR BAKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, I think we need to respect each other in this House. Some of us have been here and are good at respecting others. I listened to hon. Katuntu and my colleague representing the PWDs and he brought a proposal, saying: “How about if we cut across all the ministries?”Hon. Katuntu said, “Gentlemen, it is not just a matter of saying one minute, the Budget Committee will also be involved to look here and there. It is not something you can do in one hour.” When the honourable member starts imputing that because on Monday he has a caucus meeting - I think we need to respect each other. Some of us are doing it – I propose a Monday simply because in the process of today up to then, a lot of consultations will take place. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MR BAKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, my colleague – (Interruption)

MR SEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I respect hon. Bakabulindi a lot and he represents workers here in Parliament. We have got all the evidence and that is why hon. Okeyoh has brought up that matter. Uganda National Teachers’ Union has met these people several times and I am going to lay documents on the Table, indicating why they have resorted to an industrial action. Let me make this point very clear: Teachers are not striking; they are withdrawing services. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are diverting us from trying to lay a strategy to get the money for the teachers; do not divert us.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do strongly suggest that the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, since according to hon. Kamateeka, the source of this money has been identified within the Budget – I think we need a short report from the Budget Committee such that we consider it alongside this report and make our own recommendations. The good thing about this, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have looked at 23 votes of the entire Budget; when we take workshops, allowances, travels, trainings, special meals, fuel, motor vehicle repairs, staff welfare, you will get about Shs 720 billion. Just apply 20 percent of that – I am not saying these items are not necessary – they are but just apply 20 percent of that and you will get the money. That is my information. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, lastly, I think the Budget Committee can take it up because the most important issue here is the money identified must be sustainable perpetually; it is not about identifying it in this financial year because once you have increased, that money should be available in the following financial years. So that is why I was suggesting that the Budget Committee looks at this issue very seriously and we have a short report and we close this debate. This is because nobody is objecting to the idea that the teachers’ salaries should be enhanced. We all agree on that and I want the minister also to go on record – I want the frontbench to go on record that they are also agreeable. Then how we do it will be the only question remaining. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think let us take a decision on how to move because we can continue lamenting amongst ourselves – there is no objection on either side of the House about the need for enhancement. What we need is to find the solution. So, where is the chair of the Budget Committee? Can the Budget Committee convene and look at the areas he has talked about and those identified by hon. Ssebagala. 

1.22
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is exactly where the Budget Committee is now trying to review and look at the details of the different proposals. One of the things I am happy to hear from hon. Katuntu is that once we agree to increase salaries for everyone, we must raise this money sustainably every year. You know what our Constitution says: You can’t just give this year and then say next year that there is no money. Once you increase, it must be there; there are options available to us, increasing budget cuts. 

Secondly, what we have been recommending, as the Budget Committee - the salaries harmonisation and review – 

THE SPEAKER: That commission is important but what I want to hear is where are we going to get the money and can we pay it every year? The other one is equally important but my interest is where the money is coming from. So can we ask hon. Seninde to speak?

MS SENINDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I do appreciate what our colleague, hon. Kamateeka, has informed this House about. For that matter, I want to propose that we don’t pass the budget for the Finance Committee because it has been made very clear that much as the Budget Committee has found out where the money can be generated, the Ministry of Finance is still insisting. And, Madam Speaker, this is not the first time; it seems we are taking teachers for granted. This time, let us stand firm and support the teachers’ cause for the good of this country and the improvement of the quality of education.

So as a matter of procedure, let us agree as a House – both sides – for the good of this country, so that we do not pass the budget of the finance committee. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Members, can I propose that we defer debate on this matter, pending the report of the Budget Committee and the report from the minister? We want an answer on Tuesday morning. But you can take those to the committee. 

1.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, first of all, I am standing here to congratulate you upon the elevation and appointment to one of the international positions.

Secondly, I just want to give further information to this House that Government provided a four percent salary increase across the public service. So when we are debating about the teachers’ salary increase, we should be talking about 16 percent and not 20 percent – (Interjections) – yes. 

Thirdly, I want to clear my name because I have heard colleagues saying that I was running out of the House. No, I was not running from the House; I was going to consult my technical officer so that I can come and give you something useful. 

Further, we have had a series of meetings on this matter with the teachers’ leaders. The first meeting which I had a chance to attend was in State House. The President directed the Minister of Education to set up a committee composed of herself, the Minister of Finance and Public Service and the leadership of the teachers. We had several meetings with them. 

Actually, the teachers said during that meeting in State House, that they knew where money could come from. We in Ministry of Finance said, “That is fine, go in and discover it”. During that meeting, we run through every possible option and found none. So when my colleague here says that money has been identified, I do not know – (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it is high time that the Frontbench and specifically the Minister of Finance started taking this House seriously. The matter of the teachers’ pay started in the previous Parliament. It was Government which agreed to give them a sequential increment in their pay. The teachers had laid down their tools but they reconsidered their position because they are teaching the nation. 

We have cut budgets in this House to provide money for the medical staff. We have cut budgets to ensure that our mothers have access to midwives. But now the people who teach this nation are forgotten and the budget committee has assured this House that they have identified money. Now the minister has come out and is suggesting that they looked for the money with the cabinet members and found no money – that even in his current state, he cannot see any money for that need; yet year in year out they are promoting the army; increasing the budget of State House; increasing the President’s budget. Is he therefore in order to undermine the teachers of this nation and yet the travel expenses alone in Government could settle the problems of the teachers?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have ruled that we defer debate on this matter. I have also instructed the Budget Committee to sit and write us a report taking into account the proposals we have made here on the sources of money so that next week we find money for the teachers. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you. I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker. We are aware that on Monday, there is a pending strike by the teachers and aware that what we are proposing as Parliament will be replied to by the Executive sometime next week. What will happen in the event that a solution is not got on Monday and yet the teachers are set to lay down their tools?

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, as a Member of the Committee on Human Rights, we raised this issue two days ago. And now that we are all waiting for the response of the ministry and the committee, I request you, Madam Speaker, to ask the Executive to reassure this country that teachers will not be intimidated and unduly harassed. 

The RDCs, the cadres, the GSOs and all the others descend on these teachers and intimidate them to the bone marrow. This is violation of human rights; the teachers have their rights as citizens of this country. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think what hon. Anywar has said is a bit complex. Let us concentrate on finding the money so that we can find a permanent solution for these teachers. So the Budget Committee should meet. Minister of Finance, you should co-operate with the Budget Committee and I am holding you to your promise during the budget speech that you are going to cut your expenditure on workshops, seminars and so on. And once that money is available, let us give it to the teachers. So we defer the debate on this one. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE HEALTH SECTOR FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014 

1.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to present the report of the Committee on Health on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the health sector for the financial year 2013/2014.

Allow me to begin by tabling a copy of our committee report which is fully signed. Allow me also table the minutes that the committee made in the course of its work. I beg to lay. 

In accordance with rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Health examined the policy statement on the health sector for the financial year 2013/2014. In addition, the committee examined critically the recurrent and capital budget estimates for the health sector for the financial year 2013/2014. 

The sector comprises the following votes: 
    • vote 014 - Ministry of Health; 
    • vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute;
    • vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute;
    • vote 116 - National Medical Stores;
    • vote 134 - Health Service Commission;
    • vote 115 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Services; 
    • vote 161 - Mulago National Referral Hospital; 
    • vote 162 - Butabika National Referral Hospital;
    • votes 501 to 850 - Local Government Primary Health Care. 
    • Votes 163 to 176 cover 14 regional referral hospitals namely: Arua, Fort Portal, Gulu, Hoima, Jinja, Kabale, Masaka, Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Mbarara, Mubende, Moroto and Naguru. 

Arising from examination of the policy statement and budget estimates from the health sector, the committee made observations and recommendations that are intended to guide the House in its appropriation process. 

Madam Speaker, running through the report, the next table down there indicates budget performance. Table 1 is the sector budget performance excluding taxes and then non-tax revenue and arrears. I invite Members to look through Table 1.

There is the snapshot of the national financial allocation to the health sector in the financial year 2013/2014. Table 2 shows the financing of the health sector in the medium term excluding taxes and the non-tax revenue. Table 3 is budgetary allocation of the health sector institutions over the medium term excluding taxes and non-tax revenue.

In the interest of time, the Committee on Health made observations and recommendations as follows and on page 6 are our observations and recommendations on medicines and supplies. Permit me to say that for the last ten years, Uganda Parliament has consistently advocated for better health care delivery. 

The Eighth Parliament addressed the hitherto perennial shortage of drugs in public health facilities by allocating the entire medicine budget for all public health facilities under the National Medical Stores, which is charged with procurement, storage and distribution of drugs and other medical supplies to public health facilities. However, the committee was informed that some facilities had challenges with regard to proper requisition of drugs to National Medical Stores. 

The committee would like to commend the Parliament and the Executive for working together to prescribe the solution to the problem of medicine and human resources for health, although a lot still needs to be done in the area of recruitment, retention and motivation of health workers as shall be elaborated later in the report.

The committee recommends that the capacity on requisition of drugs by health workers be built to avoid unnecessary drug shortages. In addition, the capacity of health management committees should be enhanced to increase monitoring supply and demand of drugs in the communities.  

Lastly, the committee recommends strict adherence to guidance to essential drugs management to avoid wastage of drugs due to over-prescription.

On prioritisation of preventive health care, the recommendation on page 8, the committee recommends that more funds and energy be expended in primary health care to facilitate the local governments and lower health facilities including PNFPs to deliver on their health-related mandate. 

In addition, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Health prioritises the development of a unit cost for funding health sector facilities in 2013/2014 so as to facilitate the provision of additional resources for public health care. 

On human resources for health, permit me to say briefly that in addition to health care service delivery in lower health facilities, Parliament pushed and Government accepted to avail an extra Shs 49.5 billion to recruit health workers in health centres III and IV. The funds were meant to meet the cost of recruitment of 10,210 health workers, pay salaries of the recruited staff and pay retention allowances to doctors in health centres IV equivalent to about Shs 2.5 million. 

The outcome was that 8,078 health workers were appointed. Of these, 6,839 reported to work and by 30 June 2013, only 5,039 recruited staff had accessed the payroll.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, could you read the subject and then the recommendations? This is because the full text of the report is going to be put in the Hansard.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. The committee recommends that the ministry expedites the second recruitment and fills the vacant positions with priority in those who were not attracted. In addition, there should be harmonisation of recruitment done by Government and that carried out by development partners.

We also recommend that the Ministry of Health, Health Service Commission and Ministry of Public Service should work together to develop a retirement plan that should feed into the recruitment plan so as to avoid unnecessary vacancies in health facilities. The process of recentralisation of the recruitment of health workers should also be expedited.

In order to fully functionalise health centres III and IV, Government should enhance the wage of the 10 critical cadres at these health centres who include, among others, midwives, anaestheticc officers and anaestheticassistants and laboratory technicians. The committee recommends that Shs 43.179 billion be allocated for the enhancement of the wages of the 10 critical cadres by 50 percent as retention allowances. 

The ministry should also develop a deployment plan for all bonded students and ensure that the local governments and Health Service Commission are aware of it.

Government should carry out a study on the possibility of bonding all government-sponsored graduates in health courses (specifically undergraduates) for at least one year to address the staffing shortages in health facilities especially among the critical cadres.  

The Ministry of Health must ensure that all comprehensive nurses are retrained in midwifery. 

The Ministry of Public Service should urgently ensure that all the recruited health workers access the payroll and retention allowances are paid to the beneficiaries and reflected in their appointment letters. 

A snapshot of the recent recruitment is in the table showed below there. 

On functionalisation of village health teams, the committee recommends the enactment – 

THE SPEAKER: I think you missed out a recommendation under 6.4 under the table.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 6.4 is on page 10; under grading and under paying certain health cadres. The committee recommends that anaesthetic officers, public health nurses and ophthalmic clinic officers should be upgraded from salary scale U5 to salary scale U4 as a way of increasing the numbers of these cadres.

On functionalisation of village health teams, the committee recommends the enactment of a policy defining, among others, the composition of the teams, the selection criteria of the team members, the remuneration and/or facilitation of the team members, the reporting procedures and accountability of VHTs vis-à-vis village local councils, health centres II and public health nurses or assistants. 

The committee further recommends that secretaries for health and education at the Local Council I and Local Council II levels should be utilised to enhance community level coordination of VHTs.

VHTs should be rolled out to the remaining districts and in addition to bicycles, Government should provide a motivational allowance. Furthermore, VHTs should be sensitised on nutrition to enable them sensitise community members on the importance of balanced diets to address the malnutrition problem.

On the eradication of malaria on page 12, the committee recommends that indoor residual spraying should be prioritised as an effective way of eradicating malaria-induced deaths as compared to other measures such as larviciding and the use of insecticide treated mosquito nets that are being funded and promoted by the donors. 

The committee further recommends that the ministry carries out a long term cost benefit analysis of all the various methods being used in malaria eradication with a view of taking on the most efficient method of eliminating malaria.

Among others, the cost of collecting blood should be one of the costs to be looked at in this analysis, given the fact that 50 percent of blood in Uganda is used to treat children with anaemia largely due to malaria and 50 percent in patient deaths among children under the age of five years are attributed to malaria induced anaemia, according to the Uganda Blood Transfusions Services. 

Revamping the immunization programme

On this, Madam Speaker, the committee commends the Ministry of Health for the revitalization of the immunization planning and finally accepting that routine immunization be considered as opposed to the expensive national immunization campaigns.

Family Planning Services

On this, the committee recommends that funding for family planning services be increased. In addition, there should be an increase in skills training of health workers in the lower health facilities on issues of family planning methods especially the long term efforts.

Furthermore, the committee recommends that in order to increase efficiency in the provision of family planning, there should be mechanisms to induce demand for the services.

On nutrition, the committee recommends that the nutrition plan be funded and implemented and great sensitization on behavioural change communication be conducted targeting mothers and youth in basics of good nutrition.

Let me go to non-communicable diseases. Madam Speaker, the committee observed that the non-communicable diseases and their factors are now an enraging problem in Uganda although the efforts have been directed to infectious diseases to a great extent. The NCDs include hypertension, cardiac diseases, and diabetes, chronic respiratory diseases, mental illnesses, cancer conditions, injuries as well as oral diseases.

According to the World Health Organisation, most non-communicable diseases are a result of four particular behaviours – tobacco use, physical inactivity, unhealthy diet and harmful use of alcohol – to lead to four key metabolic or physiological changes, that is, blood pressure, overweight, obesity, raised glucose and raised cholesterol.

The committee was informed that the Ministry of Health initiated the process of conducting national NCD baseline survey for risk factors and magnitude of non-communicable diseases in the country so as to provide baseline data on the prevalence of NCDs and their risks. The committee recommends that the ministry expedites the process of availing data on the prevalence of NCDs and their risk factors so as to guide the NCD policy. We also recommend that Government should increase funding to sports and physical activities.

Furthermore, we recommend that diabetes tests and functional blood pressure kits are provided at all lower health facilities. In addition, periodic cancer screening should be carried out at all health centres III.

On drugs, alcohol and substance abuse – that is page 15 – the committee recommends that the Bill on drugs and other substances be expedited to regulate the use of alcohol and drugs that seem to be on the increase. In addition, a study should be carried out on the likely impact of future use on tax revenue.

On HIV/AIDS funding, the committee recommends that an HIV/AIDS board be established to take care of the financial needs for the country’s HIV/AIDS strategic plans and programmes. In addition, we also recommend that universal HIV testing be encouraged. We further recommend that Government collaborates with the HIV/AIDS units so as to establish the numbers of people who are both HIV/AIDS positive to ensure both conditions are addressed at the same time.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, Government should ensure adequate availability of condoms in the country.

Referral systems

On this, the committee recommends that the policy on referral systems be expedited and made through a transparent and participatory manner. In addition, we recommend that the process of establishing the referrals in Kampala to decongest Mulago Hospital should be expedited. Further, the committee recommends that the ministry should sensitize local governments on the guidelines of upgrading health facilities from one level to another so that there is strict adherence of upgrading health centres given the financial implications.

The committee further recommends that affirmative action be taken to bring Moroto Regional Referral Hospital to the status of other referral hospitals to avoid situations of a regional referral referring a patient to a general hospital.

Reduction on referrals abroad

The committee recommends that efforts to build super specialized hospitals and transform the Uganda Heart Institute Ltd into a public body together with strengthening the capacity of specialized institutes with more resources, be expedited.

On ambulances, the committee recommends that a policy be enacted to guide ambulance services in Uganda. New ambulances should be prioritized for hard-to-reach areas. 

Lastly, the committee – (Interruption)

MR MUGUME: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very important ministry, but while the chairperson is presenting the report, the responsible Minister of Health is not in the House –

THE SPEAKER: But she is here.

MR MUGUME: Madam Speaker, this is just the minister of state – the minister is important –

THE SPEAKER: She is holding the portfolio of the senior minister and I have that in writing. No, the minister wrote to me assigning her that responsibility.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, special consideration should be made for mountainous and water areas in the distribution of ambulances.

On public health inspection, we recommend that health inspectors be facilitated to do their work as a priority area and a means of promoting preventive health care.

Revamping the medical/professional councils

The committee reiterates the above-mentioned earlier recommendations, which appear in the body of the introduction, as a way of weeding out the quack and unethical doctors and quack health training institutions. But in addition to that, the committee recommends that Government should urgently regulate the use of alternative and complementary medicines.

Health Insurance Scheme

The committee recommends that the Bill should be expedited since it has the potential to improve access to health care and reduce out-of-pocket spending in Uganda.

Maternal Death Audits

The committee recommends that the maternal audits be strengthened and best practice from the Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital be benchmarked by other health facilities. The ministry should compile data on all maternal death audits in all health units in the country both public and private and submit an annual report to Parliament with actionable recommendations.

Sanitation and Hygiene

The committee recommends that sanitation and hygiene should be given due attention through policy and budget support in order to mitigate the unwarranted death of Ugandans through water-borne diseases.

The committee further recommends that the four ministries of health, water, education and local government, under the guidance of the Office of the Prime Minister, develop a harmonised position, strategy and policy on sanitation and hygiene.

Utilities in Hospitals

The committee recommends that strategic and innovative ways should be designed to ensure that health facilities have water and electricity through schemes such as water harvesting, gravity water schemes, negotiating subsidies or affirmative action from utility providers.

Uganda Cancer Institute

The committee noted the tremendous work registered by the Uganda Cancer Institute. However, the committee learnt that the genuine cost of cancer treatment – chemotherapy- was not known to the majority of the people, including the patients, thereby creating space for unscrupulous people to cheat patients. The committee was informed by the Director, Uganda Cancer Institute, that chemotherapy treatment was free of cost except that patients were charged Shs 30,000 for the bed per night.

The committee recommends that the Uganda Cancer Institute revamps its public relations and information sharing to keep the public informed about the services they offer and the associated costs. 

National Drug Authority 

Unpaid Fees for Inspection of Donor Supplied Drugs

The committee noted that NDA does not receive appropriations from Parliament. Instead, it raises its operational funds from inspection fees, which is at two percent of the value of imported medicines and other supplies. 

The committee was informed that the Government of Uganda receives huge supplies of drugs and other supplies from a number of donors. However, these donors are not willing to pay the cost of inspection to NDA, yet the drugs have to be inspected to ensure their efficacy. Consequently, the Ministry of Health has been requesting NDA to inspect the donor-supplied drugs on the promise of future re-imbursement. To this effect, Ministry of Health owes NDA Shs3 billion which has been outstanding for a long time. The committee learnt that the cost of verification of some of the drugs such as ARVs was very expensive. The committee recommends that Shs3 billion be cleared as domestic arrears. 

Secondly, the National Drug Authority should be given a vote so that Parliament can appropriate funds for its operations.

National Drug Authority Board

The committee recommends that the National Drug Authority Board should be constituted urgently to enable the Authority function properly.

PHC grants to local governments

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health ensures that all health facilities open bank accounts in fiscal year 2013/2014 to enable Ministry of Finance send PHC transfers directly to the health facilities and hence control district reallocations.

Legal status of Uganda Heart Institute

Parliament has observed that several conflicts and challenges were emerging in terms of ownership of assets, finances and management of human resources at the Uganda Heart Institute as it was found to be a limited company. The offices of the Auditor-General, Attorney-General and First Parliamentary Counsel, the health committee and the budget committee had pronounced themselves on this matter advising the Ministry of Health to initiate a legislation to transform Uganda Heart Institute Limited into a statutory body. 

The committee was informed that Uganda Heart Institute was now owned by Government and the Ministry was working on the relevant legislation to transform the institute into a public entity owned by Government of Uganda. Attached is the evidence tendered by the Minister of Health.

The committee encountered few challenges.

Governance challenges in the health sector

The political leadership of the ministry was changed with the appointment of hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, hon. Dr Tumwesigye and hon. Sarah Opendi. The committee is optimistic that the team will provide effective stewardship of the health sector. 

The charged permanent secretary/accounting officer

The committee also noted that the hitherto acting Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health, Dr Asuman Lukwago, was recently appointed as a full Permanent Secretary in the same ministry. However, at the time of his appointment, the said Dr Asuman Lukwago had been charged by the Director of Public Prosecution with a number of criminal offences. The sanctioned charge sheet is attached. 

The committee recalled that Parliament had expressed reservation on the continued stay in office of the charged Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Health. The committee observed that the Public Service Standing Orders, 2010 provide for the interdiction of a public officer if criminal proceedings are being instituted against him or her. The committee also was reliably informed that the officer responsible for interdicting a Permanent Secretary is the Head of Public Service/Secretary to Cabinet.

In light of the foregoing controversy, the committee recommends that the appointing authority appoints a new accounting officer for vote 014- Ministry of Health.

In addition, administrative measures should be undertaken on the charged accounting officer in line with the laws and regulations that govern public officers.

The Assistant Commissioner Support Services claimed to be a hindrance of effective healthcare delivery at Mulago National Referral Hospital. The committee received reports that one Kantarama Alison, Assistant Commissioner Support Services at Mulago Hospital was misusing her office. The committee was informed that the officer, who has worked at Mulago Hospital for about 20 years, was renting institutional houses meant for health workers to private persons for personal gain. The committee was also informed that the said officer was using the hospital laundry for private ends; and had turned a day-care centre built with public funds of a loan from African Development Bank into a private asset. The committee learnt that each child in this day care centre pays approximately Shs600,000 but these funds are not declared to the hospital administration.

The committee also learnt that the officer was insubordinate to the leadership of the hospital and had also rented out hospital land to private persons. The allegations have direct bearing on the non-tax revenue collection and effective health service delivery.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health takes immediate action on the matter in order to prevent paralysis of service delivery at Mulago National Referral Hospital. The Minister of Health should report to Parliament on measures taken within two months.

In addition, the committee recommends that a value-for-money audit be carried out at Mulago Hospital Complex by the Auditor-General’s Office.

Mapping and coordination of health interventions in the country

The committee recommends that Ministry of Health conducts a comprehensive mapping exercise of all health players aimed at profiling who does what, where and with what resources; and identifies under-served areas, regions and districts for corrective measures. 

Fragmentation of health service delivery

The committee recommends that the current institutional framework for delivering health services be reviewed with a view to enhancing effective coordination and supervision. 

Donor dependency of the sector and parallel structures

The committee recommends that Government critically studies the implication of off–budget support to the health sector and the projectization of healthcare delivery on the long term healthcare delivery progress in Uganda.

Planning for human resource for health

The committee recommends that strategic human resource planning be conducted to enable the formulation of a human resource master plan.

Madam Speaker, the committee made some recommendations on reallocation within the health sector and after critically analysing the proposed recurrent and development budget estimates of the health sector, the committee recommends reallocations within the sector as follows:

    (i) The funds earmarked for the purchase of the vehicle for the Senior Presidential Advisor (Shs150 million), under Vote 014-Ministry of Health, should be reallocated to purchase mattresses for general hospitals and to be purchased by National Medical Stores. The justification of this is that the Ministry of Health may not be the responsible ministry for purchasing this vehicle for the presidential advisor.

    (ii) That Shs 100 million under vote 0140 for purchase of specialised machinery and equipment should be re-allocated to NMS for the purchase of mattresses for general hospitals. The Justification is that Government runs an activity based budget and this item has inputs, planed outputs and activities to deliver outputs.

    (iii) That Shs 499.6 under vote 162 Butabika National Referral Hospital for purchase of drugs should be reallocated to vote 106 in NMS since it is the vote that is charged with the responsibility of drug procurement, storage and distribution to all hospitals.

    (iv) That Shs 1 billion being part of the funds earmarked by Vote 176, the Uganda China Friendship Hospital Naguru, should be reallocated to NMS for purchase of mattresses for all general hospitals.

The justification is that the funds are meant for construction and yet the hospital has not yet identified any land on which to build houses for staff.

Our justification for this reallocation to buy mattresses is that in financial year 2011/12, the NMS set aside Shs 16 billion to purchase beds and mattresses for all health facilities in the country. However, the fourth quarter release for NMS was cut off hence failure to procure beds and mattresses. Most of the beds and mattresses in health facilities remain in a very sorry state.

The committee was informed that no provision has been made this fiscal year for beds and mattresses and it would cost USD 8.6 million equivalent to about Shs 22.49 billion to ensure that all health facilities have them.

The committee was informed that this cost involves delivery costs. However general hospitals require USD 1.683 million equivalent to about Shs 4.376 billion.

The reallocated funds realised could not provide for both beds and mattresses and so the committee settled for only mattresses to ensure that patients don’t sleep on the floor.

On procurement contracts

As a way forward, the committee recommends that leadership of the health sector be given performance contracts to the effect that this financial year’s health budget to the tune of Shs 1.2 trillion at the minimum yields the reduction of maternal mortality ratio on the current 434 per 100,000 to 300 per 100,000 and improve the immunisation coverage from the current 52 percent to at least 75 percent.

In our conclusion, and subject to the recommendations advanced above, the Committee on Health urges the committee of supply to supply to the following votes under the health sector; the following revised recurrent and development budget for the financial year 2013/2014 and would invite hon. members to look at the table below.

As I wind up, Madam Speaker, allow me thank the hon. colleagues in my committee and other ex-officio members of the committee. I should also thank the ministers of health because they were present throughout the meeting. I also want to thank the ministers of finance led by hon. Maria Kiwanuka and all the junior ministers who were invited and they made great input to our committee.

Finally, I would like to thank the hon. Minister of Health in waiting Dr Lulume Bayiga Ssalongo who participated very well and provided the alternatives we hope were incorporated in this. I beg to report.

(Entire report to appear in the bound volume of September 2013)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson and your committee for that report. Before we start the debate, taking into account the decision we took yesterday that the work of the budget should be a priority both for the ministers and for the Parliament, I had earlier authorised the four members of the Budget Committee to go and do some oversight at our mission in Nairobi. I am now rescinding that decision; they should remain and do the work of finding money for the education sector. That is hon. chair Tim Lwanga, hon. Nankabirwa Ann Marie, hon. Nebanda and hon. Junjura so the Clerk should not facilitate them to go. 

I will give five minutes for the highlights by shadow minister and then we can start the debate.

2.12
DR LULUME BAYIGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to thank hon. Dr Omona for the presentation of the committee report to which we all participated and in which a lot of our recommendations and policy proposals were integrated. Therefore, I just want to give a few highlights which I suppose the minister should take note and make improvements in the future. 

Permit also to make a comment. Although they have been represented by the minister of state, the senior ministers of health have been dodging the House especially when it comes to the budget. I remember that the former minister for health used not to attend Parliament especially during budget and then this one. I want to thank hon. Opendi for fathoming and shock absorbing - advise them to be here when I am around.
Our alternatives are seven and they were well put across:

The epicentre of our argument is not about curative medicine but prevention of people from catching diseases and health promotion is the epicentre of this, and among these programmes that were proposed would involve of universal health literacy programme, national programme on food and nutrition education. National education of safe water use, personal and domestic hygiene and sanitation, sports and active transport strategy and community counselling services. Although these are mentioned in name and even in the policy statement but the monetary implication of them is ignored. So they are sterile programmes.

Disease prevention and we focused on non-communicable diseases and our proposals were very well captured. We observe that in most of the health centres if you are lucky to find blood pressure machines, they will be dysfunctional. If you are lucky to find an equipment which detects sugar levels at health centre III, it may not even be functional. Therefore, I want to thank the chairman for making those proposals coming out teethingly.

We proposed an active transport strategy to reduce diabetes, obesity especially for well to do people including children; and non-motorised transport mechanism and this is cross cutting in all ministries but the epicentre of this advocacy must be the Ministry of Health. To ensure even early urban planning - plans for better spaces where people can continue to walk to work-(Laughter) - sports, research and learning. 

Nutrition. The nutrition action plan has been well stipulated but it is a shame that this government even pronounced itself on the nutrition action plan which needs only Shs 15 billion and they also know that malnutrition costs Uganda Shs 1.8 trillion per year, and the nutrition action plan needs only Shs 15 billion in the first year and Shs 8 billion in the subsequent years.  They have not funded for the implementation of the nutrition action plan so that we continue to get the cost of stunting and malnutrition in the country. (Applause)

The control of communicable diseases – yes, we have got immunisation and we also applaud the ministry for having the PCV or pneumococcal vaccine as one of the ingredients of other vaccines to be introduced. We need Shs 37.9 billion which has not been provided for. This Shs 37.9 billion is to prolong the access of PCV in other two years apart from the GAVI funding which was provided, and I think this one needed to be highlighted to ensure that the minister follows it up.  

We also advocate for programmes of safe water use, hygienic housing, sanitation and sewerage disposal – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you said many of your views were already accommodated by the chair - half a minute.

DR BAYIGA: I have been commenting about the management of HIV/AIDS in this country and I do not know whether I am being taken very seriously. You will realise that Uganda is a country in which there is an upsurge of HIV prevalence and all programmes that had been installed before have been abandoned. 

The agency which is supposed to be superintending over this is not even aware of the various interventions in the country and I mentioned it two days ago. 

Apart from commenting about HIV/AIDS, we have tangible proposals which we want to put across and which were not captured by the health committee. If at all you allowed me, I would just read them verbatim and that would mark the end of my presentation.  

THE SPEAKER: I thought that – the most important.

DR BAYIGA: It is only one page.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, read them quickly.

DR BAYIGGA: We need a renewed commitment and innovative strategies in the HIV/AIDS fight. It was mentioned that we need a levy to ensure that the Ugandan community foots the bill of treating its people with HIV other than relying on foreign donations, which are unreliable for the continuity of treatment. And I proposed Shs 10,000 per person per year.

THE SPEAKER: That would raise how much?  

DR BAYIGA: Of course times (*) the population.  

Improved coordination; we must craft a unified well-coordinated national response that brings together the diversified initiatives of state and non-state actors. I want to emphatically say this is absent and it is causing us a lot of trouble.  

Let us establish a realistic estimation of the HIV burden. Today, this agency says this and the ministry will say that and we do not have concrete data on what is the realistic estimation of HIV and what kind of intervention we want to undertake.

Data management. I am aware that we have got some kind of data management and I am also aware that the ministry would want to hand over this data to an American agency so that we lose our history of intervention. I want to warn that we are going to expose this and in the future, it must be taken seriously and no matter what incentive the Americans or British are going to give, the Ministry of Health must be in position to control the data information of the history and intervention of the management of this disease or we lose out.

We must address the functionality of district HIV/AIDS prevention and control units. These ones are only being talked about in name and, therefore, we do not get forward and backward linkages in the management of the interventions.

The merging or collaborative effort between TB and HIV interventions. When you go to the health facilities, you find that this is a TB intervention and then you find there is also HIV intervention - everything comes on its own and it disturbs the arrangement of the few workers you have on the ground. This collaborative effort must be made so that HIV positive people are tested for TB and TB positive people are tested for HIV and an intervention be made.  

The integration of safety nets and economic empowerment programme: According to the challenges of access to Anti Retro Viral Therapy in Uganda, which was published by Dr Bayigga Michael Lulume, now speaking -(Laughter)– we found that one of the predictors to adherence to treatment is poverty and inability to get money for transport to collect further medicines. This is happening everywhere and it is very painful. Our people –

THE SPEAKER: Just make your proposals.

DR BAYIGGA: Yes - we are saying that these safety nets must target people who have got HIV so that they can make ends meet when they go to get their refill.  

Finally, to tap into the non-state decision making and justice mechanism and re-engage the political, cultural, religious and social leadership to fight against HIV/AIDS and set a national success target. This one was engaged but it dwindled and we want to re-engage it again and I hope the Ministry for Health takes the lead. If at all they do not take the lead, then the Shadow Minister for Health should take the lead. I thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Grace Isingoma Byarugaba –

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, allow me to lay this on Table.

THE SPEAKER: What are you laying on Table?  

DR BAYIGGA: I want to lay it on Table.

THE SPEAKER: To lay?

DR BAYIGGA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: It will be transcribed in the Hansard. You hand it over to the Clerk. Lay it. Both that one and the one of the chair will be transcribed in the Hansard.

(Entire response of the shadow minister of health to appear in bound volume of September 2013)

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, this is the Alternative Health Policy Statement for Uganda for the financial year 2013/2014 presented by the Shadow Minister for Health, Dr Bayigga Michael Lulume Ssalongo. I beg to lay. (Laughter)

2.24
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you very much –

THE SPEAKER: What is the procedural issue?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was not intending to rise on a point of procedure but we are appropriating to the Ministry of Health. You were in the chair, Madam Speaker, and you directed that the accounting officer of the Ministry of Health actually be relieved of his work so that he only remains a permanent secretary. 

I have had a look at the documents supplied by the committee and one of the offences charged of the permanent secretary, who is the accounting officer, is failure to account for funds under account one. So I am only wondering whether it is procedurally right for us to proceed and appropriate to the same accounting officer who is even being charged of the offence of failure to account yet Parliament had directed that he be relieved of his work as accounting officer and only remains as a permanent secretary because under Article 164, one can be a permanent secretary without necessarily being an accounting officer. 

So, I was seeking your guidance whether it is procedurally right for us to proceed in that direction.

THE SPEAKER: You know, it is really unfortunate that the minister who declined to effect our recommendation is here but now this is the charge sheet. What can you tell the people of Uganda? The charge sheet is here and the standing orders are clear; once you are interdicted, you leave office. Yes, I am addressing you, hon. Minister for Finance, because it was with you that we had the argument on the Floor of this House over those accounting officers. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, when this matter was referred to me, the concerns of this House were duly taken into account seriously but remember, we concluded this matter that we should go and look at the law and see what the law says because I told you we did not want to move against the law – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, there is no speculation. The charge sheet is here, it is part of this report. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Well, Madam Speaker, this is evidence which I want to thank the Member for presenting to us and at that time, we did not have it; you can check your records. So, with this evidence and the rules, let us go and move according to the law. 

THE SPEAKER: That is an assurance. 

MS BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson for the very good report that he has presented to this House. I have however three issues that I want clarification on. The first one is about the prioritization of preventive health care. The chairperson of the report puts it clearly that consensus has now emerged between Parliament and the Executive on the need to focus on preventive health care. This consensus building is not very clear because for us to realize this consensus and to have this preventive health care, we should be able to see integrated planning in all the sectors that affect healthcare. We cannot talk about the Executive being in consensus with Parliament when actually in some districts, for example, in my district, safe water coverage is below 30 percent. So, where is the consensus that the chairperson is talking about? There is food insecurity in more than 50 percent of this country. So, where is the consensus?

The other day, when we were discussing the report of the Committee on Natural Resources, an issue was raised on environmental sanitation. In towns, all the waste from industries is being dumped in lakes and rivers. So, where is this consensus? I need clarification from the chairperson. 

Secondly, I am happy to note that the report highlights eradication of malaria. On page 12, the report says that indoor residual spraying has been successful in Lango, Kanungu and Acholi. I wish to propose that we put a timeline for all the districts to be covered otherwise it will not be eradication of malaria and I pray that before we pass this budget for this ministry, we get assurance that by the end of the financial year, all the districts will have been covered by this scheme.

Lastly, I have an issue on sanitation and hygiene. I am happy to realize that the committee has recommended that the ministry has to work hand in hand with the local government in areas of education, water, and health –(Member timed out_)

2.32
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee and to support the recommendation focused most especially on reducing maternal death rates from 438 per 100 to 300. I would like to support indeed this recommendation and to urge that the result from the maternal death audits should be acted upon. It is not just enough to record that a woman has died and record the causes and not do anything about it. Madam Speaker, it is unacceptable for any woman to die while giving birth!!!

I would like to support the recommendation on family planning that the government should give sufficient funds for family planning so that Ugandans can be in control of their babies, most especially women. We need to control the population growth because as we are all aware, big numbers impact negatively on service delivery and we should be aiming as a nation at quality population rather than the numbers and I believe it is a quality population that will deliver national transformation.

Madam Speaker, I am surprised that there is no ambulance policy. There should be an ambulance policy. We have agreed here before that every health centre IV at least as a minimum should have an ambulance. Mitooma Health Centre IV has been without an ambulance for the last four or five years and the minister should tell us why. When are those health centres IV and district hospitals that don’t have ambulances getting ambulances –(Member timed out_)

2.33
MS SYLVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the committee for the good report. The committee has talked about instituting performance based contracts and I want to support this proposal and also say that it should not only be for the Ministry of Health but Government should adopt a policy of performance based contracts before we can finance. We need to say that we are giving you this budget as we are appropriating it but for this, this is what must be delivered. So, I want to thank the committee for this recommendation and ask Government to take it on for all sectors. 

On family planning, the committee rightly observed that family planning influences the quality of maternal health. Indeed family planning is to maternal health what immunization is to child health. I don’t believe that there is limited funding for family planning. Actually, we have seen over the years increment in financing to family planning. The challenge we have is demand creation and ensuring that there is a right product mix. So, what I want the Minister of Health to inform this House and the country about is how they are ensuring that there is demand for family planning. The National Medical Stores have been using the push method to send contraceptives to health centres but they are not used because either the people are not aware or the kind of products they want is not what is available. So, it should be about demand creation and ensuring that there is a right product mix.

About maternal death audits, I am glad there is a hospital which shows the best practice but we need to have maternal death audits in every hospital for every woman who dies and since the report says that they already have a report, I do not want to wait for another year. Can we have that maternal deaths audit report in this House as soon as possible? Possibly as soon as after we pass this Budget so that we can establish what are the causes of maternal mortality in the country and propose appropriate interventions.

2.36
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to speak about the ambulance system; it is very unfortunate that at this time, in our country, we do not have a definite system to provide transport for patients. And what has happened is that most politicians have taken on the role of Government – to provide ambulances. Most of us in our constituencies are being blackmailed because we have not provided ambulances. And if you go around the country, you will find ambulances with writings: “Donated by honourable so and so.” (Laughter) So, I wonder if the ministry has just failed and wants us to take on its responsibility. But at least there shouldn’t be a sick person who should die simply because they cannot reach a health facility.

On page 23, I read with dismay about a person who has turned into an untouchable in the person of the Assistant Commissioner for Support Services. When you read through the litany of the issues they have raised against this person, you will wonder if there is rule of law in this country. Has impunity taken over and some people become untouchable as we know them? Is this place becoming like Sicily, where the mafias operate? (Laughter) Sincerely, how can a country that was liberated through the blood of the gallant sons of this country allow such a person to continue tormenting workers in Mulago Hospital -(Member timed out_)

2.39
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Iganga and those who use the Iganga Hospital, I wish to appreciate the government, more so the Ministry of Health for the items they gave us last month. These included mattresses, beds among others. For some time, we have been complaining because this hospital has been having papyrus mats, buveera but last month, the assistance brought a smile to the people of Iganga who use that hospital. So I want to go on record in appreciating Government and the Ministry of Health.

About indoor residual spraying, I think this should have been the way to go; we are wasting a lot of money on mosquito nets and injectables and yet they are not yielding results. The way to go is for all of us to embrace indoor residual spraying and it will solve the issue of malaria once and for all. Hon. Members, I appeal to all of you to support this programme so that we can get rid of malaria.

The issue of health centres II has to be squarely addressed by the ministry because we have very many that were constructed in the countryside but they are now white elephants. Moreover, Government is now emphasising health centres III. We want to know the fate of these structures; should we consider them a loss and just write them off? So Government should come out clearly and give these health centres II codes so that they can access drugs and all other amenities -(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The reason as to why referral hospitals are congested is because the patients are not accessing service at the lower levels. That is, they tend to refer themselves to the referral hospitals. That is why Jinja Hospital, which was designed to receive 1,500 patients, admits over 4,000 now. Thank you.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, honourable member, for that information -(Member timed out_)

2.42
MS JUDITH AMOIT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done. On page 6, the committee recommends that the Parliament and the Executive should work together to prescribe a solution to the problem of medicine, human resource. The committee talks of a lot of things that need to be done: they talk of recruitment, retention and motivation of health workers. As much as I appreciate the committee’s observation, I have not seen where it talks about the maintenance and rehabilitation of the main hospitals.

The main hospital in Pallisa is dilapidated but no attention has been given to it in order to improve it. And most of the people are running away from the hospital because the state of the structures is worrying. So it is my humble request that the ministers in charge of the Ministry of Health should take time to visit such hospitals.

The second issue is on sanitation and hygiene. You will realise that, especially in the main hospitals, water is lacking and yet water is life. And I will reiterate that in Pallisa, where I have experience, we have lacked water for a very long time. And if the ministry is going to be negotiating, I do not know how long the negotiations will take for us to get water -(Member timed out_)

2.44
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the work well done. I have just few comments: One is about the budget of the Ministry of Health – 40 percent of it is spent at the centre while the rest is spent at the grassroots. Can Parliament, please, call the ministry to order so that much more money is spent at the health centres at the grassroots. 

Secondly, on page 10, we were told about the health workers not accessing the payroll. I really want us to call the Ministry of Public Service to order; are they being efficient? Why are the health workers not accessing the payroll? Are we just going to sit back and say, “The Ministry of Public Service has not put these people on the payroll” and do nothing about it? I think we should give the Ministry of Public Service a deadline so that the health workers access the payroll.

The committee also talked about bonding students for a year who pursue medical courses based on government sponsorship after they complete their studies. But I think one year is not long enough because I know it is very expensive to maintain a medical student in our public universities. My suggestion is that we bond them for three years so that they work for some good time in our medical facilities before they can leave for greener pastures –(Member timed out_)

2.46
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative):Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by appreciating the committee for highlighting very important issues including maternal health; the debt audit that we were talking about and, of course, family planning. But I want to note that they left out a very important issue, which is up-scaling the youth-friendly-services that we need across the country.

I am totally convinced that this is a sure way to deal with the very high maternal mortality issue, especially if we target providing reproductive health services for the young people. This committee has noted that we have 1.1 unplanned pregnancies this year. It is also evident that more than half of these pregnancies coming from the age-group between 15 – 19 years. So, this issue of maternal health has a young face; and I am sure that the honourable minister knows that. The highest mortality rates in the country are here with us; and if we do not deal with the young people, we are not going to receive the good news that we want in this area. 

I keep asking the minister whenever we meet in the corridors on the plans she has to deal with teenage pregnancies in this country. I have engaged with her many times outside Parliament. But I am not quite sure what plans the ministry has to address unwanted pregnancies, especially given the fact that if we dealt with the youths, we would have solves more than a half of the maternal deaths which we have. Even those debt audits which we are emphasising would be understood better. 

So, I want to make an amendment on the committee report at an appropriate time to make evidence on that particular issue. Thank you.

2.48
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Committee on Health for bring out a very good report. I have four points to make. The first one is, I have read through the report but have not seen any recommendation for health centre IIIs in every sub country. On average, over 30 percent sub countries have no health centre IIIs. My brother Ouma was advocating for health centre IIs; but there are a number of sub countries without health centre IIIs. 

Secondly, you talked of village health teams. I want to add that village health teams should capture people who know how to read and write. When you go to some areas, you find that a whole village health team is composed of illiterate people. So, when they go out, sensitisation because a problem.

On the side of health centre IVs, I got a chance to move throughout the whole country before health and education were split. There is lack of supervision –(Member timed out_)

2.51
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The problems of the health sector are known to all of us. I think it is time for us to consider steps we can take to solve these problems. I know progress is being made but there is a lot we can do. 

Our colleague got an accident two weeks ago. It took us two hours to get an ambulance to transport her from Nakasongola to Nakasero. Luweero Hospital did not have an ambulance; we had to borrow an ambulance from the Army. 

Hon. Colleagues, you can remember, when hon. Turyahikayo got an accident, it was the army that gave us a chopper to save her life. I visited Mbarara Hospital to see one of the people who was involved in an accident. They did not have a stretcher to take him to the theatre. He was carried with the blood dropping on the people who were carrying him. 

So, I think the solution is with the Ninth Parliament; and I think we can make a difference. I want to make a recommendation on 7.4. First, the government considers borrowing money to at least equip 14 referral hospitals to a minimum standard package. That can be done. We have borrowed money before and some of it has not been used. We borrowed money for growing rice; we borrowed money for UMI – (Interjections) – and even for the ID project. Why can’t we borrow, even if it is Shs 100 million, to restock the 14 referral hospitals to the standard that is required by the health standards of the world? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.53
MS ROSE IRIAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the work well done. I want to tackle three issues within the report. One is on the recruitment of health workers. In the Karamoja Region, we lack medical personnel. I know that people fear going to Karamoja. But let me inform the whole nation that Karamoja is now calm. We need more health workers to be employed in Karamoja. 

The other issue I want to talk about is on water. We lack water in most of the health units in Karamoja Region. And you know that water is life; we cannot have good medical services without water. 

The third issue that I want to talk about is power. The government recently promised that there would be power in all the districts in Uganda. Let me inform this House that it is terrible in Karamoja. The poles were erected and the wiring was also done, but now the termites have eaten them up before any power is provided –(Member timed out_)

2.56
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the month of July, I visited about 12 hospitals in Eastern Uganda and most of them had the same problem. It looked like the Ministry of Health plans for hospitals, which they do not understand. The population figures are for 10 years ago and they do not know the number of people who visit these hospitals; the out-patients and in-patients and, therefore, they do not plan for drugs, beds or water. 

The monies they gave hospitals 10 years ago is what they are still giving them and that is a big problem. We also notice that most hospitals have huge electricity and water bills of over Shs 100 million each. They will never pay these bills unless there is a special programme for them to pay those bills but we pretend that we are giving them money.

We went to Kamuli Hospital and saw a child dying at around 7.00 p.m. There was no blood in that hospital and the helpless mother had been told to take the child to Jinja where we had been and there was no blood. There must be a programme to have regional blood banks. As it is, the arrangement is not a good one at all.

I would like the minister to tell me when the old hospitals, including Bugiri Hospital, are going to be repaired. Since Obote built them, they have never been repaired, equipped -(Member timed out_)

2.58
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to draw the attention of Members to human resources on health on page 8. We realise that the committee learnt that some doctors, who had been recruited and reported for work, left their stations because they took long to access the payroll and their appointment letters did not show the promised retention allowance. Others left because of lack of accommodation. 

This is a serious issue and this frustrates the efforts of this Parliament if we recommend one thing and the reverse is being done. In the committee’s recommendation, they say that the ministry should do a second recruitment. This is uneconomical. Why didn’t you include that package in the first recruitment? Lives are being lost and you are there. We want to hear your position on that.

If I am to refer to Lira regional referral hospital, it should have 49 doctors but at the moment, they have only nine. This is not even a quarter of the doctors that are required in the referral hospital. This is a situation where the patients are referred from the referral hospital to the general hospital and you can imagine this situation. Please, if only you could support that regional referral hospital and you add about five or six more doctors, it would really help very much. 

On Mulago Hospital and the Cancer Institute, I want to appreciate those who work in the Cancer Institute especially where radiotherapy is conducted –(Member timed out_)

3.01
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to comment on the issue of condoms in the country. Members, this is a very serious matter. The availability of condoms in the country is so critical that if we had these condoms available in slums and the small hotels therein, in academic and other institutions especially in the toilets, even here in Parliament where they are available only at certain times, it would be so helpful.

Countries like China have insisted and it is public policy that when you put up a hotel, however small it is or any public place whether an office or a small company operating in some place, you provide a little box with condoms.

We began this campaign as youth MPs and at times, the condoms that are at the National Medical Stores expire in their hands because they do not have enough resources to distribute them. 

I implore the Executive, particularly Ministry of Health, to give this issue due importance. It is also within our powers, as Parliament, to pass a Bill where we demand that all offices, whether Government or private, ensure that there are condoms provided for their staff wherever they are and even beyond offices to include small hotels in slums and other places -(Member timed out_)

3.03
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the Committee on Health for the job well done. They have tackled many areas and I would like to first of all begin by addressing myself to the issue on page 18 about the Cancer Institute. Cancer is a disease that demands a lot of money and time in Uganda. This is the single national institute in Uganda, which is very congested so much so that there is even nowhere to sleep.

Secondly, we have only one radiotherapy machine serving everybody who comes to the Cancer Institute. The charge is about Shs 300,000. How can an ordinary Ugandan coming from the deepest end of Oyam, Arua or Rukungiri get this money? Some of the patients were even going back to sell land and animals to get this money.

I would like to bring to the attention of the House and the minister that it was written that the drugs in this institute are free but the drugs, which are free are the ones, which are less expensive. For the very expensive drugs, you are told to go and buy them from outside the hospital. When you reach the pharmacies, some of the drugs can cost about Shs 400,000 - 500,000.

There was a time I had taken my patient along with a woman from Otuke. When she was told that the cost was Shs 450,000, she threw the child she was holding and she started running amok. I had to pick the child and she told me, “Let me go to Parliament to honourable” - By then, it was the former Minister in charge of Lands -(Member timed out_)

3.05
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the committee for the report. I will pick up from where hon. Gerald Karuhanga stopped.

It is a shame that this country thinks only about male condoms and completely forgets about female condoms. Shame on you! I saw a female condom for the first time in my life when I went to Zambia and they were all over the place. You go to the wash rooms and they are there. So, the Ministry of Health should style up. We need female condoms.

I would like to draw the attention of the House to page 10 of the committee report -(Laughter) – there is a table –

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members. Yes, you are laughing but there are female condoms. Yes, they are there.

3.07
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for presenting the report. However, I want to comment on one issue concerning nutrition.  

We have only one nutrition centre in this country, but which is also limited to only children and that is the Mwana Mugimu Centre at Mulago Hospital. I have heard the chairperson of the committee saying that this time they want to focus much more on preventing non-communicable diseases. But you will realise that obesity is interlinked to all those other diseases just like other heart diseases. However, as I have said, we do not now have a facility for adults at the national referral hospital.

So, I would like to ask the minister to ensure this is prioritised because it is very necessary; it also helps on bringing down the so many communicable diseases that we suffer from. I had the opportunity to serve as an intern at the Cancer Ward and I want to inform the House that most of the cancer patients die because they are not well fed; their feeding usually details that and the rest.

But the fact that nutrition is not mainstreamed, because we lack the policy, we end up losing many people. So, I just want to ask the minister to ensure the Nutrition Department in the Ministry of Health is funded but also that they should ensure we are moving to have a fully functional nutritional facility or centre at the national referral hospital and at the regional referral hospitals. At the end of the day, you will be able to curb these other non-communicable diseases and also educate the masses about good nutrition and how to prevent such diseases. Thank you.

3.09
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this golden opportunity. As I look at this committee report, my heart is holding heavy. I have read through it and found that there is no mention of the nodding disease, which has cost this country a lot and left us still wondering whether the generation we are having is still alive.

You were in that chair when the issue of the nodding disease came to this House about a year and half ago. There were proposals made to Government. But as we speak, and I want to report this, the nodding syndrome in Northern Uganda – we do not have any children on nutrition as it was proposed. There is only half a kilogramme of beans and posho given to each child, but which does not amount to nutrition. We do not have a functioning centre where such children should be kept. Most of such children are in the villages collapsing into fires and water and some dying.

As I speak, there is the worst situation that some of these children who are about 24 years of age have been defiled. We already have 12 grandchildren from these nodding children but Government has not taken interest to protect these children from this unknown disease.

Madam Speaker, this report does not even mention the fundamentals of research that was commissioned by the scientific conference in Kampala to be undertaken by the country for us to get to the root cause of this problem of the nodding syndrome. Even the little amount of money that was approved by this House just released recently and also just to some few people. Actually, one of the doctors has been asked to account for it yet he has not done the research. In other words, the money for doing research on the nodding disease that was approved by this House was diverted – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: No, the point has been made.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.13
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for presenting this report. Unfortunately, I notice that the committee left out a very important plague that has been killing people in Okoro and Vura, which are in Zombo and Arua districts respectively. 

This is a very dangerous disease and I wonder why the committee did not talk about it in this report. The disease is very much in Okoro County and other places like Kammu, Zewu, Waara and Atiak and in the whole of Vurra in Arua. The disease usually occurs during the dry season.

Madam Speaker, every year, this disease kills very many people. Usually, it starts from Democratic Republic of Congo into Uganda and specifically our area. So, I would like to know from the minister what plans they have to eradicate this plague. This is very important because to have a plague in the 21st Century and is a very serious matter.

My point number two is about the health centre IVs. Zombo District has got no single health centre IV as we talk. Yes, it has health centre IIIs but with no single health centre IV. It has only one missionary hospital, which is Nyapeya Hospital, but which is also a private hospital. 

So, if a person is sick and they have to be referred to any hospital, they will have to either go to Arua or Nebbi, but which places are very far.

3.14
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for givingme this opportunity. I also want to thank the committee for doing a good job in producing this report. I want to comment on the lighting system in our health centres. This is a very serious problem and all health centres are in blackout. Those with solar panels still cannot get power because the panels are down. Those with electricity cannot manage to pay the bills. So, you find midwives using their telephone touches to get light in order to help the mothers. So, I appeal to the ministry to find a way of helping our people get out of that problem.

I want to thank the committee for tackling the issue of ambulances. There are so many rotting ambulances at most of the health centres. When are you disposing of those ambulances? But also let me thank the committee for commenting on the system of ambulances that is in place. That system is not a good one. We need to come up with another system that can help us get fuel for those ambulances plus taking care of them in terms of mechanical repairs.

Finally, I want to talk about mattresses. We have a problem of the lack of mattresses in our health centres. I want to thank the committee – in their report, it is said that they have identified Shs 16 billion. That is very good and please, Ministry of Health, do it very fast. We shall be very grateful. Thank you very much.

3.17
Ms SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is on the issue of health insurance. Many of us are victims of health insurance - very unscrupulous people. And if we are talking about the Bill coming to this House, I think it is long overdue. We need this money put probably in the government health centres because many of these health insurance service providers are conning us. I will tell you, Madam Speaker, for many of the people here, the money we put in for health insurance is not doing anything. We are not getting the services that we are entitled to.

When we go to the issue of family planning, you know many of our cultures do not work very well with this family planning issue. So, I think the government should come out clearly and sensitise people on family planning that it is not only for women but it is also for men. Many women are barred from taking their family planning pills or getting injections. If a man got you doing that, the next time he will tell you to pack up your things and go back to your father’s house. 

Where are we going to go if we are not putting a lot of money into sensitisation for this? If we put money into buying contraceptives and many of them are expiring in some health centres, especially the rural health centres, then we are just wasting. We need to sensitise people to know what family planning is all about and how useful it is to our country. On many occasions we contradict ourselves: we go out there and give information that we need a big population to provide market for our things in this country; and on the other hand, we say we need to have a healthy population which we can handle. We are sitting on a time bomb over this issue. We need to sensitise people and they should know that family planning is not for only women.

3.19
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join colleagues in thanking the committee for their report. I have many issues to raise but let me start with what the honourable member for Oyamsaid about the Cancer Institute. The Cancer Institute in this country is really congested and there are so many people who are dying of Cancer. These days, it is like if you get Cancer, it is a ticket to death. I want to call upon the House that let us move towards what we want. If it is money, if it means even borrowing - after all, we have been borrowing a lot - why can’t we borrow money and then equip the Cancer Institute? 

Secondly, I want to associate myself with what the committee said about family planning. Previously, we used to have outreaches and these medical people would go out as they go to immunise and they would do family planning. They would advise and it was reaching our people. Like hon. Amoding was saying, on these early pregnancies, there used to be outreaches to secondary schools and they used to help our children very much. I want to urge the ministry to look for some funds so that we top up this. 

I would like to go to experiences in my district. I represent Kween District. On the issue of ambulances, as we look for the ambulance policy I would like to urge the ministry that there are districts - mine inclusive - that do not have any transport system. We do not have an ambulance in Kween District. I have been moving to the ministry and I have talked to the minister. I want to urge the minister to look for some money and give us an ambulance. Looking at my district which is very mountainous - the terrain is hard and the roads are bad - we need transport so that we save our people.  

Number three, the referral system that the committee was talking about - the guidelines for upgrading. I would wish to have that one. I would like to urge the ministry, together with all the medical people, to look at the affirmative action. There are places in this country where it is difficult to move to -(Member timed out_)

3.21
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA: (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo) Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work well done. I want to sympathise with our Government because -(Interjections) - in most cases, we have been talking and every time we are talking of funds in every sector. The funds are not enough. And now the funds are not enough and my concern is that we have some few greedy individuals in this country who are putting the money into their bellies and the Ugandans are suffering! And when they are taken to court they are not handled well; they come back and enjoy their money when Ugandans are dying. 

Madam Speaker, it is a very big concern. We need to have faithful servants who are able to handle the finances of this country so that we can be in position to deliver services to all parts of Uganda.

I come from Namayingo in the islands. We have some islands which do not even have health services. There is even no health centre II. We do not have the water ambulance. They cannot be transported from one place to another and at the end of the day, we have seen many children and mothers dying when other people are enjoying the services. It is quite unfortunate. 

Prevention is better than cure. We have the village health team who should be motivated and equipped so that they can be able to prevent some of these illnesses, which affect our people and at the end of the day they cause death of many children and mothers. If they can be well facilitated and if they can be given the necessary tools, they can be able to prevent some of the diseases which are affecting us. We hear of mothers dying. Some of them do not even go to the health centre –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I know that this subject is very important but we have two other reports. So, I want to ask the minister to respond. But before that, I just wanted to mention that in connection with the services on the islands, last week when I was in South Africa, in between the meeting, I went to see a facility where they have mobile ambulances which can be configured for $80,000. You can put a dental clinic; you can put an eye clinic; you can put an operational theatre. I told them that we have several islands and they also showed me a design of a speed boat ambulance. So, I want to sit with the minister and try to market it with her and also with the President. It will help us. 

Let us hear from the Leader of the Opposition and then our minister. 

3.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I had an opportunity to go around some of the hospitals with some of my colleagues. One of the main issues we are finding in hospitals, for example, Lugazi, which is on the main road, Jinja, Iganga, Bugiri mention all of them, there is no water. If they have to get water, like in Lugazi, they buy a jerrican of water at Shs 1,000. Otherwise, they have to wait during the rainy season and that is when the patients can get free water. And when we went to the theatre you could see blood around because of lack of water. And you know what happens around Lugazi. 

The reason they gave was that they have failed to pay water bills to National Water and Sewerage Corporation and that was a serious issue. And it was throughout the whole area - and electricity. In fact, yesterday, when I saw that Umeme gets money from the escrow account - I do not know why they never got the money from the escrow account for those hospitals because those are also Government institutions. Madam Speaker, it is very bad! 

Two, congestion in hospitals is also on the increase. It is a serious issue because for beds which were meant for 30 people, you get 200 people. And they said that sometimes when people who are feeling better come in they even become sick. My brother hon. Muwuma talked about Iganga. We are happy that they got some mattresses but there were more issues and I think we should thank my brother “Panadol” for having demonstrated alone. That brought those dividends to us. Hon. “Panadol” should be thanked a lot. 

Madam Speaker, we got another issue - you see, NMS claims to have drugs but they apply in most of these places what they call “push down”, whether you have ordered or not they will send you drugs and the drugs have expired in many of these areas. The reason is that they order for drugs where they want to make money –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank You, hon. Leader of the Opposition; information about drugs and supplies of family planning services. In Obongi, we have increasing complaints from women who are using family planning services. They have problems of prolonged bleeding. I do not know whether it is part of the effect of the expired drugs or products which they use. 

There are also problems of names of health workers, who are already recruited and have been serving, disappearing from the payroll. So, you go to the CAO or human resource office at the district and there are complaints.

This information needs to be taken care of; that is, of people missing their names from the payroll and the side effects of family planning. We should not only advocate for money from donors some of these family planning services are very dangerous to our population. Scientists of Uganda should advise.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, NMS could be a monster that we have created because of monopoly, for example, gloves could be in the open market at Shs 1,000 but NMS will price at Shs 2,000. We are saying that NMS is a dangerous monster that we have created.

If you go to Joint Medical Stores, drugs there are cheaper than those at NMS which has economies of scale, getting interest- free money and they are over pricing it. We discovered that in some hospitals, when the drugs are not there, they are supposed to given a certificate to go and buy out. NMS will never give that because they want to monopolise, they do not want money to leave and yet people are dying in need of those drugs.

I want to look at Bugiri, that hospital should be closed. If you go to the maternity, the sewage is leaking in the maternity ward; if you go to the toilets, they were filled many years ago. Patients use candles; the situation in Bugiri is bad. If you go to the staff quarters, there was a sewage which was built sometime back it is leaking from the compound. 

Bugiri Hospital is on the main road, many people who get accidents go there; if Bugiri can be abandoned, what about Karamoja which is not on the main road, what about Bududa. That is the place where the chief whip comes from and she is one of the members of cabinet that can convince cabinet to put some drugs and treatment utensils in that area.

Ambulances; I must say that we have some places with ambulances. I want to agree with my sister there, in most areas the ambulances were grounded many years ago, no spares, no fuel. In some areas when a patient like a woman wants to deliver, a villager whose income is Shs 1,000 per month, they will say first put fuel before they pick them. In the end, the patients are not delivered to the hospitals. So there is a problem of maintenance of ambulances, but there are areas which do not have ambulances at all. There must be a maintenance plan for ambulances and also fuel so that they are able to take especially our mothers who are going to deliver.

When my brother Karuhanga talked about condoms people laughed. Condom is a serious issue; currently on the market there are fake condoms which the Ministry of Health is aware about. There is a petition that there are companies, which have been authorised in China to bring condoms but then there are more fake condoms on the market. When people put them on, they burst, some of them are short and this is a very dangerous item.

The issue of condoms must be addressed by the Ministry of Health so that these companies which are bringing wrong condoms are banned. People are saying that there are many fake condoms on the market and there is a petition in Parliament about these fake condoms. The Ministry of Health must come and tell us whether these people who petition are wrong or not.

But also it is also important that there is a policy. All public areas, bars, dancing halls should have these condoms. Condoms are about Shs 10,000 but assuming they are Shs 3,000. For somebody who goes dig, he is paid Shs 1,500 to Shs 2,000. On that pay he is supposed to have food and whatever, he has to make a decision either to buy or not to buy a condom. The reason why AIDS is on an increase is because the cost of condoms is preventing the citizens from acquiring them.

Ministry of Health should come up with a policy on how to assist these peasants so that they can acquire condoms at a cheaper price so that we can cut on the costs of deaths or sickness. When they fall sick we use about Shs 500,000 for ARVs –(Interruption)

MS ABIA: Thank you very much, the Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. Now you are talking passionately about condoms and most institutions in this country including this Parliament have the HIV/AIDS at workplace policy. When we used to have those good facilities in our toilets before renovation, there used to be some condoms called “love” that used to be placed in those toilets, of late they have vanished. I have just confirmed that in the toilets around they are no longer there. What has happened, is it that institutionally we are also incapacitated to provide those services for the hon. Members in a year?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I want to conclude.

MR ALEPER: Just to make the point very strong, what the Leader of opposition is raising. Recently, I was having a meeting with young people in my constituency and I can assure you when somebody is in dire need of having a woman, there is a desperation and balance between saving Shs 2,000 to buy a soda for that girl or woman and buying condoms. Now, this young man became desperate and was forced to use a kaveera. (Interjections) Yes. So, he used Shs 2,000 to buy this girl soda and later, he was forced to use a kaveera because he thought the kaveera would prevent him from getting HIV.  

It is a serious matter because even as we talk now, there is scarcity of condoms in the country and we have to think about these peasants. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, Membersmay be laughing but it is a serious matter. The reason –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, please, conclude.

MS KAYAGI: Thankyou, Madam Speaker. The information that I would like to give the House and to my sister, hon. Bako about lack of condoms in Parliament is that as Committee on HIV, we realised that in Parliament, Uganda Cares used to distribute condoms to Parliament for free. When there was shortage of condoms in the country, they stopped distributing those condoms to Parliament.  And as a chair, it was a concern because in this institution, we do not only have Members of Parliament but also the staff of Parliament, we have the press, the visitors, the interns that come here and the public.  All of us are using these toilets and washrooms.  

So, we asked the Minister for Health to provide condoms to this Parliament and I want to report that last week, the Minister for Health brought for us 24,000 condoms in eight boxes. The only challenge is to contact the HIV focal person in Parliament to ensure that these condoms are put in the dispensers in our wash rooms - but the condoms are here.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I just want to advise that because of the renovations going on in all those facilities, they have been withdrawn for the time being. When the facilities are back, the “nankanis” will also come back. (Laughter) Please, conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, what my brother from Moroto Municipality has said is a serious matter; people use buveeras! I was in Case Clinic some time back – that is where I go - I saw many young men coming in and going out. They park motorcycles around Case Clinic. I asked why the young men were not going to the reception; were they going to see the doctors before us? The nurse told us that they were going to use the bathroom and to basically pick condoms put there and use them. So, if that is what they do - those that have boda-bodas, what about those who have nothing?

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, on equipment in hospitals. In Kamuli Hospital, there was a Spanish loan we got and we got a scanner and an x-ray.  Madam Speaker, for seven years, this equipment has never worked and when they tried to test it, it never worked and the warrant has expired.  It was still new – the very day they brought a scanner or somebody to run the x-ray, the system was not working and the warranty had expired. 

We went to Bugiri, Jinja and Tororo and the x-rays are not working. While the x-rays and scanners of Government do not work, the ones of the private places work because they tell the people to go there and they are charged.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health must tell us what plans they have as far as maintaining equipment in hospitals is concerned because this is very dangerous. We have very expensive equipment but it is not well maintained and it is not serving the purpose and the wanainchi who come for the facilities are told to go out and pay, yet, they are already dying. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I will give you seven minutes to respond.

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. The recommendations therein are noted and various issues have been mentioned.  

I just would like to inform Members that the Ministry of Health budget looks big. It is not for the headquarters - this money is actually for projects and most of this money is donor funded and all this money goes to the districts to cover the critical areas of immunisation, HIV/AIDS, TB and even purchase of equipment. Our budget from the Government of Uganda I think is only Shs 27 billion and that is the money for the headquarters – (Interjections)- for the headquarters, please, let us not -

On the issue of human resource for health, yes, it is true. As a ministry, we note the challenges that some of our health workers have been accessing the payroll and some of them were actually removed. We have arranged for a meeting with the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance and very soon we will be able to meet so that we can resolve this challenge.  

The issue of the village health teams - we do have guidelines and regulations that actually exist and we are in the process of reviewing that although we do not have the policy currently as it is also being developed. 

On malaria and the indoor residual spraying - this is an effective way of handling the malaria epidemic in this country. However, as pointed out in the committee report, this is an expensive method of controlling malaria and we can only use it when we have the funding.

Regarding the Uganda Heart Institute; this matter is being handled and I think there is evidence that was presented to the committee. We have already presented our paper to Cabinet for consideration to turn Uganda Heart Institute into a public body and we hope it will be on the agenda for next week.

On the Health Insurance Bill, the draft was prepared and submitted to the Ministry of Finance. We are waiting for the certificate of financial implication and then it will be discussed by Cabinet and brought to Parliament. We are also fast-tracking this.

Madam Speaker, the issue of the Assistant Commissioner, Madam Kantarama - as a ministry, we have noted this challenge that has been existing and, of course, we are also going to handle this in the meeting that we are going to have with the Ministry of Public Service. Members should note that this lady was transferred sometime back from the Mulago Hospital to the Ministry of Health Headquarters and she went to court and court ruled in her favour and that is how she got back to Mulago Hospital. But we are going to discuss with the Ministry of Public Service to see how the matter can be resolved. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know what –(Interruption)


MS ANITE: Thank you very much. I sit on the Committee of Health and the issue of Madam Kantarama came to the committee and we requested her to appear in the committee, and she did appear before us but she did not give us a satisfactory answer and hence our recommendation.

We asked the minister who was not hon. Sarah Opendi but hon. Elioda Tumwesigye who came to the committee and we asked them to give us a response of what kind of action they had taken towards the challenges between Madam Kantarama and the Executive Director of Mulago Hospital. Now what is happening right now in Mulago is that Madam Kantarama and the executive director cannot work and actually, work has been paralysed in Mulago. There is nothing that the people in Mulago can do because of this. They do not know who to pay allegiance to. The institution has been crippled. We asked them for a response and the minister said he was going to have a meeting with Madam Kantarama and give us feedback but its three weeks today and the hon. Minister is back on the Floor to report that the ministry is going to have a meeting and see how they can harmonise this. I want to report to this House, through you, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, what is there to discuss with someone who has stolen government property? Why should you have a meeting with her if the facility she is using is a government facility?

DR BAYIGA: Madam Speaker, I think the minister who is also new in the ministry is afraid of handling this matter, and should be honest with Parliament so that Parliament directs the Committee on Health to handle this matter expeditiously and reports back. This lady is very deep-rooted and has godmothers and godfathers within the ministry who want that status quo to remain. That is where she derives her power of existence and even ensures that she does not obey the chain of command and reporting structure at Mulago Hospital, rendering the whole organisational structure ineffective. So, Madam Speaker, I really recommend that you direct the Committee on Health to investigate this one expeditiously and report back. Let it become a parliamentary issue because the ministry has failed and it is just dancing away from the issue. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please conclude.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This matter came to our attention just recently. It was not known to me; perhaps it was known to my other colleague who is not here. So, this is why I said that we are going to handle this matter. If you give us chance, we could report maybe in two or three weeks’ time on this matter but – 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Minister, three weeks is a long time. If we got a loan from the East African Development Bank for the people of Uganda and the facility is being used by one individual, really how much time do you need to handle that? You need to report to us next week. It is very urgent.

MS OPENDI: Okay, Madam Speaker. We will get back to you in one week as directed.

Regarding the ambulances, yes this is a challenge. However, maybe just allow me report that we are actually trying to come up with a policy on the ambulances in this country. However, we have distributed ambulances with support from the Belgium Technical Corporation: six were distributed to West Nile at the end of last year, six to the Rwenzori region, 11 are being procured under the ADB loans and will be in the country very soon and we also have 27, which are due to be procured using the World Bank funds and they will be distributed to various facilities in the country. 

The Alternative and Comprehensive Medicine Bill is before Cabinet for discussion. It was on the agenda last week but we were not able to handle it but hopefully, next week. 

MR OKUMU: I am just seeking clarification from the minister because she has been talking about procuring ambulances and all this. These days when you travel upcountry including my constituency, you are surprised at seeing the word “ambulance” written on some vehicles that actually would practically be impossible to be an ambulance. Some of them are actually Suzuki Samurai ambulances with this short chassis that even a pregnant woman, leave alone sitting properly, cannot even bend and this is what they are providing to facilitate the women from the rural areas to go and have delivery in health centres. So, the clarification I am seeking is, if she could let us know what type of vehicles those ambulances are, we would then rest assured otherwise to just mention “ambulances” will not really serve any purpose.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is on the abuse of these ambulances - and I wish the minister could listen. The Minister of Health did provide an ambulance to Apapa Health Centre IV in Kasilo sub-county, Serere but this ambulance has been taken over by the DHO Serere District. The people of Kasilo are going to demonstrate over this matter. We don’t want to be teargased like they handled hon. “Panadol”. So, I did communicate to the PS, Mr Lukwago, on this matter but he told me that their hands are tied. These are officers of the district and I was told the district passed an illegal resolution to hand over the ambulance to the DHO to use as his transport. People have so far died as a result of this. I have brought it to the attention of the chairman but they are all adamant. So, I want the Minister of Health - if it means recentralising those offices, then let it be. Even if your hands are tied, I want you to take action. Otherwise, I am going to lead a demonstration.

THE SPEAKER: You will be like “Panadol” – (Laughter) - Minister, please conclude. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am glad that hon. Elijah Okupa knows the challenges that we are facing. With the decentralisation policy, we actually have no clear authority over the district. So, it is something that we are also thinking about on whether we should not recentralize the staff back so that we can be able to also handle the other challenges like what was raised by the Member of Parliament from Nakapiripirit because when districts advertise and staff do not apply for these jobs, we have no authority to force them to go to area X or area Y and yet if they were under the central government or under us, we would be able to advertise centrally and then force them to the various districts. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I did not want to rise on a point of order but I thought I should because the minister is on the Floor saying she does not understand the functional relationship between the ministry and the local government. The law is clear that the ministry can second staff to the district. Actually, the law clearly stipulates the roles and responsibilities of the central government like policy setting and policy on ambulance use. You still have the powers. Is the hon. Minister in order not to know the roles and responsibilities of the central government of the Ministry of Health over the local government when actually she is empowered by the law to take the policy for the local government in her ministry?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the minister knows but she was advising us about the challenge she has encountered in implementing that law. Please conclude. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. The ambulances that we have actually been distributing are the Samurai type. They have patient beds and they are cheap to maintain and that is why they are actually sent to the Health Centre IVs but various people have been donating ambulances to the districts sometimes even without our knowledge. 

So, Madam Speaker, I do agree with Dr Lulume who says that we need to renew our commitment on HIV/AIDS and I think that is what we are doing; this is why we have re-engaged the top leadership – we are working closely with the religious leaders and cultural leaders to ensure that everybody continues with the sensitisation messages to discourage our youth from engaging in reckless sexual behaviour.

Madam Speaker, on family planning, this is actually another area we are facing a lot of challenges; the unmet need in the country currently stands at 34 percent and yet we are all aware that due to unplanned pregnancies, some of our mothers have lost their lives especially when they resort to abortion using crude methods. So, as Members of Parliament, please note that it is not only the Ministry of Health that should create the demand for the family planning commodity but we should work together as stakeholders in this country to sensitise and encourage the mothers to use the family planning commodities and also encourage men to support their partners.

The issue of female condoms was raised by the Member of Parliament from Kaberamaido and I want to inform you that there are female condoms in this country but the only challenge we have is that the demand is low. And like I already said, we have to work together to create the demand. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, as clearly explained, I did deliver 24,000 condoms. However, maybe, allow me say this on the Floor: It is important that these condoms are not thrown everywhere. I have gone to some of the loos and you will find them strewn even on the Floor and that can easily create challenges like diseases. It is important that a good facility is created somewhere at the corner of the loos so that they are kept safely – they are male condoms but even women pick them for their men to use. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, soon I will be issuing a statement on the fake condoms – yes, there is a petition and we have actually been – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to put the question that save for recurrent and development expenditure under Vote 014 and Vote 114. Vote 115, Vote 116 – I will come to that - Votes 134, 151, 162, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175 and 176. I put the question that, save for those, the rest of the report is adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Now, Members, on the issue of the accounting officer, when we come to the money, we shall not give it until they have responded to the committee’s recommendation. 

Hon. Members, there are two very important reports coming; so, I will suspend the House for one hour so that you go and have lunch and come back with energy. The reports include things like land and roads and you cannot miss that kind of debate. So, House suspended until 5.00 O’clock.

(The House was suspended at 4.00 p.m.)

 (On resumption at 5.15 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. Can I invite the Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to come to the podium? 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014  

THE SPEAKER: There is no shadow today? You are the shadow?

5.16
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraaro): Madam Speaker, I am here this afternoon, to present the report of the Committee onPhysical Infrastructure on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2013/2014.

It is quite a big report but I will endeavor to bring out the salient highlights of the report as much as I can.

Before I make the presentation, I request to lay on Table the minutes of the proceedings of the various meetings that we had that generated this report.

I also beg to lay on Table the Opposition alternative policy statement on Housing, Urban Development for the financial year 2013/2014. 

I also beg to lay on Table the Opposition alternative policy statement on Works, Transport and Infrastructure.

Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay on Table the Opposition alternative policy statement on lands and physical planning 2013/2014.

I also beg to lay on Table a copy of the report that I am going to read. I beg to lay.

This report is prepared in accordance with Articles 90 and 155 of the Constitution of Uganda, and Section 9 of the Budget Act, 2001. Pursuant to Rules 144, 135 and 147 (d) and (e) of the Rules of Procedure, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure is mandated to – Members can read down to the page.

In Section I, the committee considered the following votes:
    (i) Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport;
    (ii) Vote 113 - UNRA;
    (iii) Vote 118 - Uganda Road Fund.

While in Section II, the committeeconsidered the following votes:
    (iv) Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development;  and
    (v) Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission.

Methodology

The committee met and deliberated with ministers and officials from the following Government entities: 
    (i) Ministry for Works and Transport;

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, for those, the Members can read. You go to the areas and their recommendations.

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, let me bring this one out also in the middle of the page. We also received the Opposition alternative policy statements for the following:
Works and Transport represented by the shadow ministers, lands and physical planning and that of housing and urban development. So, the Opposition shadow cabinet ministers presented and their ideas are embedded within the report. I hope that saves a lot of time for the House.

The total budget approved for Works and Transport for the financial year 2012/13 amounted to Shs 1,642 billion. Out of which, Shs 324.38 billion was for recurrent activities, Shs 1,295.87 billion was for development and Shs 21.71 billion was for taxes. 

Preliminary release performance indicated that a total of Shs 1,355 billion had been released representing 82.5 per cent end of May 2013. 

Vote Specific Budget Performance

Vote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport
 
The total budget approved under this vote amounted to Shs 119.47 billion. By the end of May 2013, a total of Shs 69.6 billion had been released representing 58.3 percent release performance. 

The specific release performance for wage, non-wage, Government of Uganda and Donor Development was as follows: Wage was 77.2 percent, Non-wage was 82.6 percent, Government of Uganda Development was 60.4 percent and Donor Development was 18.2 percent. 

Vote 113: UNRA

The total budget approved under this vote was Shs 1,213.19 billion. By the end of May 2013, a total of Shs 1,138.5 billion had been released representing a release performance of 93.8 percent. 

Vote 118: Uganda Road Fund
The total budget approved under Vote 118, Uganda Road Fund amounted to Shs 280.28 billion. 

We can skip the key achievements as Members can read and then we go to Vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport, again.

Vote 016 has five vote functions namely: Transport Regulation, Transport Services and Infrastructure, Construction Standards and Quality Assurance, Mechanical Service and Policy, Planning and Support Services. 

The key achievements under each of these are summarised below: 
    a) Policy Planning and Support Services 
    b) Transport Regulation
    c) Transport Services and Infrastructure
    d) Construction Standards and Quality Assurance
    e) Mechanical Engineering Services
    f) District Urban and Community Access Roads

Vote 113: UNRA

The committee noted that Uganda National Roads Authority received a total of Shs 1,138.5 billion out of that amount a total of 190 kilometres were upgraded from gravel to bitumen standard or what we commonly call tarmac against the annual target of 135 kilometres representing a performance of 141 percent of the target.

There is a table that shows all the roads that we have and I am not going to read in detail. It has got the status of on-going projects under UNRA for the financial year 2012/13. There is project name, annual target, out turn which means the current performance and then cumulative performance of the whole project, programmed target and then programme deficit or programme minus.

In addition, Madam Speaker, a number of detailed road designs were completed. These were the following as you can read: Rwenkunye–Apac–Lira–Kitgum–Musingo - all those ones, Members can read.

Several Capacity Improvement Design Studies, as we can see below, beginning with the Kampala Northern Bypass (17 kilometres) and the others that follow.

The committee recommended that UNRA should budget for National Social Security Fund contributions in the rightful budget category (Non-wage) to avoid confusion in the interpretation of release performance as has been the case the previous financial year 2012/2013. 

Parliament should not entertain more excuses and explanations such as re-allocations from wage to non-wage as was the case in financial year 2012/2013.
	
In addition, Government should make efforts to have all approved structures within ministries, departments and agencies filled to avoid locking funds in the wage bill yet at the end of the financial year, such funds are never spent and no record has ever been provided as to how much of the unspent balances is the part of the new financial year’s resource envelope. 

The Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance should inform Parliament what happens to the unspent wage bill budget at the end of the financial year.

The committee from the preceding narration recommended that Government should adequately plan and align its priorities within the budget and the available resources to avoid last minute rush to seek for supplementary expenditure, usually, not occasioned by addition revenues but simply re-allocations from already approved budget priorities by Parliament. Parliament should not allow such supplementary request in this year 2013/2014. (Applause)

Inadequate information on Donor Budget performance

The narration follows. We have got delays in completion of road projects and the category follows in Table 2 under topic 6.0, Works and Transport Sector Budget Outlook Financial Year 2013/2014.


Madam Speaker, on Page 14, we show the number of projects and their progress. They are mainly in deficit:
    • Ishaka – Kagamba is behind schedule by 41 percent,
    •  Gulu - Atiak (40 percent),
    •  Ntungamo - Rwentobo - Katuna (25 percent) 
    • Mbarara – Ntungamo (23 percent),
    •  Hoima – Kaiso - Tonya (20 percent),
    •  Vurra-Arua (17 percent),
    •  Kazo-Kamwenge (5 percent), and 
    • Malaba – Busia -Bugiri (2 percent)

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Government through the Ministry of Works and Transport should make priorities of road contraction works to avoid spreading resources thinly on the ground, which result into slow progress on many projects. It should be noted that non-provision of counterpart funds results into penalties due to breach of agreements with development partners.

In addition, Government should adopt a design and build work method to avoid blame games where a consultant is engaged to design the road and yet another contractor starts challenging the designs and BoQs resulting into unnecessary delays and cost overruns.

The share of Government of Uganda and donors for the development budget component is projected at 54 percent and 28 percent respectively. On the other hand, the overall share of Government of Uganda and donor for the Works and Transport Sector is projected at 72 percent and 28 percent respectively. We can still refer to the table below with a graph. 

This is a clear demonstration of Government’s renewed effort towards infrastructure sector development in this country - in line with the National Development Plan (NDP) and Vision 2040. The challenge now remains on how to efficiently and effectively plan for the utilisation of these resources to ensure that there is value for money spent. Figure 1 above shows the trend of budgetary shares by category.

Vote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA)

Madam Speaker, the total budget for UNRA is proposed to grow by Shs 730.47 billion from this financial year 2012/13 level of Shs 1,213.19 billion – and all those figures. So, this shows that it is growing to 79 percent of the previous figure provided from 74 percent. 

It should be noted that Government of Uganda budgetary allocation to UNRA is projected to grow from Shs 685.27 billion approved for financial year 2012/13 to Shs 1,289.73 billion, an increase of 88 percent. On the other hand, donor component under UNRA is projected to increase by 24 percent.

I am going to begin on a few achievements in the middle of the page 18. The sector has achieved-
    (i) rehabilitation of nine paved roads; 
    (ii) term maintenance of 2,209 kilometres of paved roads and 1,843 kilometres of additional unpaved network; and
    (iii) gravelling and drainage improvement works on 1,107 kilometres of unpaved roads.

The committee was informed that with the additional funding, more length shall be placed on term maintenance in financial year 2013/2014, which is the equivalent of 4,052 kilometres compared to 2,611 kilometres. In addition, the current backlog will be reduced by 65 kilometres on paved roads and by 1,017 kilometres on gravel roads. 

Vote 500-850: Local Governments 

The budget for local governments benefiting from the Rural Transport Infrastructure (RTI) Programme and Peace and Recovery Development Programme (PRDP) is projected to reduce from Shs 29 billion from the previous financial year to Shs 26.07 billion. This is the second time that the allocation to RTI and PRDP is reducing from its financial year 2010/11 and 2011/12 levels, by then amounting to Shs 32.58 billion. 

Rural Transport Infrastructure (RTI) and PRDP constitute one percent of the total sector budget down from two percent in financial year 2012/13.

The committee noted that under the listed vote functions, the following were to be done:  
    a) Policy Planning and Support Services 
    b) Transport Regulation 
    c) Transport Services and Infrastructure 
    d) DUCAR 
    e) Mechanical Engineering Services 

Vote 113: UNRA

Madam Speaker, UNRA has a long list of road projects to work on during this current financial year. I have attached a copy of all these planned activities for the information of members in Annex 1. The same information is available on pages 229 to 232 of the ministerial policy statement of the financial year 2013/2014.

Vote 118: Uganda Road Fund 

The Uganda Road Fund has planned various activities for implementation in this current financial year. I have attached a copy of all activities for the information of Members. The same information is available on pages 355 to 356 of the ministerial policy statement of this year.

In addition, UNRA national road maintenance, street lighting and bridge programme for this financial year is available in Ministry of Transport and Works ministerial policy statement on pages 374 to 389.

Observations and recommendations
The committee would like to register its appreciation to Government for its continued prioritisation of the works and transport sector through provision of substantial funding from Government of Uganda budget.

The committee noted that –

    1. Despite the proposed budgetary increase under the Road Fund, amounting to Shs 72.57 billion, the allocation to District Urban and Community Access Roads (DUCAR) has remained static at Shs 91.19 billion. All the additional Shs 72.57 billion has been allocated to UNRA for national road maintenance. It should be noted that DUCAR is a proxy to access social services such as schools, health facilities and markets. As such, community access roads have a more direct impact on the poor than any other category. It should, therefore, be noted that investment in rural road infrastructure should be strict as community access roads have a direct impact on the growth of the economy.

2. 	Despite the increment of the UNRA budget to Shs 730.47 billion, funds for bridge maintenance and development have remained inadequate; for example, a total of Shs 67.5 billion has been allocated in the financial year 2013/2014 for major bridge works. This is a modest increase from Shs 59.51 billion approved in the previous year. It should be noted that bridges are very expensive to construct and to maintain.

3. 	Huge costs have been incurred over time in land acquisition whenever road constructions are to be undertaken. This financial year, a total of Shs 201.6 billion has been allocated for this purpose compared to Shs 31.67 billion approved last year. Despite these costs, efforts to ensure that the acquired land is protected from encroachment and to have land titles acquired for such land have been very minimal. Over time, Government has had to incur double compensation to acquire the same piece of land. In addition, there is a very high possibility of budgetary wastage through inflated land compensation costs as a result of insider trading by government officials.

The committee further noted that: 
    • There are delays in quarterly releases by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 
    • There are also delays in providing timely accountability by agencies and local governments that benefit from the funds from the Uganda Road Fund. 
    • The committee noted that over the years, significant funds under the “returned funds” have been taken back to the Treasury from the districts and other implementing agencies, but such funds are never reflected to finance subsequent projects in the following financial years. 
    • There is lack of operational district road committees.

Madam Speaker, the committee strongly recommends as follows:

1. 	Government should make efforts to operationalise the wisely thought-out Road Fund to bridge the funding gap in the road subsector.

2. 	Proper planning, which takes into account all aspects of road infrastructure, should be undertaken with a view to equitably redistribute the available funds to promote growth and development through enhanced incomes and productivity in all regions in the country.

3. 	Government should survey and gazette all road reserves and demarcate them to avoid encroachment. In addition, all illegal structures within the road reserves should be demolished at the owners’ expense without delay. The ministry should adequately provide funds to protect road reserves across the country.

4. 	The Ministry of Finance should ensure timely quarterly releases to the Uganda Road Fund.

5. 	The returned funds should be reflected in the subsequent budgets as monies to be used for other upcoming projects.
6. 	Any such funds that are returned to the centre, in any case, should be declared and the sector ministry should get authorisation from the Ministry of Finance to reinvest such money into other critical areas that it might have planned for.

7. 	Funds disbursed to districts for particular running projects should be ring-fenced for at least three months after the end of the financial year. They were saying that funds were being released late; as soon as they are released, they are recalled the following day. So, such funds should be ring-fenced for at least three months to do the job they were assigned to do in the districts or in any user agencies.

8. 	Districts that do not have road committee should form and operationalise them immediately.

9. 	District road committees should ensure timely submission of quarterly returns of their performance to the Uganda Road Fund.

10. 	Members of Parliament should ensure that the district road committees are formed and operationalized.

11. 	Funds for the implementing agencies that fail to adhere to operationalise district road committees for accountability should be withheld by the Uganda Road Fund.

12. 	Districts without fully constituted road committees should not be allocated funds.

13. 	Funds for agencies that fail to adhere to the rules generally should be withheld.

14. 	District road equipment should be pooled in zonal clusters countrywide in order to have complete road units for efficient completion of the projects in those areas.

15. 	Government should commission further studies for determining and publishing a road construction price index.

16. The ministry should establish a strict mechanism of verifiable indicators for outputs such as monitoring, supervision and inspection of bridges and roadwork countrywide. This is important, Madam Speaker, because we observed that money is put in the field but no one follows up until they sign a certificate of completion.

The Road Transport Subsector

The Road Fund

The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, in consultation with the board and the Minister of Works and Transport, should develop Road Fund Regulations to streamline the collection and proper management of the fund as envisaged in the Road Fund Act, 2008, Section 49 (1).

The amendment of the URA Act should be expedited to allow for collection and remittance of road user charges to be deposited directly into the Road Fund account as envisaged under Section 21(3) of the Road Fund Act, 2008. 

The committee further reiterates its recommendations that: 
    • The Ministry of Works and Transport engages the Ministry of Finance on the amendment of the URA Act to enable the direct transfer of the money.
    • Development of capacity in public-private partnerships through the training of key technical staff - I request members to read that from the report.

Inadequate Local Contractors Capacity

The committee observed that whereas the above idea is a good one, it requires further study. It should not be implemented haphazardly. Our recommendation is that Government should evoke Section 14 of the URA Act to gradually enhance local contractor capacity by encouraging multinational capacities to sub-contract for local content purposes to local contractors.

Madam Speaker, next we have the financing of DUCAR. I implore Members to read what their parliamentary committees did when they went out to the districts of Namayingo, Bukwo, Kween, Sironko, Bugiri and Kaabong.

The committee recommends that in view of their significance, district road committees should be formed by all districts without any further delay. The Uganda Road Fund Secretariat should withhold all funding for all districts that have not fully – We are repeating these for emphasis.

Next we have poor road designs and bridge maintenance and development. The committee recommends that Government, as a matter of urgency, undertakes an assessment of the status of bridges across the country with a view to ascertaining the financial requirements to have meaningful maintenance and rehabilitation. Funds for this purpose should be provided in a sequenced manner to avoid a situation where some parts of the country would be cut off and to continuously carry out annual bridge condition survey on the UNRA and DUCAR networks.

The Unit Cost for Road Construction

The committee also – look at the second paragraph – received submission on the establishment of a Uganda Construction Industry Commission through an Act of Parliament to regulate the construction industry. The committee observed that the above idea requires more study. 

The committee recommends that: 
    • To lower the unit costs, there is urgent need to deal with the issue of political interference, insider trading by local politicians and senior civil servants, and allow open and fair competition.

    • Government should develop mechanisms to manage leakages in the procurement process that cause price manipulation. 

    • There is need to reduce the lengthy procurement and disposal processes and to replicate the new system of independent parallel bid evaluation in UNRA to DUCAR as well.

    • In addition, Government should explore new technology with potential to cutting back on the costs of road construction such as the use of recycling technology and adoption of enzyme technology for stabilising road pavements.

    • Government should also avail the required funding amounting to Shs 19 billion to procure the pavement recycling machine as additional to the sector budget for the financial year 2013/2014, or re-allocate it from UNRA’s current ceiling for the current financial year without any further delay.

Water Transport Subsector

Madam Speaker, Members can go to the recommendations on the next page. The committee recommends that: 
    • Timely, effective and efficient interventions should be made to rehabilitate the existing ferries and to purchase new ones so that all major islands are connected to the mainland in order to boost economic productivity through fishing, agriculture and tourism.

    • Adequate funds should be availed to ensure full-scale operation of the existing ferries and to have them insured to avoid the scenario of MV Kabalega that sunk. We recommend that Government installs navigation aids on all water bodies to avoid accidents, which are currently on the increase. In addition, the Ministry of Works and Transport should annually budget for the rehabilitation of the landing sites across all water bodies to allow proper landing of ferries to reduce on the high rate of wear and tear as a result of poor landing sites.

    • Government should also procure a ferry similar to the MV Barbus, which existed between 1947 and 1998, to serve the islands of Bubeke, Bukasa, Bufumira and Mazinga sub counties covering 79 of the 84 islands that constitute Kalangala District. In addition, procurement of the Sigulu Ferry, which is expected to commence in this financial year, should be expedited to serve Sigulu Islands in Namayingo District with huge fishing potential.

Railway Transport Subsector 

Performance of the Rift Valley Railways (RVR) 

The committee noted that when Uganda Railways Freight Services were concessioned to the Rift Valley Railways consortium for a term of 25 years with effect from 1 November 2006, Rift Valley Railways was expected to meet a number of obligations but some of them have not been met. The obligations are listed here in the report. 

Overview of the Performance of RVR

Honourable members, I want you to note this carefully. The committee was concerned about – see page 31 – the continued encroachment on URC assets and the rate at which railways assets are being vandalised, and that freight volumes have remained below the baseline level, a situation that has contributed to the deterioration of our road network. This is because wagons that would be carried by the trains now move on the road and our roads are deteriorating faster than would be expected.

The committee strongly recommends that: 

    • Government, through the Ministry of Works and Transport, hastens its supervisory role and ensures that the obligations under the concession are not breached without any sanctions.

    • In addition, Government should commence negotiations that should see passenger services that were not included in the current concession, starting with passenger services between Busega and Mukono, taken on by the concessionaire, RVR, or through any other arrangement as a means of decongesting the city.

The committee further noted that Uganda Railways Corporation was not doing enough to protect its assets against vandalism and encroachment as envisaged in the Concession Agreement. In addition, the committee was concerned that despite Government’s renewed interest in the railways subsector, Government through the Privatisation Unit is in the process of disposing off staff houses and other attendant properties that belong to the URC, for example, the URC staff houses in Gulu.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the proposed sale of the Uganda Railways Cooperation assets should be halted – (Applause)– and instead efforts to have them renovated and rehabilitated be hastened as these are critical in the renewed development of the subsector.

Air Transport

Civil Aviation Authority (CAA)

The committee was concerned about:
    • The status of Uganda’s air transport. In spite of Uganda being a landlocked country, it has only one international airport, which is Entebbe International Airport. Uganda’s strategic location within the Great Lakes Region provides great potential for it to act as a disperse point for tourists visiting the region. However, Government has not been quick in exploiting this opportunity. 

    • The grounding of a master plan aimed at increasing competitiveness and boosting Uganda’s fast-growing reputation as East Africa’s tourism and investment destination, which was prepared by the Civil Aviation Authority.

    • In the 20-year ambitious plan, code-named Civil Aviation Master (CAM) Plan, valued at over US$ 400 million, Government of Uganda would reconstruct Entebbe International Airport at a cost of about US$ 300 million and four other aerodromes at Kasese (US$ 60m), Gulu(US$ 26m), while the remaining funds would be used in the construction of Arua and Kotido aerodromes.

Honourable members, the document is very long; you can read the information that the committee got from (a) to (g). The committee recommends that Government should actualise its commitment towards the renewed interest and revival of Uganda Airlines by translating all these plans into a phased medium term budget with effect from this financial year.

Madam Speaker, I pray that the House adopts this report and approves the budget for the Ministry of Works and Transport of Shs 2,440.076 billion for this financial year as indicated in annex 2 here attached.

Section II: Lands, Housing and Urban Development
Madam Speaker, the mandate is very clear and attractive; I leave that to Members to read and then we compare this with the delivery of goals.

We can skip page 35 into page 36. On page 36, we have land management and administration and the achievements. In (b), we have physical planning and urban development. On page 37, we have housing; honourable members, I beg that you read the details therein. Under (d), we have policy planning and support services. On page 38, we have vote 156, Uganda Land Commission, and its major achievements are listed thereunder.

Observations and Recommendations

The following are some of the observations and recommendations on the lands subsector:

The committee observed that the land question in Uganda is one of the most outstanding unresolved national issues that threaten the peace and stability of the country. It is apparent that past attempts at land and legislative reforms, both during the colonial period as well as in post-colonial Uganda, have failed to resolve this question once and for all.

Today, the challenges arising from the land problem in Uganda ensue from a number of factors, which include but are not limited to:

a) 	Deficit in dispute resolution. 

b) 	The existence of two parallel legal and judicial systems in place for dealing with land issues, that is, of customary tenure and that of the state administration.

c) 	Shortfall in land administration. 

d) 	Land conflicts and disputes are on the increase and yet there is lack of or no capacity at all in the institutions charged with adjudication and settlement of land disputes, both statutory and traditional.
 
e) 	Many of the land administration institutions are weak or not functioning.

f) 	District land boards are rare and district land offices that are supposed to support them are weak. 

g) 	According to the baseline evaluation report 2007, the land registry’s problems revolve around: 
(i) 	Fraudulent and backdoor practices, which lead to the loss of property by the rightful owners; 
    (ii) Counterfeit land titles circulating in the market; 
    (iii) The existing registration system and procedures are too disorganised and practically ineffective to prevent such practices and properly resolve the issues;
    (iv) The degraded registry environment and damaged and out-dated land records leave little chance to the genuine owners and clients to protect themselves;
    (v) A greater majority of the title records in the registry strong room are in a very dilapidated and sorry state; 
    (vi) Inappropriate systems are still predominantly used in the land records management and archiving system. 

Recommendations

The Scope of the Land Policy Implementation Framework 

The national land policy implementation should entail the systematic identification and execution of all steps necessary for the attainment of goals and prescriptions set out in the national land policy. It is a translation of policy into a programme of land reforms designed to deliver a wide range of services and benefits to the land using the public, and to sectors which depend on land for value addition.

Issuance of Fraudulent Land Titles and Issues in Land Management

These are outlined for all of us to read. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the ministry treats monitoring and evaluation as a matter of priority. Funding to this area should be increased and value for money guaranteed by ensuring that government projects, like regional land offices that have been reportedly been mishandled, are supervised effectively.

Accessibility to the Land Fund 

You can read about the issues surrounding this, honourable members. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the ministry addresses this in the next budget. The land fund regulations should be put in place to guide the project implementation. 

The ministry should fast-track the implementation of the project and ensure that tenants are involved in the process. Additionally, all tenants whose landlords were compensated should be issued with land titles as soon as practically possible. 

The ministry should lay before Parliament a status report of this project detailing a list of absentee landlords, those compensated, costs so far borne and those awaiting compensation and future plans. 

Systematic Compensation and Demarcation Concerns for Land in Bunyoro Region in the Albertine Graben Area

The committee noted that the compensation concerns and generally land management issues in the Bunyoro region or Albertine Graben have not been properly addressed since 2006.

Compensation of Ranchers 

The committee was concerned that the issue of ranchers has dragged on for a long time and that there are no funds earmarked to have this settled even in the medium term. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should ensure that this matter is resolved since it has taken many years and ranchers are threatening court action. This would save Government huge costs that would be incurred as a result of lengthy litigations.

The ministry should lay in Parliament this financial year a status report on the implementation of the compensation. This should include the list of ranches, those compensated, those awaiting compensation and plans for complete clearance of the compensations. 

The Housing Subsector 

There are more planned outputs for the financial year 2013/2014 as of May 2013 as reported on pages 27-29 of the ministerial policy statement of this year.

Public Servants’ Housing Scheme 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you can read through that.

Absence of the Public-Private Partnership Law

The committee recommended that the ministry should avoid entering into a PPP arrangement in the absence of a policy or legal framework governing it. Accounting officers should stick to the prevailing policy and legal regime in the implementation of government projects of this type. 

Additionally, the committee recommends that the ministry should furnish Parliament with a status report reading which houses were sold, how much they generated, the beneficiaries and where the money generated from the sale is being kept. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should table the required resolution to Parliament to operationalise this scheme this financial year. 

The Committee further recommends that a national housing policy be developed within six months and be laid before Parliament. With a policy and a housing law in place, the development framework for the housing subsector is bound to be organised. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that Government should:
1. 	Consider undertaking both structural and detailed planning procedures before allowing developers and development. Additionally, the plots must be serviced with accessible roads, water and electricity supply in a bid to promote coordinated development. 

2. 	Regulate the rental rates and also curtail the move by landlords to charge rent in dollars instead of our local currency. 

3. 	Reinforced efforts of conserving wetlands, including other bio-diversity environments, should be undertaken to promote a balanced ecosystem, overcome dry spell conditions and promote ecotourism for income generation and at the same time control destructive floods since wetlands work as a shock absorber for excess rain water and water purification. 

4. 	Regulate the cost or prices of land for residential, industrial and commercial development. Social services like schools, hospitals, leisure parks, playgrounds, sports centres must be designated in an effort to promote integrated and/or one-stop centre development and reasonable connectivity. 

5. 	Review its approach in constructing roads of a lifespan not falling below 25 years. This will help to reduce unnecessary spending on potholes and other road repairs which in most cases emanate from poorly constructed roads of 3 to 5 years lifespan.

General Observations and Recommendations 

Construction of Ministry Headquarters 

The committee recommends that the ministry implements the construction of its headquarters in one place instead of being scattered.

Parliamentary Outreach Programmes 

Land Conflicts in the Eastern Region 

Members can read about this issue. The committee recommends that the Uganda Wildlife Authority should ensure that boundaries to all national parks and protected wildlife areas are clearly demarcated and any conflicts within the neighbouring local governments urgently resolved. 

As an interim measure, UWA should sign a memorandum of understanding with the districts in question to stop the harassment subject to the resolution of the conflict. 

The boundaries in districts where conflicts exist should immediately be resolved by the Ministry of Local Government in consultation with Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Further, given the high number of land conflicts between districts, the boundaries should be surveyed and demarcated prior to creation of any new districts in the future. 

You will read the sector budget outlook and overall sector budget outlook for financial year 2013/2014 on your own, including the table that follows on page 50. On page 51, we have got land administration and management, and physical planning and urban development. On page 52 we have housing and vote 156, Uganda Land Commission, on page 53.

Legal Framework for the Operations of the Committee on Illegal Land Evictions (CILE)
The committee was concerned that CILE had no clear legal framework for its existence despite being announced on 22 February 2013 by the President and gazetted on 27 May 2013.  

The committee also observed that even though the CILE was composed of representatives from different government institutions, the members were appointed in their individual capacities. This is demonstrated by the public arguments and contradictions between the chairperson of the CILE and the Inspector-General of Police in spite of being represented on the said committee.  

The committee recommends that:
    • The legal and institutional framework establishing CILE should be reviewed to address the anomalies.
    • Membership on CILE should be through nomination by the institutions represented thereon, rather than individual appointments, in order to increase ownership, create harmony and institutionalise the work of the committee. 

Outstanding land issues

The committee recommends that the unresolved land issues should be immediately resolved through strengthening and empowering the institutions mandated with customary and statutory land management and administration, for example, sub-county chiefs and traditional leaders; operationalising land dispute resolution and adjudication institutions; and institutionalisation of all land interventions and governance structures. 

Low Investment in the Lands Sector

The committee realises that Government investment priorities should be re-aligned to accord the sector the importance it deserves in the national development. The committee reiterates its earlier demands that Government should prioritise the sector and demonstrate commitment by making substantial investments, given that all development hinges on land. 

Operationalisation of the Land Information System (LIS)

The committee recommends that due to the critical importance of the LIS in reforming the land sector and its likely impact on the development of the economy, the required funding for the operationalisation of the regional land offices should be provided immediately.  

Suspension of Construction of the Ministry Headquarters 

The committee demands that Government should revisit its strategy of housing MDAs under a common area, especially where there are already on-going projects. The government should declare its position on the matter and give timelines on when and where these agencies shall be housed. This is more so because some MDAs supervised by the committee indicated that they were in advanced stages of establishing their offices in different locations, despite this strategy. So, you will find plans in different locations, meaning they are not coordinated.

Absence of Public Private Partnership (PPP) Law 

The committee recommends that the PPP Bill should be quickly passed into law. The ministry should avoid entering into any PPP arrangement in the absence of the legal framework governing it. The accounting officers should stick to the current policy and legal regime in the implementation of government projects of such nature. 

Land Conflicts in the Country 

We have talked about this before. This was repeated during printing. So, we shall go to the conclusion on page 58. 

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this House adopts this report and approves the budget for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development sector of Shs 30.750 billion for the financial year 2013/2014 as indicated in Annex 2 here attached. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chair and your committee. I ask the Clerk to reflect the full text of the report in the Hansard. I understand that the Opposition’s alternative position was already reflected in the report –(Interjection) - I thought you had got a common paper with the chair. 

Maybe before you come up, I want to ask the chairperson – You know, there are some neighbours of Kamuli and they want to know why the Kyoga ferry is not mentioned anywhere. There is a big lake called Kyoga; it is a neighbour of Kamuli. (Laughter)

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, I may not have been detailed; there are many things that I skipped but they are written here and are captured in the document.

THE SPEAKER: Lake Kyoga is very important; I do not know how you can skip it. It joins Buyende, Kagwara and Kasilo. It is big.

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, we can take solace in the fact that we said, “…and all other lakes that need ferries.” The details are within the ministerial policy statement. This was just a summary of the whole document. We could not read every detail, but they are very important and we take note of that.

MS EKWAU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this is very unfair of the committee chair. Honestly speaking, throughout the Eighth Parliament, the Bukungu-Kagwara-Kaberamaido ferry was always in the ministerial policy statement. As we speak now, it is no longer mentioned; it has disappeared. 

If there was anyone to get an award or a medal out of this ferry, the Rt Hon. Speaker would be the one. We even went up to Nakiwogo to see the designs.  We were given a design on paper and when we reached the site, it was a different thing altogether. Since then, we have never heard anything about that issue.

For the committee chairperson, on whom we would rely to address some of these issues, to come here and generalise an issue like this is really being unfair to these communities. Is it, therefore, procedurally right that as we speak now, the name of this ferry does not even appear anywhere – not in your report and not in the ministerial policy statement, and not even in the annexes of the documents you have presented to this House?

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also rising on a point of procedure. Our colleague, the chairperson, has just been able to report what they managed to handle. However, I thought this response should have ordinarily come from the minister because for many years, this ferry has been expected. 

Early this week, we were in Kamuli for a very big ceremony and this issue was still raised by very many stakeholders; they were asking the President about it. This is an opportunity for the minister to come and explain to the country about this ferry’s fate, instead of the committee chairperson owning up to what he cannot. I think –(Interruption)

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. When we were in Kamuli for the said function, H.E. the President gave assurance to the people at that function that the Bukungu ferry would be worked on in this financial year. So, if we just drop it now, then we are not putting the President in a good position. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, I was raising a procedural matter, advising our colleague, the chairperson, that he should not switch roles and become part of the Executive and start explaining things on behalf of Government. We should expect an answer from the minister on what is happening to the Kyoga ferry. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the request for that ferry is almost 40 years old. So, it is not a joking matter for those communities; not at all. Minister, please, brief us before we continue. 

THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Madam Speaker, I must apologise that the funding of the Kagwara-Kaberamaido–Bukungu ship is not in this budget. The building of this ship was initiated in the Prime Minister’s office. We were given money to survey the routes – (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bukungu ferry is very important; we want to hear about it before you can contribute.

MR BYANDALA: We were given money and we made two significant actions. One, we surveyed the route, which this ship would use; and secondly, we designed the ship and all our drawings were approved. 

After that, I wrote several letters to the Prime Minister’s Office informing them that the funds they passed over to my ministry were over and now I needed money for the physical building of the ship. I even gave them the estimates. After a long time, I got information from the Prime Minister’s Office that they had run short of funds for the building of the KBK ship. When we were discussing the budget, we made a provision for it, but it is one of the unfunded priority projects. 

6.18
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WORKS, INFRASTRUCTURE AND DEVELOPMENT (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Madam Speaker, the issue we are concerned with is the policy of this Government on transport. The NRM Government has overemphasised road transport at the expense of water transport, air and railway transport. This Parliament has also made a mistake by allowing the Government to get away with it. 

On the Bukungu ferry, they have even built the landing site; how could they build a landing site without providing money to build the ferry to use the landing site? This has taken several years. We think Government should change its focus on road transport and emphasise the other aspects of the transport sector as well. 

When the NRM Government came to power, it was always railways given priority. Over time, they killed the railway system, air transport was killed and water transport is undeveloped. Today, we keep building roads because we have allowed these foreign owned trucks to dominate our roads and spoil them. We have to change that if we want to develop our transport industry. We must change the policy. 

On the issue of UNRA and the Road Fund, I think the ministry should let these two operate as business corporates. They are not departments of the ministry. They should operate as business corporates and have their own funds. The Road Fund should collect money that should go directly to the fund, which Parliament set up. Government has refused them to collect that money. They should set it up and collect that money. When we begin collecting money from the road tolls, the URF should collect that money so that they can maintain our roads as Parliament thought it wise to pass that law. 

We have a big budget for the transport sector; it is a very big budget. The last time, Members of Parliament were complaining about the 10,000Kms of road, which were taken over by the central Government and for the last four or five years they have not been maintained. The Minister of Transport said he could only maintain them if we gave him an additional Shs 600 billion. I am happy to note that this money has been provided in this budget; actually, Shs 700 billion has been provided. So, we hope that the 10,000kms of road which had been neglected are going to be maintained by the minister. 

In addition, we need affirmative action also in economics, not only in politics. I would like to see companies owned by women being given contracts to supply rice, cement and stones to these road contractors. Most of this money is going to foreign companies. We need our own people to benefit. We need companies owned by our youth to get subcontracts to supply these foreigners. That is the only way we can create employment and empower our people economically instead of only empowering them politically. 

I would like to emphasise the issue of towns without tarmac. My town of Bugiri is maybe the only town in the world which has no tarmac. If Government budgeted for at least half a kilometre of tarmac road per town council, it would go a long way in solving this problem. There are about 20 or 30 towns in Uganda; if we just budgeted a half a kilometre per town council, depending on the size of the town council - Some town councils have only three shops, so they can have a quarter a kilometre but bigger town councils should be given half a kilometre. I think that can be done by Government; otherwise, we shall never have money to tarmac these roads. 

Insider trading is a big issue. I have done some research and found that a lot – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, your work is with the committee’s and you were also given an additional five minutes. We have been very generous, because with your in-put in the report, I should not have allowed you to speak. 

6.24
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

My first observation is about the Bududa circular road. I am glad it has been reflected in this year’s budget. I hope it will not stop at being on paper, but the work will begin as recommended in the report. 

Secondly, I agree with the recommendation on the operationalisation of the Road Fund. This will place the focus on the implementation of many projects, especially the rural roads. Somewhere in the report, the committee observed that rural roads help in the development of rural areas, especially as regards trade. For some of us who are from these rural districts, our farmers will benefit a lot because some of them are neighbours with other countries. We are a major producer of food crops and we supply countries like Kenya and Sudan. So, when you talk about the feeder circular road, this will also boost agriculture and promote the incomes of the people. I agree with the committee recommendation that emphasis should be placed on rural access roads so that farmers benefit as well.

On page 49, the committee mentions UNRA. Some of our districts border national parks and we have conflicts between the Uganda Wildlife Authority officials and the local people in our districts. I agree with the committee recommendation that these conflicts should be resolved and boundaries should be clearly demarcated so that our people do not lose their lives. Some of these places are used as cultivating grounds for most of our farmers and that is how they supplement their incomes -(Member timed out.)

6.27
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the work well done. 

I would like to talk about the roads to be tarmacked, which have appeared in the budget for the last 20 plus years, and yet new roads come on board and they are worked on. You have just been complaining about the ferry and your request is about 40 years old. The road from Mbale-Bubulo-Magale-Lwakhakha has been in the budget for the last 20 years and to date, we have not seen any tarmac on that road. Now they are saying they are procuring a contractor and consulting on the supervision and once this is done, the loan agreement will be signed. May I find out from the minister when this is going to happen because these consultations have been going on for a very long time?

Secondly, on the issue of physical planning and urban development, the way buildings are being put up in our city leaves a lot to be desired. We are seeing buildings come up in the city and towns and we have no parking space, lifts are not provided for the disabled, and cars are being parked on the streets. This is bringing a lot of congestion in the city –(Member timed out.)

6.29
MS EVERLINE TETE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I bring you greetings from the people of Bukwo. I have just come from Bukwo and the people are fine. When I learnt that the committee was going to report, I had to rush quickly to come and hear something about Bukwo District. 

I want to thank the committee for the report. It is true that the Ministry of Works is maintaining Bukwo Road. They have started maintaining the road from Kapchorwa to some other place. However, Madam Speaker, you have been to Bukwo personally, and everybody has been to Bukwo; what is there to maintain on Bukwo Road, really? When that road is maintained today and the next day it rains, the whole road is not there. (Laughter) Surely, whoever recommended maintenance of Bukwo Road is very inhuman. Why waste government resources?

For sure, hon. Byandala, maintaining that dead road! I compare that road to a human being; If Bukwo road was a human being, Mulago would not handle it. (Laughter) It would have to be flown to India or elsewhere. I expected the chairperson to talk about tarmacking. Bukwo Road is about tarmacking not maintaining, honourable ministers -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. Let her conclude. Bukwo is very important.

MS TETE: Madam Speaker, I am very proud that our youth bought 21 lorries in two months, but it is very unfortunate that they have never stepped on the road. They are in Sironko and operate between Sironko and Kitale. They cannot reach home because the bridges are broken. The bridge between Kween and Bukwo is completely down and our lorries cannot go home. We celebrated in Sironko; it is very unfair.

6.32
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I thank you. I want to be very fast. Before I talk about roads, I want to inform the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development about illegal distribution of land titles and issuing of illegal land titles. Honourable minister, you are the senior Minister of Lands now. I knew you as a minister and up to now, you are still a minister. Who is issuing fake land titles? How many have you expelled and how many are in courts of law now? We are talking when people are down there issuing fake land titles. We want the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to tell us what he has done.

In Naalya Housing Estate, all the recreational spaces that were left when they were building the estate have been consumed. I want to ask the Minister of Lands to go and research and see who is constructing where children were supposed to play. You will find my aunties and uncles again. Don’t ask me; you know. 

Now, let me go to roads - the road from Kamuli to Jinja. I was in Kamuli for an introduction just this week; my friend married a Musoga woman there. There is a road from Kamuli before Jinja. The Basoga are going to get finished! Hon. Byandala, for heaven’s sake, help these Basoga because they are in trouble. I want to bring it to the notice of hon. Byabagambi that this weekend, I was in Kamwenge and the road, which was constructed recently from Mbarara to Ibanda has potholes-(Member timed out.)

6.35
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise. One is on the issue my colleague, the shadow Minister of Works, mentioned - insider civil servants’ trading. The money sent to districts under Uganda Road Fund and PRDP - Last year, our Minister of Karamoja Affairs asked us to go to the districts to monitor and we found out that in Nakapiripirit alone, we lost Shs 1.7 billion of Uganda Road Fund money and the one of the PRDP. Some of the roads did not even exist. The bridges, which were funded, did not exist. I want to know from the minister who is responsible for supervising and has there been any audit into the use of Uganda Road Fund money. 

I wrote a report, gave it to the minister, the Police and IGG and I think we sent you a copy and nothing has been done to date. The roads for which money was sent are not there. Moreover, the people who are alleged to have been doing the work were engineers from the neighbouring districts. An engineer from this district uses engineers from Moroto and the one from Moroto uses the one of Nakapiripirit; they just give contracts to themselves like that. We captured this, Madam Speaker, and we have a report on this. So, engineer Byandala, can you help us on that issue. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we should not think that PPPs are a panacea to solving problems of ministries. If we are not careful, these stories of people saying “we have entered a private public partnership” are a way to dispose of assets of this country. You find the minister saying, “We have given half of this barracks to a private person and we will recover money in 30 years.” Who is doing that and under which law? We must be careful, Madam Speaker. (Member timed out.)

6.37
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

On page 24, bullet 6, the committee report says, “The committee further reiterates its recommendations that: stocking Bailey Bridges and metal pipe culvert sections in readiness for emergency response to avoid the Kanungu Bridge type of scenario.” (Laughter) So, the scenario in Kanungu has now become part of the dictionary for engineering work. 

I have been instructed by the people of Kanungu to withdraw my support for this vote unless the Minister of Works can give a satisfactory assurance to me that the bridges in Kanungu will be fixed. Short of that, I am inviting all of you, honourable Members of Parliament, to support us to carry out a fundraising function in mid-October to raise money to fix the bridges ourselves. The bridges collapsed in mid-May last year and up to now, it is extremely difficult to access Kanungu. 

It is easier for someone to travel from Rukungiri to Kampala than to travel from Kanungu to Rukungiri, which is just a stone’s throw away. So, we are extremely disappointed and I want to put that displeasure on record. However, we are mobilising to raise funds on our own to put up a bridge.

Secondly and lastly, under annex 1, there are these roads that are labelled “contractor facilitated financed projects.” The information I have is that there is disagreement between Ministry of Works and Ministry of Finance. Actually, Ministry of Finance does not agree to this mode of financing - the contractor facilitated financing. Now the minister is telling us the agreements will be signed this financial year and yet the information suggests that the Ministry of Finance does not actually approve of this mode of financing. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, a number of us are beneficiaries of these many roads, which have been listed, but Ministry of Finance has actually frustrated UNRA and Ministry of Works. It seems not to be comfortable with that mode of financing. For how long will you come and tell us that things are in the pipeline when you know there is no work being done in this regard? We would want to get assurance particularly from Ministry of Finance that actually you agree with this mode of financing instead of just deceiving Parliament that something is being done when nothing is being done on the ground. I thank you very much.

6.40
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am concern about a road which crosses through three districts, that is, Mubende, Mityana and Kyankwanzi. This road is codenamed Mutetema-Kasanda-Bukuya-Kitumbi. Three years ago, UNRA took over this road and they developed designs for the road. It is a stretch of 70 kilometres. At the beginning, it was given a budget of Shs 490 million but no viable bidder was attracted to this road. The unit was then raised and it was given a budget of Shs 700 million. Again, this could not attract any viable bidder. 

We reached out to the Ministry of Works and notified them. Ministry of Works promised that they were going to redesign this road. Today, when I look at the new designs, this road is missing and yet this is a very viable and very important road that helps to carry agricultural produce from Mityana, Mubende and Kyankwanzi. A lot of maize cannot access the market because of this road. So, I want to inquire from the Minister of Works about the state of this road.

Secondly, this House requested that we stop demanding for the splitting of districts and we respected that. Last year, those of us who still have big districts were promised that in this financial year, they were going to give us additional road units. If I can share with this House - the road unit we received in Mubende District breaks down almost on a weekly basis because the district is very big and there is a lot of work to be done. I want to inquire from the minister about the state of the big districts with only one road unit. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Five seconds to complete.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Now, I go to land administration. I want to thank the honourable Minister of State for Lands for the work she is doing for this country. (Applause) She has really helped some of us. However, she is not giving us a permanent solution to land evictions. 

I would recommend that Government looks around for money for a land fund such that the people who are being evicted are helped to buy this land. We cannot solve this problem without assisting people. This is retarding a lot of development in Buganda. In Mubende, tenants are told not to plant coffee, they are not planting matooke; the only things they are planting are beans, maize – only seasonal crops. We cannot develop this country that way. So, my request is: can Government find some money for the land fund?

6.44
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will start with two recommendations. One is that the committee should go back and review the need to have airports per region, because airports will help us to improve our tourism sector, and they will also help us to meet other needs. We gave the example of one of our Members who got an accident and we looked around and there was no airport from where she could be picked.

Madam Speaker, another issue is about having all our public institutions like schools and hospitals accessed by good roads. Some of them cannot be accessed by road. There are some schools in my district which cannot be accessed. That is another recommendation.

On the issue of roads, the Kyenjojo-Fort Portal-Mubende-Mityana road is wanting. There are many potholes created by heavy trucks and there are many repairs that have been made but they are not long lasting. Can we have a solution? This road was made to carry specific kilograms or tonnes on the lorries. So, the road is wanting and soon we shall go back to the budget asking you to improve that road. 

On the issue of land, I would like to know who a landowner is in Uganda. Who should own land? We have had people owning land by citizenship, acquiring citizenship, some from outside and some Ugandans –(Member timed out)

6.47
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My focus will be on page 42, on the issuance of fraudulent land titles. I think the Minister of Lands should help us out with this because land is a resource. Banks now cannot even lend money when you have a land title. When you carry out a search at lands and surveys, you pay a fee and they give you a go-ahead, you then go and borrow money and the bank gives you money and then suddenly the bank comes back and says that the title you gave them is fake. Honestly speaking, who are these people in the land registry giving these fraudulent titles? The ministry must assert itself and find out who these people are because the original copies of the land titles are within the Ministry of Lands. What are we doing? 

The rampant evictions are due to connivance between the Police and people within the Ministry of Lands. Recently, I stopped people - a police barracks – from evicting 35 people from land where there were even graves since 1954. People came saying that this was their land, that their fathers were staying there. I asked the children, “If your father was buried here, how do you come and complain for land that was occupied even before you were born and say that it is your land?” They were using the Police to evict people. Please, Minister of Lands, assert yourself; you have the powers, help this country. 

Madam Speaker, I think we need to even revisit the Constitution. I think we have blamed Amin and said that he was mad; there is no country all over the world where land belongs to the people. I am telling you the truth! Go to Kenya and Tanzania, the land does not belong to the people because there is no way the Government can plan. Look at the public land here; it is already given out. Supposing a disaster happens? Look at the Bududa case - we are compensating people to buy land. If we had public land reserved for such emergencies, we would not waste a lot of money. (Member timed out)


6.49
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a good report. 

I would like to first of all comment on the operationalisation of the Road Fund. I do ask the Minister of Works to engineer a way to get funds to operationalise this fund, because it is very important as observed by the committee. It is going to help us resolve very many challenges, especially in the rural areas. 

Secondly, there is the issue of low investments in the lands sector as reported on page 55. Low investment in this sector has led to a number of problems. One, we have a problem of operationalisation of the land fund, which was set up to resolve historical injustices in areas like Kibaale. This has not been possible because of lack of funds. Two, we have had a lot of boundary disputes across the country but there is no funding to resolve them. Can you imagine a whole ministry which looks after a very big resource, land, is given Shs 30 billion? In Kabula, I think 10 square miles is worth this amount of money and the whole Ministry of Lands has Shs 30 billion.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I know you have visited Kanyaryeru and you have visited all those areas from my place; an acre of land costs Shs 3.5 million. You can imagine if somebody has 8 or 10 square miles, he can buy the whole Ministry of Lands. That is around Shs 30 billion. This is a ministry which is responsible for this resource in the whole country, to plan where we can grow food, where we can practice production; what are we doing? 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, it is important that Government also considers certain critical sectors that are going to contribute to our economy. If we continue funding some of these sectors the way we are doing now, we will continue experiencing problems and even get the blame game that we are actually having in these sectors. So, I call upon Government to ensure that we fund all these sectors – works, as far as roads are concerned, and lands - so that we can address some of these concerns. I thank you.

6.52
MR ABDI FADHIL CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their work. 

What I want to speak about has always been on the Minister of Works’ table. The Tororo-Mbale-Soroti Road is a problematic road; we have been using it and we have been facing a lot of problems. For 45 kilometres from Tororo to Mbale we spend almost two hours, and yet it is the busiest road now in eastern Uganda because it is the route used for goods being taken to South Sudan. There are a number of lorries that have gotten accidents along the Mbale-Soroti stretch and also between Soroti, Amuria and Kotido. Today, there is an accident that occurred in Obalang just because of these bad roads. We need to do something about this.

You are aware that some of the road equipment that we procured recently is being hired out by some districts. We need to do something in order to curb this vice so that we do not misuse some of these things.

The Muyembe-Moroto Road is another problematic road. I actually request that we swap constituencies with the Minister of Works so that he goes to Kween and I go to his constituency because he is maintaining his roads better than ours. The Muyembe-Cheptui Bridge has never been repaired for the last five years. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have made your point; you need a better road than what you have.

6.55
MR STEPHEN DEDE (NRM, Bukooli County South, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the good report. I want to also thank the minister for telling this august House that they will buy a new ferry for my people. Thank you very much. I do not want it to disappear. 

I have one concern; when I look at the planned roads to be worked on, I do not see Musiita-Lumino-Busia –(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, honourable colleague, for yielding the Floor. Last month, the President was in Mayuge with the Minister of Works and Transport, hon. Byandala, and some of the good news they delivered to the people who attended the function at Kityerera was that the Musiita–Namayingo-Lumino Road was going to be tarmacked. It is now surprising, and to our dismay, that this road has now disappeared. When you look at the annex 1 provided, it is not mentioned. That is the information I would like to give to my colleague.

MR DEDE: Thank you, my colleague, for giving me that information. Madam Speaker, about two days ago, my people celebrated when they heard that that Musiita-Namayingo was on the list of the roads to be worked on, but right now it is not there. It was in the newspapers – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dede, I want to confirm that on Monday we were with the President in Kamuli and he mentioned this road again.  

6.58
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for this report. However, I have some comments to make. 

I do not know much about the other regimes but for 27 years, the construction of a tarmac road in the Madi sub region has been a promise, and therefore a debt, from this government. Year in, year out, statements are made even in the Budget Speech. Recently, when the budget was read, I went to the ministry and I was informed that there is no money. I want the Government to tell me what exactly I should say to the people of Adjumani. They are sitting on promises, which are never fulfilled. 

Secondly, the committee dwelt on the assets in the railway sector but I see that they did not comment on the issue of the reconstruction of our railway line. You are talking about the pressure exerted on our roads but without a railway line, we may not do much to prevent that. 

You also talked about investment of monies that are returned to other projects when approved by the Ministry of Finance. I think the conditions for the return of the money should also be considered because at times, monies are released late and, therefore, the districts are not at fault. Therefore, I think that the purposes for which these monies are budgeted will still stand. 

He also talked about building the capacity of our local contractors through sub-contracting. I believe that would make our citizens secondary citizens. Why don’t we have a deliberate initiative to empower our contractors because we know their capacity, instead of putting them under sub-contractors –(Member timed out.)

6.59
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for producing such a good report. 

My main concern is the land issue between the districts of Kapchorwa and Bulambuli, which also border Bukedea District. Way back in the late 1940s to the late 1960s, our people migrated from the lowlands of Kapchorwa and some went to Masindi, some went to Teso, some went to Kenya and some migrated to the higher altitude areas of Kapchorwa because of the cattle rustling. There were rampant killings because of cattle rustling and this forced people to migrate. Now because of the peace which the NRM Government has brought, our people want to go back but there are mainly two issues to deal with - identification of the rightful owners of this land, because this was a long time ago, and public hearings.

In 2004, Government assigned a commission of inquiry, which was headed by the former Commissioner of Police, Mr Odwe, who wrote a detailed report about this land. The report was appreciated by the people of Sebei. It was released in September last year and the recommendation was to identify the rightful owners of this land. (Member timed out.)

7.02
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the good work. 

My first concern is about the committee investigating illegal evictions. The committee has recommended for the legal and institutional framework establishing the CILA to be reviewed but you are the same committee that said that there is no legal and institutional framework. I wonder what was on your minds. Can you review what is not there? About the appointment, the institution and the constitution of this committee, it is doing very good work with our sister there but I think she lacks the legal mandate. I wish this Parliament could give her a good recommendation to help her. 

On PPP, Madam Speaker, this law was needed yesterday. Many things are going on in this country and in a few years, we shall regret. There is no reason why we do not fast-track this public-private partnership law. I do not know why the Bill cannot be fast-tracked. The country is losing money; we are donating money.

Madam Speaker, I am very happy that the Namutumba-Busolwe- Butaleja-Nabumali Road is going to be worked on, but I also want to remind the honourable minister that there was the Busolwe-Nagongera-Tororo Road, less than 30 km, in the manifesto and it has been there for a long time. I do not even come from that side, but it should be able to help some Bakedi to interconnect and do business. The Bakedi are the people from those six districts. In fact, Tororo, where I come from, is a low lying area; so when you do this, you will have helped to fix many things, other than the Bukwo stuff of maintaining what needs to be treated. 

Madam Speaker, I found out from UNRA that about Shs 5 million – (Member timed out.)

7.05
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues in congratulating you upon attaining your big office. May God spearhead this. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. It is a two-in-one as I can see – it is about infrastructure and about land. 

I will speak about the state of the roads. Roads are really bad. I want to thank Parliament for going out to establish that Sironko, among others, has the poorest roads. The roads are in dire need of repair and the bridges have broken down. I have spoken to people in the Ministry of Works and UNRA several times, begging them to repair at least one bridge for us between Budadiri and Bugusege, but they are adamant. Do they want people to die before they can do something?

One thing is clear to me; they always say that is a central road, but the people who are using it are in the village. What can we do? I propose that maybe we get poles, put them on the bridge and we cross like we used to do in the 1900s because we cannot wait any longer. This road is used by heavy trucks that ferry poles for Umeme and they do not care. Why don’t we build good bridges for everyone to use? 

On this note, I would like to thank the former minister, hon. Wanjusi Wasieba; he was a minister of state but he managed to construct bridges across the country. Most of the bridges that we are using in Sironko were constructed by him. I wish such people were here to help us. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, three seconds to complete your point. (Laughter)

MS WADADA: Madam Speaker, one time I was in Buhweju District, – the chairman can testify – the road is also impassable. There are no signs – actually, you cannot even tell whether you are coming to the end of the road and yet at the end of the road, there is a broken bridge. (Interjections) Is it now repaired? It is not. Honourable members, I think you can bear witness; when we went to bury our honourable colleague, you saw that the roads across the country are bad. It is now 27 years; when are these things going to happen? Is it just going to come from heaven that the NRM Government will perform for Uganda? I would like to thank hon. Nantaba for the work she is doing; she is actually helping the poor. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, as I said, I pray that God gives you life and strength; maybe one time you will lead this country. Uganda needs a female President. Thank you. (Laughter)

7.06
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee. 

I am not happy with one thing and I have always said it here; I think I must take a lead in the formation of an organisation for new districts in Uganda. We do not have any benefits as far as tarmacking our district roads is concerned. A district like Kalungu; hon. Byandala, what did we do to you? Even Buhweju, where the chairman comes from, they are also suffering. At least when you are planning every year, budget for about 10 districts and get loans for us to get tarmac, so that we enjoy the new districts.

Secondly, I do not know how much UNRA spends on grading murram roads. What happens is that UNRA takes their tractors, collects soil on both sides of the road and then say they have graded the road. I went to UNRA and asked them whether they really graded Kalungu roads because whenever it rains, all the soil is washed back. Do the people of Kalungu pay anything? I do not understand. 

Finally, – I do not want to waste time today - as a country, we must go back and acquire aeroplanes. Our airfields in Uganda should be upgraded. We cannot get tourists to Chobe, in Northern Uganda, without these airfields working. Go and see what is happening in Tanzania; because of our poor roads, tourists will stop in Kampala because they cannot go to those areas. By the time President Museveni took power, Kenya had only two planes while Uganda had more than 15. Today, Kenya has about 100 planes and Uganda none –(Interruption)

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you, honourable member, for yielding the Floor. I want to give you information. Uganda needs tourists but it cannot meet its obligations because there are no sources of revenue. In Lira District, they gazetted land for an airfield but it is now over 30 years and they cannot work on it and people are already encroaching on it. I want to assure you that this country has no will for generating income through tourism. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Since I have got that information, let me stop there. (Laughter)

7.11
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the minister to Annex A, drawn from the ministerial policy statement on page 231. It deals with the Lira-Kamdini-Gulu Road. I would like clarification on the contradiction because it appears under two slots; the first one is designs for full reconstruction, which has Lira-Kamdini-Gulu and then when you go under road design studies for upgrading to bitumen standard, again you get Lira-Kamdini-Gulu.  So, what is the status of this road? Can I now even trust the data in this ministerial policy statement? 

This road feeds this country. If you go to my constituency, at the junction called Corner Kamdini at night, you will find over 200 trucks parked there; they come from different countries en route to South Sudan. All the buses that are going to South Sudan travel through Kamdini Road. A month ago, His Excellency got a puncture on that road because of the state of that road. (Interjections) Yes, he got a puncture on that road. It is a road that is not only economically beneficial to Uganda but also to other countries that trade with South Sudan as well. (Member timed out)

7.14
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to go to page 11, where the committee has a table on the work in progress as far as roads are concerned. The Tororo-Mbale-Soroti Road has blank spaces as far as programme target is concerned and the last objective. I want to know whether there is no target for the completion of this road. Why is there a blank space when other areas have figures attached to them?

Still on the Mbale-Soroti Road, the stretch that goes through Soroti Municipality – I know that it is a central Government road – has a very problematic spot. We know that that is where the lorries to South Sudan pass and this spot is just in the middle of the town, between the district offices. It is very hard to have this spot repaired because the district cannot work on it and neither can the municipality because they claim it is supposed to be worked on by the central Government. I want to hear from the ministry if they cannot authorise the district to take care of the repairs on that spot because it seems the central Government cannot do it. It is causing a lot of accidents and it is a shame to Soroti Municipality. 

Madam Speaker, I know that the rural people also use national roads and highways but the budget of rural roads is being reduced year in, year out. I wonder what this Government is thinking about; the rural economy is being destroyed. These people cannot take their goods to the markets to sell. If you are not going to work on these roads, do not expect them to have the capacity to use the main roads, the tarmac roads, to come to Mbale and Soroti. We are killing the economy. I want to understand why this budget is continually being reduced – (Member timed out.)

7.16
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you. Madam Speaker, you advised me two days ago to direct this question to the Ministry of Works; it is a giant question with a multiplicity of smaller questions. Uganda is known as the Pearl of Africa; how do we follow up that statement to its rightful conclusion in the absence of a national airline? We are now in the East African Community; how shall we shine in the absence of a national airline? 

I want to state this in form of a question. You hear of an animal called “Air Uganda”. Who owns Air Uganda? Is it privately owned or publically? If publically, does Uganda own shares in that company? How can that company, being private, carry the logo of the crested crane as if it were a national corporation? I want to know. Madam Speaker, why does – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know we have a right to speak here, but I think some of the things we are saying might injure Air Uganda. They are investors. This is the Agha Khan; he is helping us to even have something with “Uganda”. You do not want him to use the crested crane? 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, with due respect to that, does that company, Air Uganda, pay for our air routes? How much tax do we get from that company? This is a matter of great importance and without an answer, I would persuade honourable members not to pass the budget of the Ministry of Works. (Member timed out.)

7.19
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two points to make. First, in 2008, Government took over 10,000 kilometres of roads from local governments. Most of these roads that Government took over are impassable. The engineers are conniving with senior politicians, some of whom are seated here, – (Interjections) – Yes, in front of me here; I am going to mention them. They front weak contractors and the roads are not done while the money is being shared. 

There is a road from Ntare School to Kashongi in Kiruhura District, about 30 kms; this road was awarded to Prime Contractors, a company which had already failed in Kanungu with a contract of Shs 280 million in 2010. When the engineers had just been given about 30 per cent, I leant of it. I reported to the minister, hon. Byabagambi, and we went to the road and he addressed the people; he promised that he would stop the contractor. We were very happy about that. However, it is now over one and half years and the contract was not stopped. I now have information that the entire Shs 280 million has been paid and nothing has been done on the road. 

Hon. John Byabagambi, you are my friend but the information on the ground is that you cannot discipline those engineers because you have an interest in Prime Contractors – (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, it is true that I visited that road with him and we found that actually the contractor was not performing. The contractor is called Prime Contractors. I do not know who owns Prime Contractors. I wrote a letter terminating Prime Contractors and Uganda National Roads Authority started the termination process on the instigation of my letter. I am sure the Member of Parliament is privy to that. 

I have been in this ministry and this is the first time to hear that Byabagambi can indulge himself in such interests. I had my own company before I came here. I had to de-register it because I never wanted anybody to confuse my company with construction work. Therefore, Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to speak without facts about who owns that unscrupulous company? How can he associate it with me? Is he in order to state that I have interest in it? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Yaguma, can you confirm that he is a shareholder and how many shares he holds? Can you substantiate what you have said?

MR YAGUMA: Madam Speaker, I said there were rumours and he has not denied. The money was paid and the road was not done. 

Furthermore, Madam Speaker, you went to Buhweju for the burial of our colleague, hon. Joy Kariisa, and you did not meet any taxi. Now, how do you think the people of Buhweju travel? Their only gateway is through my constituency, Kashari, the route which I was telling you about. It is in our NRM manifesto. When the President was in Buhweju, he directed hon. Byandala to work on the feasibility studies. I have not seen anything being done there. I am surprised that – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I asked you to substantiate and now you are submitting on something else. If you do not have the facts, please withdraw. 

MR YAGUMA: Madam Speaker, I do not have any bad intentions against anyone. However, if we have night dancers here doing it against NRM, then we should help ourselves. Thank you.  (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, it is very difficult to build a name but very easy to destroy one. If the honourable member does not have the facts here to substantiate that statement, he should either withdraw the statement or apologise. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we all brought here the rumours that we hear and accused Members here on the Hansard – It is very serious. Do you have all the facts or not, hon. Yaguma? 

MR YAGUMA: Madam Speaker, I gave the background of the road. I said I went with the minister to see the road and by then they had paid about 30 percent. He promised that the contract would be terminated. Instead, they went and paid 100 percent. What I am reporting here is what I am getting from my constituency. So,my colleague should not be worried. I have not said he has shares and I have not said he stole the money. I am just reporting what I have heard.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, in view of the report and the debate by Members concerning contractors, more so local contractors in the country, and the apparent curtailing of the few foreign companies that are here, this matter should be taken as a serious national security issue. It should be taken as a matter of national economy importance because you realise from district level to the UNRA central government roads-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are submitting. You are smuggling hon. Kwiyucwiny’s opportunity.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and that is why I am seeking your guidance. I cannot debate-

THE SPEAKER: No, why don’t you allow Members to comment on your report? The report is yours.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I am only presenting an important dilemma that this country is facing.

THE SPEAKER: Why didn’t you include it in the report?

MR MUKITALE: Arising from the debate-

THE SPEAKER: I think you should do that through your chairman and he can make that point when we are winding up because this is your report.

7.27
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. From what I have heard this afternoon, there is a lot of demand to construct, repair or maintain roads. However, many of those roads and bridges we have heard about have not been included in the budget and yet we have said as a nation that the priority of this country this time is infrastructure development. When we say infrastructure development is a priority, which includes roads and electricity, let us live up to that word in the true sense; let the priority be priority.

Madam Speaker, also in my constituency there are roads, which have been named many times and they have disappeared from the main budget. Nebbi-Goli Road was once in the main budget, now it is not there. If you go there, you will see trailers going to Congo and trucks lying on their sides on the road. The road is impassable. The stretch from Nebbi to Goli, Paidha, Zombo, Zeu, Warr and Vurra has been left as an island in West Nile. Most of the roads in West Nile are being worked on but this stretch has been left out. I do not know whether we are going to donate it to Congo because it is worse than the roads in Congo. The bridges are also very narrow.

I want to thank the Government because recently, we were able to commission Nyagak Dam and now we have some power in West Nile.However, the dam has expanded and the small bridge, which was on the main road, is slowly being eaten away. I am – (Member timed out_)

7.30
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. The major and most important road in Bunyoro is the road from Kigumba to Masindi, Hoima, to Kyenjojo. This road, for the last few years I have been here, has been reflected in the State of the Nation Address and in the Budget Speech, including this year. However, to my surprise, I have not seen anything here about the Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kyenjojo Road. The minister has got to tell the Banyoro why, because they have been your number one supporters in the whole of this country. 

Regarding the issue of ranches, as I talk now they are a security threat in my district. People are fighting and cutting one another, and the honourable minister is aware of this. He went there but he has not gone back and he has not solved that issue. There is a rumour that these ranches have been reallocated to one of the investors, an Indian. I want the honourable minister to allay the fears of the people of Kiryandongo as to whether this is true or it is a rumour. Also, when are the people going to be resettled in these ranches? Should they have hope in this Government?

I want to agree with hon. Kakooza about naming the people who are issuing out fraudulent titles. Who are these Ugandans who cannot be exposed? Let the committee tell us their names. We are tired of covering up wrongdoers and dilly dallying around. We want these names exposed in this Parliament.

Recently, I read in the press about the land committee of my honourable friend called Nantaba, the Minister of State for Lands, but I do not know what happened to this committee. Would she like to tell us what happened? Why did she have to halt that committee, because people had hope in it? She had already issued out a timetable and also raised the interests of Ugandans but-(Member timed out­­­_)

7.32
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a good report. 

I hope the committee was shown a conceptual framework for an appropriate transport plan for this country. That is how you determine how many roads, how much water transport, air transport and rail infrastructure to construct. If you do not have that, you can keep spending money but you are not connected; the connectivity could be low even when you have put in a lot of money. So, it is important that we have a conceptual framework for an appropriate transport mix.

Madam Speaker, I want to comment on the community roads. We can have all sorts of good roads - tarmac and so forth - but if the small roads within the villages are not done, we can end up not utilising the amount of expenditure we have put in the big roads. So it is important that while we are looking at our connectivity, we look at these community roads and small bridges, which we cannot do at district level and which are a problem. I think the ministry needs to come in so that you help with the connectivity of the network.

I would like to comment on the issue of physical planning. I think Uganda is now considered a planning area. However, I am disappointed that the budget is small. I wish it was enough so that even small villages would be planned for before you build anything on them or before you develop them. I want to appeal to the minister, if you can avail us some teams for -(Member timed out_)

7.34
MRS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to join the rest to appreciate the committee for the report.

I will straightaway comment on the contractor facilitated financing project. I am happy to learn that Namutumba-Butaleja-Nabumali Road is going to be worked on, but I just want to pose a question while echoing what my colleague, hon. Netalisire, asked: When is the process of procurement of contractors and supervision consultants going to be complete? I am also happy that the ministry worked on the Idudi-Busembatya-Namakoko Road;it was in a bad state and when I wrote a letter to the ministry, they acted. Thank you very much. 

I would like to just find out when you are working on the Namutumba-Bulange-Bugiri Road. It has been in the plan and it is supposed to be tarmacked. Also, when are you working on the following bridges: Namakoko-Pallisa, Buyenvu-Budama/Butaleja, and Kisoro-Butaleja? We are eagerly waiting for that. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.36
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have three issues to raise and the first one is on road units. A year ago or plus, His Excellency the President of Uganda gave out equipment for road units. It was a grant and indeed it was not a donation. However, as I talk, many of these road units are grounded. We have heard many colleagues saying that in their districts, these units are grounded. In Kampala, we got the same road units some three years ago but right now we have only one grader which is operational. 

All these road units come from China. These are not donations; this is the money that we are supposed to pay back in future. Our sons and daughters will have to pay back this money. So, why do we go for poor quality road units and yet we are supposed to pay for these road units? 

Secondly, I would like to comment on district road committees.In the report, we have district road committees but here in Kampala it is supposed to be city road committees and also the Road Fund. I want to the know the relationship between KCCA and Ministry of Works because they are telling us that when the KCCA Act was enacted –(Member timed out_)

7.38
MS ROSE AKELLO (Independent, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two concerns. One is about the road from Kitgum to Kidepo and the one from Kaabong to Kidepo. This road leads to Kidepo National Game Park, and according to the CNN award of this year, it was the third best after Masai Mara. However, you wonder, because the road leading to this game park is in bad shape and tourists who go there get stuck every now and then. Let us remember that Kidepo National Park and the other parks that we have bring in revenue for this country. So, I want to know from the Minister of Works when they are going to work on these roads. I have even seen in the budget here that there is nothing to do with Kidepo. They are leaving it to another grant.

Secondly, there is a contractor who is working on Kaabong-Karenga Road and the company is called Coil. My goodness, this contractor is just wasting time. I went there and I just came back last week; the contractor does not even put murram, not even offshoots. They just heap soil and leave it there. I can assure you, honourable minister, I went there personally and I got a foreman on the road. I asked him, “What are you doing? Is this murram? You are not even putting offshoots.” I am not an engineer but I was asking him those questions. Do you know what he told me? He told me, “You politicians are here just causing problems for us; after all, I got this contract from central Government.” 

I want to know from the minister if the contracts given from central Government for rural areas are just dumped there and are not worked on well. I want to-(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: I think you made your point. Honourable members, we are winding up. Okay, maybe we shall have someone to speak for the ferry. (Laughter)

7.40
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard colleagues laughing but honestly, you should be crying with us. The population of the people who would be served by this Bukungu-Kagwara-Kaberamaido ferry is immense. It would contribute to great economic development for the people of this region. 

Madam Speaker, I have two letters here that I was able to extract from the communications that have been going on. There are those that even date back to the Eighth Parliament. Because of the short time I have, I could not bring them all but I have a letter dated 15 April 2013 from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and addressed to hon. John Byabagambi. Some of these letters were copied to hon. Okupa, hon. Balyejusa, hon. Omona Kenneth, hon. Ibi Ekwau and the Rt Hon. Speaker, and we were being directed to follow up on the issue of this ferry. This letter was signed by the honourable Minister, Matia Kasaija. It is about the Bukungu-Kagwara-Kaberamaido Ferry. In it, there was a directive that the Ministry of Works unilaterally takes up the process of following up the financing of this ferry. 

The other letter was from the office of the Minister of State for Works, Ministry of Works and Transport, reacting to and addressing the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament. This letter was copied to us as well. In these two letters, Ministry of Finance is being directed to find resources but Ministry of Finance is finding a problem because the process was started by the Office of the Prime Minister, which is now withdrawing from the entire process. A lot of money was wasted in the procurement process, designing and planning. Where does this leave us, Madam Speaker? We really plead with you to see to it that the process that was started in this House is finished, so that we have the ferry bounce back on the budget of this financial year, because now it is not even being mentioned. Just help us.

This is a process that has taken long. I really plead that the Office of the Prime Minister directs the responsible ministry to sit and they find a way forward. Out of the over Shs1 trillion, let money be found; after all, it is only Shs33 billion. Let monies be found and then we sort out the issue of this ferry. We plead with you. 

This ferry would support a very big population in this region; I do not want to enumerate. If we just keep on pleading, I do not see it coming. It came up in the Eighth Parliament and it has now disappeared. There are designs, we visited Nakiwogo, but the process has stopped and it has now disappeared. If we give it even a single year, it will never come back to life. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, during the NRC, this ferry was under the Public Investment Plan- as far back as the NRC- and then it disappeared. So, apparently, they keep bringing it up and taking it away. It is a serious matter.

MR OKUPA: I would just like to give some information. In April 2006, the President wrote to hon. Nasasira directing him to get money for that financial year for the ferry to be procured for that line of Kamuli-Kagwara and then the one which was supposed to follow the next financial year in the budget was Amolatar. However, we were surprised that the Amolatar one, which was supposed to come after this, has been procured. 

When you look at the budgets of 2007/2008, 2008/2009, 2010/2011, 2011/2012, the ferry has been there. However, I was surprised that when the Minister of Finance was reading her speech, it had disappeared. What is the problem? Are we the problem or you are the problem? This money was supposed to be provided under PRDP but people misused the money under PRDP. The designs are there, everything is there and we were supposed to start the construction. What is happening? Can we budget for two to three years because we need to start constructing the landing sites and then start building a ferry. Can we stagger this money, the Shs 33 billion, into two to three years and we have this on the ground.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the ferry, I just want to propose that this House directs the Minister of Finance to sit with the Budget Committee and ensure that there is provision of money for the ferry. When the Budget Committee sits to look at the other things, it can also bring a report on this. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I have to move a motion before the report is passed, with your permission, that the Government includes in the air transport sector the rehabilitation and expansion of Tororo air field; and that tarmacking in the construction of the Namayingo-Majanji-Bugiri-Busia Road be extended up to Tororo.

Finally, I have one clarification to seek. Can the Minister of Works inform this country what the cost will be of implementing urbanisation as per Vision 2040 together with the current urbanisation, which is not in conformity with the law? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ibi, please lay the document on the Table.

MS IBI EKWAU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the first letter dated 15 April 2013 from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development addressed to hon. John Byabagambi, Minister of State for Works and Transport, and signed by the honourable minister, Matia Kasaija. It was about delegating procurement of the ferry by Office of the Prime Minister for Lake Kyoga. I beg to lay. 

The second letter is dated 6 May 2013 and it is from the office of Minister of State for Works, Ministry of Works and Transport and it is addressed to the Rt. Hon. Speaker. This letter was signed by the honourable minister, Abraham Byandala. This one was also on Bukungu-Kasilo-Kagwara ship. I beg to lay it on the Table, Rt. Hon Speaker.

7.49
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Rt Hon. Speaker and Members of Parliament, first of all, I sincerely thank the committee for a report with good recommendations and I sincerely thank you for the debate we have just gone through, which has given some very good information. 

My counterpart, the shadow minister, asked why the road fund and UNRA do not act business-like. That is a very good statement, but they are operating under bureaucratic laws. How do you combine the two? This is the problem we have. You want them to be business-like but they are operating under bureaucratic laws. So, when you allow us to operate out of the bureaucratic laws, then we can move very fast. 

Secondly, on the Mbale-Bubulo-Lwakhakha Road, the African Development Bank mission is here; we are getting money to have this road tarmacked, together with the Kapchorwa-Suam and Kanungu-Ishasha-Rukungiri roads. So, please be patient, they will be worked on. 

Somebody said that money sent to the districts is being misused. This is why we have always been urging you, Members of Parliament, to be on the road committees. You would know where money is going, and you would be able to supervise, monitor and ensure that this money is properly used. The ministry cannot be everywhere but we have MPs in every district; please, go to these road committees. 

Bridges in Kanungu: I apologise to the People of Kanungu and the country at large. We were coming to the end of procurement but a whistle-blower came in and IGG stopped the process. The IGG took over a month investigating, we were then sent to PPDA and PPDA cleared us. However, these fellows went to court and there is now a court injunction. We were there on Monday and the Judge ordered the two sides to submit and he will give his views on 14th of next month. It is very unfortunate but that is how things are moving. For the other bridge, we are about to get a contractor to start on the work. 

The Fort Portal-Mityana Road, yes, has outlived its lifespan and because we get very little money for maintenance, we cannot do periodic maintenance on these tarmac roads. That is why in this budget I fought so much with you, and it is with your support that we got an extra Shs 72 billion plus. This money is going to be utilised to work on some of these tarmac roads: Fort Portal-Kasese-Katunguru, Pakwach-Moyo and then Kampala-Mukono-Jinja.  However, I need more money to work on these roads. 

My colleague, the Minister of Finance, who is in charge of the road fund, will tell you something about the operationalisation of the fund.  

Tororo-Mbale-Soroti Road, again we apologise but at least the speed of work has increased. That is good news. I have solved all the technical issues, apart from getting a no-objection from Solicitor General. If I get that, then my people will be in a position to pay the rates, which has been a problem to us. 

Musiita-Namayingo-Busia Road; I hope before the end of this month or early next month, you will be seeing adverts in the papers calling for civil works contractors. Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kyenjojo; we have already sent out documents for Kigumba up to Kabwoya we have already we have sent out documents and we expect to receive them in a month’s time, to start evaluating and get a contractor for Masindi to Kabwoya - they are in two lots - funded under ADB. We are discussing seriously with World Bank the possibility of moving from Kabwoya up to Kyenjojo. I can assure, you this road is going to be tarmacked. 

The road to Kidepo: it is very unfortunate because we had started works on this road but we were stopped by Uganda Wild Life Authority. We pleaded with them and they said, “No, you are going to disturb our animals; do an environmental impact assessment.” Now they are saying they want me to pay Shs 80 million to NEMA. I have complained several times to my colleagues that this is a lot of money because they are just checking; they are not the people doing the study. For all the works I have to do, I need to pay between Shs 4 and Shs 5 billion to NEMA to approve the reports and this is too much. I cannot afford it. 

On railway construction, Government is working very hard to ensure that we build the new standard gauge. You have heard about the tripartite meeting between Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda, and other countries have been –(Interruption) 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am standing on a point of order in protection of the Constitution of Uganda, national objectives and directive principles of state policy xxvii, which state and prescribe the functions of institutions of Government, namely NEMA. The work which NEMA has to do is a constitutional duty in protection of the environment. Is the honourable member in order to disregard the duty of NEMA in pursuing its goal, which is a constitutional goal of protecting the wildlife, which Uganda potentially depends on in terms of tourism? Is he in order to disregard what is constitutional?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is aware of those provisions of the Constitution but the Constitution also requires teams to create facilities for all Ugandans. So, it is okay. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the good ruling. 

On the issue of the national airline, the government policy as I speak and as was stated some many years ago is to divest ourselves from non-performing assets. However, this morning, I held a serious meeting with airline operators. There is what they call the Yamoussoukro Declaration, which has been confusing people, which says that you must own over 51 per cent shares to carry a national flag. Two weeks ago, I chaired a community meeting in Kigali after two hours and we checked and found that this is not necessary. They say you must have – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: How much are you left with?

MR BYANDALA: Just a little. The Yamoussoukro Declaration just says you must have effective control but not ownership. So, there was confusion in the interpretation and we are going to pursue this. I am going to sit with my colleagues, the ministers and top management, to see how we can get a national airline carrying our flag so that it can move. This is possible and we are going to do it.

On the Bukungu ferry, Madam Speaker, first of all I want to correct my friend hon. Ibi Florence; the money was not wasted. We did a survey of Lake Kyoga to find out which routes are safe and good for investment. We also got a consultant to make designs and these. So, there was no money wasted. We invested it and it was a matter of picking up from there. This is stage movement. So, I think it should be put very clearly that there was no money lost but we are moving slowly because of the funds we have. 

Madam Speaker, they talked about landing sites, saying that we should work on them. We have a problem because of the weather changes at our landing sites these days. We need a landing site with two levels - when the water is down and when the water is up. Those we designed a long time ago were with the water up. Now the water goes down and then it rains; it is a problem but we are addressing it very seriously.

The capacity of contractors is very low. We are trying to help them through a crossroads project where we are building capacity technically and financially. We also want to institute a commission, the Uganda Construction Industry Commission, to assist them to ensure that they move on very well. -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Is the problem the design or the money because we do not see it in the budget policy statement? We do not see the money provided for it but you are now telling us about the technical issues which you addressed. Is the money there? Is there hope?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you said you have happily spent money to create the facilities and you say it is not wasted. Now that those facilities are there, what do you want to do with them?

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, money wasted was on the BKB ferry – the Bukungu-Kagwara - 

THE SPEAKER: I thought you said it was not wasted?

MR BYANDALA: It was not wasted.

THE SPEAKER: So, now that it is not wasted, what are you going to do? Are you going to leave the facilities just there?

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, we have written to the Ministry of Finance. As I said earlier, it is one of the projects we wanted to do and it ended up being a priority project without funding. We submitted but with the present envelope that we have, we could not afford it. However, I have been speaking to my colleague, hon. Matia Kasaija, and we are going to ensure that - We need to build that ship and we need just over Shs 30 billion. So, we are going to ensure that in the next financial year, we at least provide Shs 10 billion so that we can build it over time and ensure that the people get the service they want. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I said yesterday when discussing the report on defence that the Minister of Finance, as we discuss the budget, is authorising the Ministry of Defence to borrow money from commercial banks and the Bank of Uganda to procure vehicles and equipment. This matter requires the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Works and the Budget Committee to look for this money. This is not a lot of money. They have over Shs 1 billion. We need Shs 30 billion to do this ferry. 

Some people do not know, but if I were going to Soroti, I would just pass here and I am already there, or even up to Lira. It would cut costs on my fuel and vehicle maintenance. So, can we have the Minister of Finance commit herself on the Floor before we end this matter?

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to thank you for allowing me to make these comments. I thank my colleagues, the MPs who are here; I thank you very much and I urge you to let us pass this budget so that we can move very fast and ensure that all the roads we budgeted for this year are tackled so that we move forward. 

8.04
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee and members for a report well written and submitted. 

I also want to thank Members for the observations and contributions. The input you have come up with should enable us to function better in the execution of our duties. I want to give an undertaking as a ministry that the observations and recommendations, which have come up in this report, shall be pursued very seriously so that next time when we report, we can be in position to report on progress as per the observations and recommendations. 

Madam Speaker, -(Mr Birekeraawo Nsubuga rose_)

THE SPEAKER: But he has just started; he has not said anything yet.

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, the Minister has just said that the recommendations in this report will be followed. On page 47, there is a recommendation about rental rates, where our people are being charged in dollars. Can you tell this House and the country at large what you are going to do to ensure that Ugandans are not charged in dollars for renting buildings?

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, when I say that the recommendations as contained in the report will be taken up, it also entails studying the practicability of enforcing or complying with those recommendations. I know that we are running a liberalised economy and I will be in position to get the committee on board regarding the practicalities of what they are proposing. 

Madam Speaker, there are a number of issues which were raised by Members concerning physical planning and urbanisation. In 2010, the Physical Planning Act was passed and my ministry, together with a number of urban and local authorities, have come up with plans which we should be following as we pursue development and landuse in the various parts of the country. 

There has, however, been a problem of compliance in the implementation of some of these physical plans. It is the duty of my ministry to make sure that we follow up on this. One of the drawbacks that we have had in regard to this has been as a result of the resource envelop that we have as a ministry. However, I promise that we shall be in position to try and do better than we have been doing.

On the issue of urbanisation and the cost of urbanisation, we are coming up with an urban policy, which is going to be costed.This will give us an indication of how much we would spend if we were to be in a position to pursue urbanisation in earnest over the next 20 years.

There was the issue of issuance of illegal land titles, which my ministry has been grappling with over time. The issuance of illegal land titles involves connivance by a number of individuals, and in certain cases district land boards and area land boards. We are following up on this matter. One of our biggest hopes is that with the institutionalisation of computerisation in the ministry, it will become easy for us to ascertain the authenticity of the information that we are dealing with in the course of processing of land titles, and we shall be in a position to know exactly at what point the fraud is being committed. (Interjection) Let me finish with this point. 

It is also true that much as we have a problem within our ministry, there are a number of titles that are being produced outside our system, particularly on Nkrumah and Nasserroads. Our belief is that with the new security measures that we have introduced in our computerised system, we shall be in a position to easily detect those which are fraudulent and therefore take up such cases with the law enforcement agencies. (Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Honourable minister, you were recently quoted in the media saying that we can now process our land titles within three days at the regional offices and at the headquarters. Can you now confirm that we can actually process our land titles within three days?

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, all things being equal, that can be done.

There is the issue of unplanned construction of houses in areas gazetted for other activities like football grounds, parade grounds and so forth. As I pointed out, at times there has been failure to comply with the plans of the area. There has also been a problem of failure to comply with the approved plans. I remember I had a problem in Hoima and we have also had a problem in Lira, where a parade ground is subdivided forallocation into residential houses. We have had these problems but as a ministry, we have been able to rein in some of these cases, particularly where they have been reported.

Madam Speaker, there is the issue of finding a permanent solution to the problem of land evictions. Fortunately, we have been able to come up with the national land policy and it articulates quite a number of solutions to this problem. It is also true that if we can be in a position to successfully mount a programme of sensitisation in the countryside, involving explaining the constitutional provisions on land, the Land Act of 1998 and the Land (Amendment) Act 2010, with the view to ensuring that people understand their rights and responsibilities, and if we engaged landlords and bibanja owners, I am sure we shall be in a position to solve some of the problems we are currently facing regarding land evictions.

The solution of creating a land fund is one of those viable ones. The only problem we have had has been in regard to operationalising the land fund with sufficient funds to be able to pay off the absentee landlords and issue certificates to bibanja owners or bona fide land occupants in those areas. My view is that as the economy continues to improve and we have more resources to deploy, – and Parliament I am sure will approve allocation of funds to the land fund –as Government we shall be able to follow up on this one.

Madam Speaker, there is the issue of Kiryandongo. Yes, there is a serious problem there, I admit, and we are trying to make sure that we go over to the ground and deal with this problem. However, I want to assure you that ever since I joined the ministry, I have not been aware of any allocations involving the ranches in Kiryandongo area. I am going to go through my records again but I do not have that information. I know you are faced with an avalanche of people from all sorts of areas who think there is plenty of free land in Kiryandongo, but we shall come there and see how to deal with that problem.

There was a question asked about whom land belongs to in Uganda. Land in Uganda – (Mr Ssemugaba rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are a member of the committee; why don’t you let the minister speak? 

MR SSEMUGABA: Madam Speaker, I just want to say something on the issue of ranchers.You remember, it is has almost been twenty years now; our people who were given pieces of land do not own them. The ministers of finance are here and they are the ones handling the arrears. Government has not paid the ranchers and our people cannot get land titles. The titles still belong to the ranchers and we are sitting on a time bomb. 

Another issue is that these people issuing fraudulent land titles are still in the offices. The commissioner in charge of titles, Madam Kulata, and others are still in office. They were reinstated. How will they solve the problems in lands when those people are still there, and they are the ones who have been issuing such fake land titles? What are they planning to do? We are tired! Ugandans are being cheated. You put a caveat but these people still offer land titles to the rich people. How is the minister going to solve that? Let him reassure the nation?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemugaba was really bursting; he really has a serious problem. You better solve it. He and others are really affected.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, we dealt with some of those issues in the committee, and I am sure the Member is aware that these are problems that we are trying to deal with. 

Land in this country belongs to the citizens of Uganda and these citizens can own land under four land tenure systems - customary, leasehold, freehold and mailo. As for the issue about some non-citizens owning land, they can own land under leasehold and this is how they get land for their various economic activities. In many countries, land belongs to Government, that is true, but the Constitution dictates that land in Uganda should belong to the people of Uganda– (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member from Kyankwanzi raised a very important issue of the staff in the ministry who are conniving with the cheats and they are still in office. The minister has strategically avoided answering that question. 

Madam Speaker, I happen to be a member of the committee; we asked the minister to give us the list of those who have been interdicted, those in court, and what actions he has taken on such staff. Up to today, the minister has not brought that list. The honourable member who has asked was even the chairperson of that committee. No wonder, Madam Speaker, you saw him explaining with a lot of pain, but the honourable minister is still avoiding him. Is the minister in order to continue ignoring the Member’s concerns?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you appreciate that the submission by hon. Ssemugaba is really coming from very deep and appears to be really painful. I think he has been harbouring this pain for some time, and he is not alone because hon. Kahunde also talked about ranchers. I even have a petition here brought by other people under the Ranch Restructuring Programme who have never got their deeds. So, what are you going to do? Do you have a solution, honourable chairperson?

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, I do not have a solution but I have clarification on that person they call Kulata. When we were in the committee, we heard information that the lady who is the Commissioner for Land Registration had been interdicted. We asked the minister and the PS to tell us why she was back in office and the members, in their wisdom, decided not to hear from that staff. We never took any information from her; we barred her from talking to us. 

Secondly, we demanded to get information from the court that reinstated her to office. The information we got was only short of a letter of judgement from court. Up to now, we have been dealing with this paper. Actually, the next item we are handling is to call the Minister, the Permanent Secretary and Kulata to explain what brought her back to office. So it is a pending case with the committee. We thought it was not wise for one person and a few others who had cases to answer to stall committee work. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, she was not the only person; her case is in court but what about the others? We asked for the list. Do not cover for the minister because there are a number of them. There are even those who had issued two or three land titles for one piece of land, and they have not answered up to now. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, for some of the matters, we provided information to the chairperson of the committee as he has reported. Secondly, some of these cases are being investigated by the IGG, so I cannot at this stage come out and say what is happening to individual officers. I know for a fact that the IGG has started on investigations in the land registry. My view is that we should let the IGG do her work and then we shall be in a position to get a report covering all those whom you would like me to give a report on here on the Floor. For now, I do not have sufficient investigative competences of my own. 

Regarding the issue of the ranches, you are right that this issue has been going on for over 20 years. As Government, we are still trying to deal with that problem. It is not only my ministry that is dealing with this issue; Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Water and Environment and a number of ministries are also dealing with this particular problem. I am sure as soon as we have a solution addressing the problem of all these ranchers, we shall table it in a transparent manner. 

Madam Speaker, there is the issue of district boundary disputes between Bulambuli, Kween and Bukedea. We are handling this matter as a ministry. We should have had a team on the ground much earlier but because we did not have the requisite funding to do our work, the work was delayed. 

As for the people who settled in the lower lands in this area, – several tribes had settled in the area - the Odwe report has come up with very good findings and recommendations which we are trying to follow up on. I am sure the Members of Parliament from these areas are aware of the work we are doing on the ground. The problem we have is that at times we have to move with caution. We cannot move as fast as they would like us to do because if we do not move cautiously, we shall make mistakes and everybody will come here to demonise us. 

Madam Speaker, regarding the issue of illegal land evictions, the legal mandate of this committee has been discussed and we are waiting for final recommendations from the legal minds in Government. I am sure the whole country will get to know what exactly is going to happen to the work of the committee and under what legal framework they will operate. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that save for the recurrent and development expenditure under vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport; vote113, UNRA;vote 118, Uganda Road Fund;vote 012, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; vote 156, Uganda Land Commission, this House do approve this report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Full Report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to appear in the Hansard bound Volume of September 2013)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the minister to come back? Yes, you are a member of this House. You do not just leave because your issues are finished. Did you only come for your business? You are supposed to tell me where you are going. You are supposed to support the House.

8.26
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to present this report on behalf of the chairperson, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who is currently on duty trying to benchmark on the much needed PPP Bill. I have been hearing the concerns of Members and I would like to put their fears to rest that this Bill is being processed by the Committee on Finance.

Madam Speaker, before I start on my report, I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating you on the achievements you have attained at the international level, specifically at the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. We congratulate you and we are proud of you.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of this report that I am going to present and also request that it be uploaded fully on our Hansard for the record. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, sections 9 and 11 of the Budget Act and Rule 135 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandate sessional committees to critically examine government recurrent and development budget estimates and make recommendations for general debate in the House. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development examined seven votes under its jurisdiction and these included:

    • Vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
    • Vote 130, Treasury operations;
    • Vote 108, National Planning Authority;
    • Vote 131, Office of the Auditor-General;
    • Vote 141, Uganda Revenue Authority;
    • Vote 143, Uganda Bureau of Statistics;
    • Vote 153, Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA).

The methodology and mandate are given. I will now move on page 2, although it is recorded here as page 1. 

Vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development The mandate is given. The budget performance overview is also given on the named page. I do not think I need to read all this because of time constraints.The key planned outputs are also given on page 3. 

Page 4 has the proposed allocations for financial year 2013/2014. In financial year 2013/2014, the proposed total allocation to vote 008 is Shs 289.65 billion, reflecting an increment of 37.2 percent against the approved budget of financial year 2012/2013.

The proposed allocation for vote 008 is on page 5 and the details are as follows: recurrent expenditure Shs 64,240,776,000 and development expenditure Shs 251,409,735,000. The total is given as Shs 315,650,511,000. You note there is a difference of about Shs 26 million; that is due to the non-VAT taxes. That is the difference between the amount I have read and the Shs 315 billion.

Macroeconomic Policy and Management
 
The proposed allocation to the macroeconomic policy and management programme is Shs 125.904 billion reflecting an additional funding of Shs 50.12 billion, a 66 percent increment against the financial year 2012/2013 approved budget. This is largely on account of increased allocation to projects like capitalisation of institutions, from Shs 59.4 billion to Shs 102.11 billion; support to macro-economic management, from Shs 0.915 billion to Shs 2.065 billion; support to national authorising officer, from Shs 2.58 billion to Shs 3.99 billion; Belgo-Ugandan Study and Consultancy Fund, from Shs 1.85 billion to Shs 3.65 billion, and coming on board of new subventions, Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority, with the allocation of Shs 6 billion.

The Tax Gap

The committee observes that Uganda’s tax effort is estimated at 54 percent to 65 percent. This implies a tax gap of 35 percent to 46 percent. The tax gap translates to Shs 3.325 trillion to Shs 5.317 trillion that remains uncollected.

The committee further observed that Uganda’s tax expenditures are estimated to amount to between 2.3 percent to 3 percent of GDP This is equivalent to Shs 1.129 trillion to Shs 1.472 trillion in foregone revenue every year.

The committee recommends that measures to streamline tax expenditure, tax policy and tax administration to close the tax gap with a view of reversing the trend be undertaken to raise tax efforts. These could include the national identity cards, levying a higher rate for night clubs, and imposing a user fee, say Shs 3000, for every mobile phone line per year.

Tax Exemptions and Waivers

The committee observes that Uganda’s domestic revenue mobilisation realised an increment of 0.6 percentage points as a percentage of GDP from 12.3 percent in financial year 2011/2012 to 12.9 percent in financial year 2013. While the committee appreciates this remarkable performance, the tax revenue of 12.9 percent of GDP is far below the sub-Saharan target of 18 percent and 20 percent for Kenya.

The committee observes that the low tax to GDP ratio is largely attributed to the numerous tax exemptions and waivers granted to NGOs and selected private companies by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic development.

The committee notes that-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, if you could just read the subject and the recommendations because we shall print the entire report in the Hansard.

MS AKOL: Okay. On page 8, the committee recommends that Government streamlines tax exemptions to minimise revenue loss. The committee further recommends that the Ministerof Finance, Planning and Economic Development reviews the performance of the existing tax exemptions and waivers and their impact on the economy. The report of the review should be presented to Parliament by end of December 2013.

Stock of Public Debt

The committee observes that the total stock of public debt as at end of financial year 2012/2013 is Shs 15.94 trillion, which is 29.1 percent of GDP.The details are enumerated.The committee observed that at this rate of increase in the stock of total debt, the country is likely to experience debt distress. 

The committee further observes with concern that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development signed 13 new loan agreements equivalent to Shs1.3 trillion without prior approval of Parliament. These are listed in that table you see below. We know the mandate of Parliament as given by the Constitution and the Budget Act and the Public Finance and Accountability Act. The committee observes that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic overlooked the provisions of the Constitution and the Public Finance and Accountability Act and, therefore, undermined the mandate entrusted in the Legislative arm of Government.

The committee recommends that Parliament stays consideration of any loan requests and directs the Committee on National Economy to investigate and report on the circumstances under which the said loan agreements were signed prior to parliamentary approval.

The Non-Performing Assets Recovery Tribunal (NPART) 

The proposed allocation to NPART in this financial year is Shs250 million. The committee notes that for a period of over five years, Parliament has always been informed that the Bill for winding up NPART activities is before Cabinet. In financial year 2012/2013, Parliament appropriated funds to cover only six months within which time the activities of NPART should have been wound up, and resolved that no further request for more funds will be entertained by Parliament.

The committee is not satisfied with the continued funding to NPART in the financial year 2013/2014.In light of the constrained resource envelope, the committee recommends that the Shs250 million be reallocated to other priority areas in vote 008 and in particular project 1197c, FINMAP components III, IV and V. 

Project 1211, Belgo-Ugandan Study and Consultancy Fund

The committee observed that Belgo-Ugandan Study and Consultancy Fund has a proposed allocation of Shs3.65 billion, reflecting a 97 percent increment against the financial year 2012/2013 approved budget.

The committee further observes that the planned outputs under this project in form of supporting 20 studies and consultancies, monitoring and executing contracts/agreements for studies and consultancies, preparing bid documents for consultancies and eventual technical and financial evaluation of the proposals do not differ significantly with those implemented in financial year 2012/2013. The justification for the Shs1.8 billion increment is therefore insufficient. The committee considers a Shs1 billion increment appropriate. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs2.85 billion be appropriated and Shs0.8 billion be saved for other priority areas, in particular project 1197c FINMAP components III, IV and V. 

Appropriation in Aid

The committee notes that spending agencies that have been granted appropriation in aid have never made reports to Parliament. Members will recall that Section 17 of the Budget Act, 2001 requires that the minister responsible for any vote on appropriation in aid is to make quarterly reports to Parliament on the manner in which the funds from the vote are expended. The committee observes that failure of spending agencies to report on appropriation in aid makes it subject to abuse. 

The committee recommends that provisions of Section 18(1) of the Budget Act, 2001 be invoked and the minister gives an explanation not later than 15 November 2013 and thereafter complies with the provisions of Section 17 (a) of the Budget Act.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, I propose that you read the subject and the recommendations because we are going to print the entire report in the Hansard. It is going to be reflected.

MS AKOL: Obliged, Madam Speaker.

Lottery and Gaming

The committee recommends that a strong regulatory framework be put in place to ensure that investment in the industry flourishes without putting the public, especially the minors, at risk of unscrupulous dealers. The committee further recommends that the budget of the National Lotteries Board be enhanced to enable them effectively execute their mandate. 

Proposed Appropriation to Vote Function 1401

The committee recommends that only Shs124.854 billion be appropriated for the vote function 1401, macroeconomic policy and management. 

Vote Function 1402, Budget Preparation, Execution and Monitoring

National Planning Authority (NPA)

The committee recommends that NPA be given the mandate to determine MTEF allocation to the development budget and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be in charge of the recurrent budgets. 

The Output Budgeting Tool (OBT)

The committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development expedites the process of reviewing the functionality of the Output Budgeting Tool with a view of enhancing its functionality, connectivity and backup.

Budget Monitoring and Evaluation 

The committee recommends that monitoring and evaluation guidelines, which are standardised, be formulated and the reporting mechanism be harmonised. The committee further recommends that monitoring and evaluation of budget implementation be enhanced through improved resourcing and facilitation of M&E players to make them more effective. Parliament should expedite its follow up of the monitoring reports issued by the players in the M$E framework.

Supplementary Expenditure

The committee observed that supplementary budgets, especially those that result from would-be foreseen activities show weak planning. The committee recommends that Government observes budget discipline as supplementary budgets result into budget distortion and negatively impact on service delivery.

Management of Cash Limits

The committee observed that there are gaps in the cash management process. The committee observed a mismatch between the approved budget and macro and micro cash limits. 

The committee recommends that the formula used to issue cash limits to MDAs be transparent, especially to Parliament that is mandated to appropriate. This will help in enhancing progress in the implementation of the approved budget.

Recommended Appropriation to Vote Function 1402

The committee is satisfied with the planned activities and therefore recommends that Shs32.52 billion be appropriated for the budget preparation, execution and monitoring vote function.

Vote Function 1403, Public Financial Management

The proposed allocation to this vote function is Shs45.312 billion. The committee recommends that Shs1,050 million be reallocated to project 1197c to ensure that activities that suffer huge cuts are enhanced under the FINMAP project.

Procurement Policy Units

The committee observed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should define the mandate and objectives and identify the planned outputs, which should be distinct from those of PPDA, to avoid duplication. 

The committee is constrained to propose approval of funds for this subvention.The committee now recommends that Shs400 million be reallocated to OAG to cater for the audit of public secondary schools. This is because we are seeing a duplication of the activities of the Procurement Policy Unit with the PPDA. 

Recommended Appropriation for Vote Function 1403

The committee recommends that Shs45.962 billion be appropriated to the public financial management vote function.

Vote Function 1404, Development Policy Research and Monitoring

This is to do with the Presidential Initiative on Banana and Industrial Development (PIBID). 

The committee observed that the escalation of project costs has led to an increased burden on public resources. The committee recommends that the process of changing ownership of PIBID to 100 percent Government owned be expedited. The committee further observed that governance issues of PIBID should be immediately addressed and that a clear business plan be developed.

The committee, however, recommends that Shs25.2 billion be appropriated to enable PIBID address its contractual obligations.

Recommended Appropriation for Vote Function 1404

The committee recommends that Shs43.999 billion be appropriated for the development policy research and monitoring vote function. 

Vote Function 1406, Investment and Private Sector
The proposed allocation for this function is Shs 15.899 billion.  Shs 3.752 billion, pension settlement to former UEB employees; I beg to read this, Madam Speaker. 

The committee observed that Government of Uganda made a commitment to settle Shs 47,971,421,017 that is due as pension payment for UEB employees through the Privatisation Unit, which was a subject of an interim order by the High Court. 

The committee noted that the Auditor-General verified the computation as required and observed from various correspondences that the payments be made to the individual claimants for purposes of transparency and accountability. 

The committee observed that subjecting the senior citizens to seek court redress before getting what is due to them is a matter of concern to both the present and future generations. The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development identifies Shs 47,972,421,017 to clear the pension that is due to the former employees of UEB in the financial year 2013/2014.

Subvention to Uganda Investment Authority (UIA)

The committee noted that in financial year 2013/2014, Uganda Investment Authority will receive a subvention total of Shs 6.443 billion. The details are given hereunder. 

The committee recommends on page 23 that Government establishes a cap on the amount and timeframe within which the given institution should receive a subvention. The committee further recommends that UIA, Capital Markets Authority and Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority be given vote status in the financial year 2014/2015.

Recommended Appropriation for Vote Function 1406

The committee is satisfied with the planned activities and, therefore, recommends that Shs 15.899 billion be appropriated for the investment and private sector vote function. 

Vote Function 1408,Microfinance

The proposed allocation to this vote function is Shs 16.52 billion.The committee noted that while the rural financial support services project will end in December 2013, SACCO development activities should continue in order to avoid collapse during the time when RFSP ends and when a new project begins. The committee therefore recommends that Government provides the adequate amount of funds required by the project during this period.

Recommended Appropriation

The committee is satisfied with the planned activities and therefore recommends that Shs 16.519 billion be appropriated for the microfinance vote function.

Vote Function 1449, Policy Planning and Support Services 

The proposed allocation is Shs 28.36 billion.The committee is satisfied with the planned activities and therefore recommends that Shs 28.362 billion be appropriated for policy planning and support services vote function. 

Recommended Budgetary Allocation for Vote 008 

The committee recommends that only Shs 289.3 billion be appropriated to vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This is after recommendations that Shs 400 million be reallocated from vote 008 to vote 131 while Shs 1.05 billion is reallocated to project 1197c, of which Shs 250 million is from NPART and Shs 800 million is from the Belgo-Uganda Study Consultancy Project. That is the difference.

Proposed Allocation to Vote 130

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed that vote 130 is primarily to pay Government debt obligations when they fall due. This vote has been allocated Shs 1.236 trillion in financial year 2013/2014.

Commitment Fees

The committee observed that there is a reduction in the amount in form of commitment charges.The committee was informed that this is because most of the development partners no longer charge commitment fees. The committee recommends that Government explores avenues of fulfilling the conditions for loan disbursements so that the intended objectives of loans contracted are achieved.

Vote 108, National Planning Authority

Observations and Recommendations 

The proposed allocation to vote 108 is Shs 9.933 billion, reflecting a 13.9 per cent increment.The committee recommends that the National Planning Authority embarks on the exercise of producing the second country review report beginning financial year 2013/2014 as this is an international commitment. This is the APRM report for Uganda. It is NPA that produces this report.

The committee further recommends that Shs 500 million should be availed to this activity through appropriate reallocations within vote 108. The Ministry of Finance should identify the balance of resources of Shs 950 million needed to finance this activity in financial year 2014/2015. This is still on the APRM. 

Economy-wide Microeconomic Model

The committee observed that development of an economy-wide microeconomic model is one of the planned NPA activities in the financial year 2013/2014. The committee is aware that the microeconomic policy and management vote function is developing the integrated microeconomic model. This integrated microeconomic model performs exactly what NPA intends to develop. The committee considered this a duplication of activities. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that NPA drops this activity and instead waits for the completion of the integrated microeconomic model to enable it make an assessment of changes in microeconomic variables to the economy. The committee recommends that Shs 1.8 billion be identified in financial year 2013/2014 to address the salary gap in the NPA resource envelope. 

Status of the National Development Plan Implementation

The committee recommends that the National Planning Authority presents a report to Parliament on the status of alignment of the national budget within a given financial year and cumulative performance.This should be done at the time the national budget is approved and at the end of the financial year to reflect on national development plan and the actual releases. 

Recommended Appropriation to Vote 108 

The committee therefore recommends that a total of Shs 9.932 billion be appropriated to vote 108, NPA.

Vote 131, Office of the Auditor-General (OAG)

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed that the office of the Auditor-General has not been audited since the financial year 2008/2009. Members will recall that appointment of an auditor for the OAG is a mandate of Parliament. 

The committee recommends that Parliament expedites the process so that that the audit of the OAG is expeditiously undertaken. The committee also recommends that Shs 400 million that was saved from the procurement policy unit under vote 008 be reallocated to this activity to enable the audit of the 80 public secondary schools.

Summary of OAG Key Findings 

In financial year 2012/2013, the committee recommended that a summary of key audit findings that can easily be comprehended be availed to Parliament. I wish to report that this report has been submitted and I beg to lay it on the Table.

This is a report of the office of the Auditor-General and it is entitled, “Extracts of the Summary of Key Findings of the Annual Report of the Auditor-General for the Year Ended 30 June 2012.” Madam Speaker, this report has key findings and recommendations to do with financial audits, value-for-money audits and also special audits. I beg to lay it on the Table.

The committee recommends that the planned audits for financial year 2013/2014 be maintained as those that were planned for the financial year 2012/2013. This is because of the financial constraints. 

Value-For-Money Audit Reports

The committee observed that several of the Auditor-General's reports have not been considered by Parliamentary accountability committees. The committee further observed that even those committee reports that are ready have not been debated to enable Parliament make resolutions, upon which Treasury memoranda is developed.

The committee noted that the largest backlog is in the area of value-for-money audits where Parliament has debated only two reports. The committee has learnt that failure by Parliament to consider reports of the OAG has compelled development partners who support OAG to consider withdrawing their support.

The committee recommends that Parliament identifies time to debate the parliamentary accountability committee reports so that the final output, Treasury memoranda, is realised. The committee further recommends that Parliament considers giving sectoral committees the mandate of handling value-for-money audit reports. This is the case we benchmarked from Zambia.

Recommended Budgetary Allocation to Vote 131

The committee recommends that a total of Shs 61.615 billion be appropriated to vote 131, OAG. 

Vote 141, Uganda Revenue Authority (URA)

Recommendations

The committee recommends that URA considers strategies that make it easier for individuals or business entities to attain Tax Identification Numbers (TINs), for instance, use of mobile phone numbers to attain a TIN. This will go a long way in easing tax payer registration with its related benefits. Uganda Revenue Authority should also enhance its efforts to informthe public that acquiring a TIN is free of charge, in order to avoid misinformation and exploitation from middlemen.

Remittances of Taxes to Bank of Uganda

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and URA consider exploring possibilities of making these transactions instant.

Parking Yards 

The committee recommends that URA explores strategies to expedite the procurement process as this has an impact on revenue collection.

ICT and Calls Verification

The committee was informed that URA is in initial stages of building an interface with the Uganda Communications Commission system in order to track all telephone transactions in the country. The committee recommends that this interface be expedited as it is likely to increase URA’s ability to tax all the transactions with its related benefits.

Single Customs Territory (SCT)
The committee recommends that the roadmap for implementation of the Single Customs Territory initiative be expedited so as to improve management of Mombasa Port and clearance by URA at Malaba border point. This will go a long way in reducing revenue loss.

Online Services 

The committee calls upon URA to expedite plans to beef up power backup to mitigate instances of power failure, put in place a business continuity mechanism to ensure instant notification of incidents and quick switch over, implement a disaster recovery solution and increase the efficiency and performance of the deployed links.

International Trade Taxes

The committee recommends that URA explores the possibilities of improving tax administration and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tax policy measures, with the aim of widening the tax base to enhance generation of revenue from domestic sources and reduce over reliance of customs duty as a major source of revenue.

Recommended Budgetary Allocation for Vote 141
	
The committee is satisfied with the planned activities and the corresponding proposed budget allocations. The committee, therefore, recommends that a total of Shs 211.053 billion be appropriated to vote 141.

Vote 143, Uganda Bureau of Statistics(UBOS)	

Observations and Recommendations

The committee recommends that the non-wage recurrent budget for vote 143, UBOS, be reinstated to Shs 20.23 billion. This is from the observation that in financial year 2012/2013, Shs 7 billion was moved from UBOS to the Parliamentary Commission and we were convinced by Ministry of Finance that this money would be put back in form of a supplementary. That did not happen and, therefore, this vote function suffered a loss of about Shs 7 billion in its MTEF and therefore budget allocation.

We recommend that the Ministry of Finance reconsiders and puts back this vote function to its original status. 

The National Population and Housing Census

The national population and housing census that was slated for the financial year 2012/2013 has been postponed to the financial year 2014/2015 in August. The committee noted that due to the postponement of the census, there is now need to repeat mapping activities, to prolong usage of a hired data processing centre, engagement of contractual staff for longer periods, among other costs.

The committee observes that in the current budget cycle, the due date for the actual enumeration activity will be when the Government is operating on vote-on-account. The committee recommends that Government identifies resources for this activity in financial year 2013/2014, so that it is effectively implemented in August 2014.

Plan for National Statistical Development (PNSD)

The committee recommends that funds be provided for the PNSD programme as this programme will ensure that statistical data being generated by MDAs is harmonised through common concepts, definitions and classifications.

Manpower Survey 

The committee recommends that the bureau incorporates some of the information required in the manpower survey in the questionnaire for the coming national housing and population census. This will help reduce the cost of collecting information on manpower, which has been hard to incorporate in the questionnaire for the Census.

The committee further recommends that Parliament considers amending some of the provisions of Section 19 (1) of the UBOS Act, 1988 to enable them undertake the module that requires disclosure of the respondent's identity.

Recommended Budgetary Allocation for Vote 143

The committee recommends that a total of Shs 71.556 billion be appropriated to vote 143 and Shs 7.0 billion be identified to reinstate its non-wage recurrent budget ceiling.

Vote 153, Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority (PPDA)
Observations and Recommendations

The committee recommends that PPDA prioritizes capacity building strategies to take care of the challenges identified during the procurement audit. The committee also recommends that the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development immediately adheres to the authority’s recommendations of taking further appropriate action against the respective PDEs.

The committee further recommends that PPDA focuses its capacity building programme on non-compliant entities, publicises worst performing PDEs and enhances compliancy checks.

The committee recommends that PPDA works closely with the policy unit of the Ministry of Finance under the Accountant-General’s office to ensure previous recommendations of boards of survey in the various PDEs are implemented. The committee further recommends that a policy that compels PDEs to first dispose off before any new procurement is made in a given financial year be put in place.

List of common user items

The committee recommends that PPDA expedites the publication of regulations that will operationalize this amended Act so that the issue of exorbitant prices is addressed.

Recommended Budgetary Allocation for Vote 153

The committee considered the planned activities of PPDA and the corresponding proposed allocations for the financial year 2013/2014. The committee, therefore, recommends that a total of Shs 8.875 billion be appropriated to Vote 153, PPDA.

General Conclusion

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee calls upon Government to consider the census as a priority and, therefore, they should identify resources to carry out preparatory census activities and finally, a census enumeration in August 2014. With proposed massive investment in infrastructure, energy and the health sector, a strengthened PPDA will ensure a transparent procurement process that will give rise to most efficient firms taking on contacts.

After efficient firms take on contracts, the OAG will ensure that there is value for money. Therefore, there is need to bridge the resource gap in this institution for it to effectively execute its mandate.

I now move that considering the above observations and recommendations, Parliament appropriates the following estimates for the respective ministries, departments and spending agencies:
    • Vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development: Recurrent expenditure, Shs 64,240,776,000 and development expenditure, Shs 251,419,303,000.

    • Vote 108, National Planning Authority: Recurrent expenditure, Shs 8,926,721,799 and development expenditure, Shs 405,416,000.

    • Vote 131, Office of the Auditor-General: Recurrent expenditure, Shs 40,755,770,000 and development expenditure, Shs 20,860,000,000.

    • Vote 141, Uganda Revenue Authority: Recurrent expenditure, Shs 191,220,553,000 and development expenditure, Shs 19,833,000,000.

    • Vote 143, Uganda Bureau of Statistics: Recurrent expenditure, Shs 21,009,000,000 and development expenditure, Shs 50,584,000,000.

    • Vote 153, Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority: Recurrent expenditure, Shs 8,469,449,000 and development expenditure, Shs 320,000,000.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I urge the House do adopt this report. I beg to report. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and members of the committee. I now direct the Clerk to reflect the full report on the Hansard. May I now invite the Shadow Finance Minister to give some highlights in five minutes.

(Entire report to appear in the bound volume of September 2013.)

9.10
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday and the other day, I said something about the agricultural credit facility. We need to appreciate that more than 70 percent of Ugandans are engaged in agriculture. In 2009, Government took a decision to avail funds to support this sector – Shs 30 billion from the commercial banks and Shs 30 billion for the Government. From 2009 to date, we are talking about Shs 300billion, but I have a document here that shows that only Shs 59,975,283,391 has been disbursed. 

Madam Speaker, we appropriate money here - Shs 300billion – and the money is lying somewhere and we are lamenting and complaining. I have raised this matter before. This document is from the Ministry of Finance and was presented to this Parliament. When I raised this issue, hon. Jacan Omach and the Minister said I was lying, that I could not bring evidence.

The criterion is that the participating commercial banks are supposed to conduct due diligence and forward the loan application to Bank of Uganda for approval. This is where corruption comes in. I have said that it is not the ministers who are corrupt; there is corruption involving the technical people in commercial banks and Bank of Uganda. Unless you lubricate the system, you donot get this money. That is why out of the Shs 300billion only Shs 57 billion has been disbursed. 

This year again, we are going to have another Shs 60billion for this programme. Shs 300 billion minus about Shs 60 billion is Shs 240 billion, but we are going to add Shs 60billion and we will get Shs 300 billion. We lack money for Bukungu, - Shs 30billion – we lack money for teachers all because of corruption. We all need food to eat, and it is agriculture that is stabilizing inflation in this country.

Honourable ministers of finance, do you really love yourselves? Without agriculture, inflation would be at about 30 percent. This is a question that needs a serious answer. We want the names of all the applicants. When we raised the matter, the minister said there is the issue of confidentiality. How; when this is taxpayers’ money? Give us the names of all the applicants and reasons why you have failed to disburse money. We also need the list of those who have received this money so that we can monitor them to establish whether they are paying it back or not. Please, lay those documents on the Table before we approve this money. I now lay this document on the Table.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, if you read the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, you will realise that it also has issues about debts. Most of these debts, according to the Constitution, are managed by the Office of the Attorney-General and Ministry of Justice. At the Ministry of Finance, –page 29 – we also have Shs 1.236 trillion in debts; out of this figure, there is a component of domestic and international debts.

We request that before we appropriate this money, the Minister of Finance and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs need to reconcile their records. Otherwise, we are going to have a double accounting problem. I have seen something on the former UEB workers in this report and when you look at the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, it also has former workers of UEB, unfunded. So, we need to know, out of this money that we are going to appropriate, who are the people going to be paid. The issue has always been, for those who have connections, debts are incurred and they get the money fast. So, before we appropriate this money, we want to know which debts are going to be paid and to who; when was the judgement or ruling made? When did it take place?

Madam Speaker, these are very serious matters and very heavy and weighty issues that we need to follow up; otherwise, we are going to have our voters in the villages of Tororo, Kamuli and elsewhere not being paid but people in Kampala here getting paid. They incur debts today and Government appropriates money and pays. 

Madam Speaker, these are the key issues; the rest, I leave to colleagues. We have to move forward. We need to consider them. Thank you very much.

9.14
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I only have one concern and it will take me less than two minutes to go through it.

The committee reports that the Ministry of Finance contracted on behalf of the people of Uganda 13 new loans equivalent to Shs 1.3 trillion without parliamentary approval. This is contained in the committee report on page 9. Not only is this unconstitutional but it offends Article 159(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and it is also immoral and an abuse to this institution, Parliament. 

There is not a single day that the Executive has come to this House with a loan request and we have refused to approve it. There is therefore no reason as to why anybody would go behind Parliament, breach the law, offend the Constitution and borrow on behalf of the people of Uganda. It is not a small amount – Shs 1.3 trillion, 13 different loans running from November 2010 to as recently as 15 February 2012. What are you up to, honourable minister? We certainly need an explanation in respect to this matter. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

9.17
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also want to support the committee’s recommendation on the issue of acquiring loans on behalf of Parliament. Like the honourable member has just said, how come the minister signed loan agreements without bringing the requests to Parliament? This is the budgeting period and it is only now that the ministry is bringing to us this information; this can lead to duplication. 

Now the other ministries are asking for money and we are appropriating funds for both but even these ones are here. It is not clear to us. We can easily duplicate. So, we feel that the recommendation of the committee should be taken seriously so that we do not approve any loans. I wish also that we do not approve this until they clearly show us that there is no duplication in those other budgets that we are going to make.

There is information on page 8 that some institutions and organisations have been given tax waivers. The committee goes on to note that we are losing revenue as a result of those exemptions. Madam Speaker, we lack funds. The President has just said that we will be the ones to support our budget majorly and donor funds will be very minimal, but here we are waiving taxes. In this financial year, the Ministry of Finance is taxing water and paraffin and this is really very expensive to the local community. We are saying that if there are sources of generating revenue for this country please utilise those and leave the local community, instead of taxing water and paraffin. These people are benefiting at the expense of the local community. 

Madam Speaker, it is a surprise that secondary schools are not being audited and these are schools that really charge a lot to the students – (Member timed out.)

9.19
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. 

The issue raised on page 9, about these 13 loan agreements, raises very serious concerns, and I believe all Members in this House are concerned. I would like the minister today to tell us the truth on how much we have as a debt burden and how many loans they have approved without the consent of Parliament. 

Secondly, the committee recommends that the Committee on National Economy should investigate. I would also like to say that it should not only stop at investigating these loan requests but also investigate their impact. I remember when I had just joined the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, the issue of the July 2009 loans came up. All members raised concern that some of these loans were not even used. Some of the beneficiary districts did not even get the CAIIP programmes which were under CAIIP-3. So, I think it was a very serious issue. I can see that there is something happening as far as these loans are concerned. There is something fishy here; maybe this is an eating point that we are not aware of. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the issue of payment of our retired citizens. They have mentioned UEB but I would also like to say that there are other senior citizens who retired like the pensioners of the railways who were not paid. I would also like the committee to take interest in some of those senior citizens who are seeking court redress to get their payment.

Finally, there is the issue of secondary schools not being audited. This is also a very serious issue because this is also one of the points where we are getting –(Member timed out.) 

9.22
MR WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two concerns. The first one is on URA. We got information that the accounting officer in URA is not legally in office because in URA, the accounting officer is supposed to serve two terms of three years each, which expired about two years ago. We would like clarification from the minister whether the accounting officer in URA is legally in office; otherwise, we should not approve the budget for URA.

Secondly, I would like an explanation for these companies which are exempted from paying taxes, which are mentioned on page 11. One of the six companies, namely Picfare, I am aware got Nytil for US$ 1 dollar and then it was even given exemptions from paying taxes. Why? What is the justification? What role did Parliament play - I was not in Parliament then - in approving the exemptions for these companies, and one of them even got Nile Hotel almost free? So, these are concerns for us.

There is the issue of the total debt for the country; what is the total indebtedness of the Government of Uganda? We would like the minister to tell us. 

9.24
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee members and all the other Members for persevering up to now. I have three concerns to raise. 

The first concern addresses taxation - widening the tax base but also reducing tax waivers and tax exemptions. As much as we encourage investors, sometimes we just stress the locals. We would like to know how long the tax exemptions take, because the exemptions may be for five years but the company ceases to exist and again for the next five years, it will still continue operating without paying taxes.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, if we are looking at ways of getting money, many people have lost money to sports betting. We call upon the minister to at least harden on the betting -people go there whenever they want - so that we can get more money.

On page 8, they say, “The Minister of Water combined with NGOs to grant a tax waiver on water and the Ministry of Finance lost money.” I think when the ministers come here, they come from Cabinet; I now wonder how such a scenario ends up happening. I do not sit in Cabinet but I think that in Cabinetyou come up with a single position before you come here.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I support the amendment of the PPDA Act because many times in these processes of the Privatisation Unit, the rates are exaggerated. Thank you.

9.26
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank You, Madam Speaker. Allow me also thank the committee for this wonderful report. 

My concern is only about the census. I see that the committee has recommended that we should have the census in August 2014. Madam Speaker, I studied journalism, these guys did mass communication and most of the people who sit in the committee and the ministers studied finance and budgeting; you know very well that you cannot keep budgeting for a population that you do not know. Currently, it is not very clear how many people are in Uganda; we do not know how many are children and how many are men or women. We are still in that dilemma.At one point, it was said that Uganda had a population of 32 million people and then someone said we are 34 million and yet again another person said we are 35 million. So we do not know exactly how many people are in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I do not find it comfortable for us to keep budgeting for a population we do not know. That is why we keep seeing these ministers coming back to ask for supplementary budgets; this is because they do not know how many people they have budgeted for. How many people are consuming this energy, for instance? You do not know. So, the next minute you will be running here with a supplementary budget asking for our support; we cannot keep supporting you on this. 

My recommendation is that we do not wait to implement the committee’s recommendation that the population census be done in August 2014. We should do it now.They should identify sourcesfor this money and we carry out the census, so that we know how many Ugandans we have and in the next budget we shall know how many people we are budgeting for. Thank you.

9.28
MR SIMON PETER ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas I join my colleagues in thanking the committee, I want to draw the attention of Members to page 12 and to reinforce the point that my sister has raised on lottery and gaming.My concern is on betting.As we talk now, there are a number of places in this city and in most of the towns that have been opened up for betting. The people you get there are young people who are supposed to be very productive in this country; they are the ones who spendthe whole day just betting. 

I can assure you, Madam Speaker, if you looked at sports now, there are great games. I would not support the idea of only drawing guidelines but recommend that we ban sports betting because it is not helping our economy; it is just encouraging redundancy and abuse of the youth. Where do these young people get the money they use for betting? They actually end up stealing and robbing each other. So, my recommendation is that we ban these betting houses and probably increase taxes for –(Interruption)

MR ABDUL SSEBAGALA: Thank you, my honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, this issue is very serious. We are getting complaints from parents that when they give school fees to their children, they use it for betting. So, betting is very dangerous. As much as it is getting us some revenue, I think we should find a way of abolishing betting and gambling.

MR ALEPER: Thank you for the information, my brother. Madam Speaker, you have heard how serious this matter is. Lastly, I would like to submit –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: You gave up your time. Okay, I will add you half a minute. 

MR ALEPER: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on the issue of the former employees of UEB. I am one of those people faced with a big burden as far as this issue is concerned. There are four children of a former employee of UEB who died and they keep travelling to Kampala to seek redress from the courts. Who contributes towards their expenses? Every time they travel, I have to get money to contribute towards their expenses. 

I want to support the committee’s recommendation that this process has to be expedited. Government has to identify money so that we can rescue these children who are getting frustrated. Some of these former employees died in the process of pursuing their money –(Member timed out_)

9.32
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I want to congratulate you on your election by the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians. I also would like to thank the committee for the report.

I have three observations to make. One, on page 7 they recommend the imposition of a user fee of Shs 3,000 for every mobile phone. I find this recommendation a bit retrogressive. I think the telecom industry is already fairly heavily taxed, especially regarding airtime. The telecom companies have complained that the excessive taxation is leading to a reduction of growth in that sector and yet that sector and the ICT sector in general have been contributing about six percent to the country’s GDP. So, I think that is a bit retrogressive.

On the issue of the TIN numbers, the committee recommends that URA should use the mobile phone numbers, which they say have now been registered, in order to quicken the process of issuing out TIN numbers. However, I think this is a bad recommendation because even some of these mobile phone numbers are wrongly registered; for example, you are hon. Akol but when you check for the registration status, it says the number belongs to Kabajo. So how can you use that information to register somebody for TINs? You cannot rely on the mobile phone number registration, and these phones can easily be stolen and so forth. So I think the best way forward would be for URA to educate the users that the TIN numbers are free and therefore -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Who used up your time? (Interjection) No, when you start speaking is when the timing starts. (Laughter)

9.34
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have few issues to raise. I have perused through the report but I do not see anything on residual properties under the Departed Asians Custodian Board. In Mbale we still have those properties and there are people occupying them and paying rent; so we want to know their status.

Secondly, on non-performing assets recovery, you are all aware that there are laws that govern attachment; once assets are attached and they are not renewed, then they revert back. So we want to know the status of the non-performing assets recovery.  I am told they are waiting for the law before disposing of those assets but some of the assets were got some time back; we want to know their status. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, on the issue of census, as one Member said, they have announced the date but we do not see the money for the preparations; what are we going to do? Are we going to use direct procurement? Won’t we be risking, like the way we did for CHOGM?

On e-tax, I want to say that it is a good initiative, but people are not conversant with it. Our people are illiterate; where I come from, for example, you may ask a person for their e-mail address and they ask, “What are you talking about?” I think let us have parallel systems in order for them to operate, otherwise we are losing a lot of revenue in terms of taxes – (Member timed out_).

9.36
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

I understand we lose about Shs 690 billion in form of tax holidays, tax evasion and tax refunds as stated here. I want to know the rationale of the Ministry of Finance in granting such long tax holidays. We hear that BIDCO has about 40 years’ tax holiday. How will our people gain out of that? So, I support the committee in their proposal to review all these tax holidays and exemptions. 

Secondly, I want clarification as to why we should procure a loan and it takes long to be executed. At the moment, when we pass the request here in Parliament, we immediately start paying interest on the loan and yet it has not yet been put to use to help Ugandans. 

Lastly, we gave the Minister of Finance time to come back and tell us about the operationalization of the Road Fund - the amendment of Section 14 of the URA Act, which will help direct transfer of money to the Road Fund other than just budgeting for it like that. When is the amendment coming to Parliament? Since we came here, she has been promising to bring it. We thought the ministry is serious but they are lying to Parliament –(Member timed out_).

9.39
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative, Female): Madam Speaker, I want to make reference to two or three issues. First, I want to commend the committee for the measures they recommended to streamline the tax policy. However, I also want to raise a concern that the Ministry of Finance is getting over ambitious with its tax policy; rather than create new areas of taxation, they aim at stressing the already strained tax-payers. You give an example here of mobile phones; mobile phones are very important for the development of the economy but you want to tax them further yet they are already promoting our economy. 

I think for some of the areas that you have identified in this financial year, as some colleagues mentioned earlier you are looking at areas that are going to stress the few people who are already stressed by taxes in this country. Whenever you come up with a new tax policy, you go back to that same class of people. Honourable minister, I think we need to make adjustments in this tax policy.

On the issue of Cabinet going behind Parliament and passing these loans, I want to thank the committee for this recommendation. It is very progressive and we support it. Why would your ministry do such a thing in modern-day democracy? What is our role here as Members of Parliament? Are we just wasting our time here and waiting to take home a paycheque? This is not very good for our country. 


Madam Speaker, I am also concerned about the national census. The issue that tickled me most is why you are seeking to amend the issue of protecting the identity of a person. Supposing I was giving a comment on my employer in order to improve the sector and my identity is disclosed; don’t you think my job could be endangered? I do not know the actually meaning of this recommendation but I think the committee should drop this. In principles of good research, the standards must be clear. The identity of the person has to be protected –(Member timed out_)

9.41
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I cannot imagine that on 11th June, the hon. Maria Kiwanuka I know, sat in her boardroom with the technical staff and signed for a loan of Shs 172 million without the approval of Parliament. I am not quite sure about this finding; the hon. Maria Kiwanuka that I know cannot do that. (Laughter)

Secondly, can we get assurance from the Parliamentary Commission on when this process of securing an auditor to audit the office of the Auditor-General is getting completed? It has been on and off. I can see hon. Elijah Okupa is here, probably he can brief us. 

The committee is proposing an extra Shs400 million for the Auditor-General’s office to audit secondary schools. Auditing is a mandatory exercise. We passed a law here and assured Ugandans that every coin that goes into our institutions from Government will be audited. These are statutory requirements. We should not negotiate and audit just a few for this year; we should clear this work because it is mandatory.

We have a very important institution, and I know it is part of Ministry of Finance, the Population Secretariat. I am surprised that the committee has not mentioned even one word about this important institution. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before hon. Benny Namugwanya comes in, I want to say something about auditing the office of the Auditor General. We did advertise a number of times but those who bided wanted us to pay Shs 1.2 billion to audit and we thought we could get the same service for probably Shs 50 million. That has been the problem. They were bidding so high that none of us could even justify how Parliamentary Commission could spend Shs 1.2 for audit. So, that was it. 

9.44
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Madam Speaker, I want to make a comment on the recommendation of the committee on page 24; the committee recommends that Ministry of Finance should continue with SACCO development activities. When I look at these activities, I wonder whether this is not hijacking of the mandate of other ministries. I think SACCOs fall under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. When Ministry of Finance comes in to develop SACCO activities, they are mixing mandates. I have heard this complaint several times and that is why when you go down to the villages, SACCO activities are a scum. 

If we are going to use formation of SACCOs to develop this country, then we might never develop Uganda. Let me give an example; when you go to the villages, you may find 30 SACCOs in one village but they are not viable at all; they are not supervised. Even if we are to leave this mandate under the Ministry of Finance, I want to propose that they come up with a strategy on formation of SACCOs in this country and they table it here in Parliament and we agree on a way forward. 

Right now, the SACCOs in the villages are subjecting people to abject poverty; even the little money they have is spent in registration and membership fees and at the end of the day, the SACCOs collapse and the money is stolen. So honestly, we need to revive this if we are to develop-(Member timed out_)

9.46
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee members for the good report.

I want to address myself to the issue of the census. A population and housing census is very important and we need to take it very seriously, as Members have said. In Uganda today, we are facing many problems in hospitals, health centres and schools because we are planning people whose number we do not know. 

As regards the date identified, I request the committee to decline it because this date coincides with party primaries. At that time, we shall be very busy looking for votes and census and voting cannot match very well. We need to change the date. This census should have happened yesterday and not tomorrow. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

9.47
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. Last month we did pass a Bill concerning the National Population Council and in our recommendations, we were pushing for it to get a vote. However, in this report they do not mention anything like the National Population Council. I do not know whether it was by omission or it was neglected because it has not been assented to. Maybe the minister will shed light on this.

Madam Speaker, regarding the issue of public debt, I should assure the minister - Hon. Bahati is just being polite but I will say that what was done has made her appear as one of the enemies of the country. Thirteen loan requests being approved or signed behind the back of Parliament is really treacherous. The other day I was telling one of my daughters that hon. Mukitale is the one mortgaging our country because he is the one who normally presents the loan requests here as the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy, but I think this is worse. 

Madam Speaker, NPART is another bottomless pit. This may be a clique of some sort that is here to finish this country. I want to propose and move that we do not give them money this time unless they bring a report. The committee demanded for it and it is not forthcoming. How do we keep giving money to an organisation that we are told expired in 2007? There is nothing being done, so we should not give it money. Instead of reallocating Shs 250 million like the committee is proposing, we should just stay and block this money-(Member timed out_)

9.49
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. For the last three years, we have been going through a very big struggle of allocating our scarce resources to our budget and this never being enough. I would like to request the Ministry of Finance, working with the Committee on Finance, to try as much as possible during the next budget, before we go into the allocation of the little money, to sensitise Parliament and we agree as leaders on how we can generate more money.

Right now, I hear people talking about a census and there is also another project on national IDs. We are trying to give money to the Registration Bureau and we are now talking of urban authorities. I think if we had one project amalgamated and integrated, you could share this information and we make a saving. What we lack in this country is the ability to identify areas where we can save. We need an integrated manner of financing so that we consolidate the funds. Even with the Auditor-General, who has done a very good job, education has been under inquiry over billions and health has parallel investigations. All those areas spend money. 

Can we identify the areas that are money makers, so that before we say, “last year it was the Police, this year it is health, tomorrow education”, we ask ourselves, “Is tourism the cash cow; how much do we give it in the budget?”

Modelling and projection can be done. We could say that if we give agriculture money, – not a single sector project, but the value chain of agriculture - what can they give us? We have been hearing reports here about the land sector. We should not only talk about a land fund in Kibaale; can we talk about the complete sector, from systematic demarcation, registration, physical planning and urbanisation. We made this country a planning area but nothing is happening. We can make urbanisation a policy to reduce service delivery in this country-(Member timed out_)

9.51
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report.

I have some observations to make. One is about NPART. According to the committee’s report, NPART refers to the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Tribunal. However, I know that there are two institutions; there is the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust and the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Tribunal and one is under the other. So, which one exactly are you referring to, NPART the tribunal or the trust?

The committee recommends that a certain amount of money be reallocated to other priorities but you have to consider the purpose for which NPART was set up. This institution was set up to recover money that was borrowed by people and not paid. They have foreclosed and attached people’s property, so if you do not allocate this money, what happens to the property. You might be looking at saving Shs 250 million but you end up paying compensation to people. This is because if you do not fund this activity, what happens to the property? Who looks after it? It will be stolen and Government will be sued. So, we need to expedite the process of either winding up NPART or doing something about this situation.

Secondly, on page 19 the committee is recommending financing the completion of a factory. I would like to bring it to the attention of the committee that much as you are looking for the money to finalise the completion of the factory, we have a problem of the banana bacterial wilt. You will look for the money to complete the factory and fail to protect the raw material and at the end of the day, you will finish the factory and have no raw materials. This is a very serious matter and the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Agriculture must come together and look for a lasting solution-(Member timed out_)

9.54
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I will start from where my colleague has stopped. My colleague has tried to justify the purpose of NPART. My question is: why did they fail to appear before the committee to explain themselves? Are they there or not? Why have they delayed to present a report to give us direction? I really support the recommendation that no funds should be given to this institution unless they give us a convincing report of what they have been doing and how they have been doing it.

My second point is about the 13 loans. All these 13 loans were signed for by the Minister of Finance before coming to Parliament and we also followed suit and approved them. So as we blame the ministry, I think we should also blame ourselves. I do not know why when the loan requests came, we also approved them and yet we knew that the law states that we should first discuss loan requests before they are signed by the ministry.

Regarding the recommendation, I would have rephrased and said that any loan request that comes to Parliament already signed by the minister should be rejected, instead of subjecting ourselves to investigate the circumstances and reasons as to why they were signed before. I think if we want to follow the law, let us also be tough and strict on provisions of the law so that we can all work in an orderly manner. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

9.55
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to appreciate the committee. The report is well done. 

I am going to comment on something from page 22, the practice where the senior citizens who, to get what is due to them, have to seek court redress. I am a daughter of a former employee of the Uganda Dairy Corporation but as survivors, - my father died even before he got his pension and gratuity - getting this money is not easy. Up to now, we have not received anything. He died in 1985 but we have not received anything. Whenever we go to the Ministry of Public Service, they tell us the Ministry of Finance has not given them the money. 

My father worked hard, and there are so many people out there in that situation. I see men above 80 and 90 years struggling to get this money but they are not getting it. Even those who are getting pension are getting 60 per cent; you do not know where the 40 per cent goes. So, the committee recommends rightly that the Ministry of Finance should look for this money. 

I am also married to a former employee of UEB. You can see, Madam Speaker, how I have suffered. (Laugher) At my ancestral home, I look after my siblings and even where I got married, I am doing everything because my husband has not received his pension. (Member timed out_)

9.56
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the taxes collected by Uganda Revenue Authority is stamp duty. I want clarification from the ministers as to who should be collecting this tax. Under finances of local government, the Constitution, Article 191- power to levy and appropriate taxes – clause (2) says, “The fees and taxes to be levied, charged, collected and appropriated under clause (1) of this article shall consist of rents, rates, royalties, stamp duties…” That is to be collected by local governments. So, why is Uganda Revenue Authority collecting stamp duty when actually the responsibility of collecting stamp duty as per our Constitution should be with the local governments?  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we appropriate money to local governments. According to the Public Finance and Accountability Act, when you do not utilise the money at the end of the financial year, the money is returned to the Consolidated Fund. Where does this money go when it comes to the Consolidated Fund, because we are now budgeting but we have not appropriated it, we have not distributed it? Where does this money go?

Lastly, Madam Speaker, in June the Minister of Finance wrote a circular to all accounting officers, especially in local governments, to return money and yet the law provides that you return the money at least by 31st October. Some of the activities in local governments are at standstill because money was even returned in June, and this is the money we appropriated here when we were passing the supplementary budget. So, can I get clarification on those issues?

10.00
MR STEPHEN MAYENDE (NRM, Bukooli County South, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done. 

I would like to also comment on tax exemptions and waivers. When these people come to Uganda, they come with only one manmade resource and for us we offer a lot; we give these people land, labour, sometimes raw materials, market, and we even pay tax. Sometimes we even incur social costs like pollution and noise. Our fish is now polluted with waste from these factories. In the end, these people just go with all the profits they get here to their country. 

Madam Speaker, we have had many companies that have been set up but they no longer exist; they have sold all of them. Companies like Celtel, Zain, Warid; I want to know from the minister how much money Ugandans get out of the sale of these companies. Thank you very much.

10.02
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to refer you to page 15 of the supplementary expenditure. I know that it is coming to 10 O’clock and we are trying to appropriate, but what has been happening in this Parliament is that the Ministry of Finance has been raising supplementary requests in total disregard of the law. My understanding of the law is that once we have appropriated, nobody has the powers, including the minister, to reallocate funds from one vote to another. 

The law requires that before a supplementary is raised, Ministry of Finance must show the source of the money. What has been taking place is that Ministry of Finance has been suppressing votes in ministries where money has already been appropriated, which is not in their powers. I am of the considered view that before we pass any supplementary in this House, Government must show us which votes have been suppressed, because we are the ones who, after being convinced, appropriate money to say, health-(Interjection)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I would like to give you information. Thank you very much, hon. Mwiru. I just discovered that there has been a directive from the ministry originating from State House that some of the money budgeted for the districts should be reallocated to fulfil presidential pledges. Presidential pledges are not part of the budget, so the minister maybe will clarify on that. However, I have proof that letters have been written, for instance to my district of Bugiri, that half of the budget for constructing classrooms and developing schools will be diverted to build a school in memory of some war hero, and the money is supposed to come from what is meant for the whole district.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point we are making is that you have ever ruled in this House that we need to operationalise the contingency aspect within our Constitution. Instead of raising supplementaries, which in my opinion is just budget indiscipline, we should operationalise the contingency fund so that we do away with supplementaries because this is being abused. 

I was in Jinja and I saw what Ministry of Finance does; they switch off the district computers from the system early so that the districts cannot even access the funds within the system. So, this money is sent back and they take it under the supplementary business. This is what these ministers of ours are doing. So, Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence that we take this matter up very seriously. If we do not do that, these ministers will just continue politicking. They are seeking for money we have already appropriated to key sectors and they are reallocating it to areas where there is wastage. (Member timed out_)

10.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Committee most sincerely for having generated the concerns that they did generate. I would also like to thank the honourable members of the House for giving their version of what the committee did recommend. There are many issues that have been raised but because of time, we may not be able to answer all of them, well knowing that we shall have a whole year with the committees and Members of Parliament where pertinent issues raised will be answered.

Having said that, I will address the issue raised by the Shadow Minister for Finance, first of all on the Agricultural Credit Facility. The facility was introduced by Government to facilitate farmers to access cheap financing to develop the agricultural sector. What we are aware of is that since the inception of this project, total disbursements as at 30thJune amount to Shs 118.6 billion both from Government and the participating financial institutions. Out of the Shs 118.6 billion, Government has contributed about Shs 60 billion.This means that the participating banks have also contributed, because they contribute50 percent. It cannot, therefore, be true that we have Shs 240 billion lying in the banks because Government has contributed that amount of money I have talked about and the corresponding banks have contributed an equal amount.

We have been shown this paper and as a ministry, we shall crosscheck the correctness of the information that has been given. However, what we know is that since the inception of this project in 2009 up to 2012, the Government has contributed that amount, and a total of 17 financial institutions are currently participating under this scheme. We shall crosscheck the authenticity of what hon. Ekanya has said about money lying in the banks unutilised.

The second issue -

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, hon. Aston Kajara has been my dear friend from the Sixth Parliament to-date. This document I am reading was laid before the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development by hon. Omach. Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter for which I am ready to face the rules committee. 

What the minister is referring to here is the Shs68 billion here plus the Shs 50 billion, which adds up to about Shs 118 billion. The Shs 68 billion is commitment - funds committed. Table 5 shows the area, funds disbursed plus commitment. That is the fund that has been committed to those that have applied.However, what I read is here in table 3 - total loans disbursed as of 30 June 2013. This is a document from Ministry of Finance.It is Shs 57 billion. So if you add the funds that have not been disbursed –the committed – it comes to Shs 118 billion, which you are talking about. 

This is the commitment funds from where corruption emanates. They tell you that the money has been locked there, do the necessary. I am speaking with facts and I do not want to mention private companies that have appealed to me as the Shadow Minister for Finance about this corruption. I am not saying that you, the ministers, are corrupt but there is a problem in Bank of Uganda and commercial banks. Is the minister, therefore, in order to say that I have lied when this document is from Ministry of Finance?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is that document from your ministry or not?  

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, during the committee meeting, hon. Ekanya did refer to the document that he is waving and hon. Omach requested that he presents it. That is what hon. Omach has told me. Hon. Omach was not the author of that document.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is from the Ministry of Finance. Never mind who wrote it but it came from the Ministry of Finance, honourable minister.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think it is honourable for colleagues to admit and say, “We are sorry.” I was in that committee meeting at the time when this document was laid. So, it is wrong for the minister to come and deny that they did not lay the document before the committee, unless you want us to push further that every document that the ministers bring must be endorsed or certified. That is wrong. Hon. Omach, you are a Christian so just shame the devil and just proceed.   

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I did say that we are going to crosscheck the information in this document and we shall liaise with hon. Ekanya and also with Parliament and inform you of the actual position.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is not just about that money. I think the big problem that we have is that it is not possible for many farmers to access that money. I tried myself when I was Deputy Speaker - I chased for that money for almost one year and I gave up. So, you can imagine a Speaker giving up; what about the ordinary farmers? That is the only problem we want to address.  

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on Finance. What hon. Ekanya is saying is true. Let us discuss the subject matter because what is important – Yesterday you asked a question, Madam Speaker, and I think the Executive did not take it seriously. When you want to help the economy to grow, you invest money in those people where you think you can get more to generate more revenue. We have been told that there is money in these commercial banks for agriculture.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, it is actually announced in the Budget Speech for the whole country. We are told there in Serena every year.

MR KAKOOZA: So what hon. Ekanya is asking is: what should be done for people to access that money you have committed in that bank, so that someone engaged in production can help build capacity, triple their purchasing power to grow and generate more money so that you can tax them? This is the gist of the matter. Set aside the issue of the document - whether it is correct or not - the money committed to that bank should be accessed by people to enlarge capacity and production. That is how the country can grow. This is what is important. 

MR SSEMUGABA: Madam Speaker, there is one MP, hon. Majegere, who was chasing the same thing and he failed. They said he had to first put up a very good house on the farm, worth more than the money he was requesting for. Now, what is it for?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, if I can go into the procedure for accessing this money; the procedure is that eligible persons go to a bank of their own choice, apply for a loan to finance either agricultural equipment or a milk cooler or any proposal. If satisfied, the bank will discuss with you and once it is satisfied that the conditions have been met, it sends you to Bank of Uganda for vetting. Once the commercial bank – (Interjections) – Yes, the Bank of Uganda has to be satisfied that the project is bankable because it is also adding money to it. Once the project is bankable, the bank to which you applied will give you 50 percent while the Bank of Uganda will give you the remaining 50 percent contribution.

Madam Speaker, I want to make it clear that the Ministry of Finance is not involved unless the application exceeds Shs 5 billion, in which case one would come to the minister. The only time such a person has come and such a loan was approved was in respect of one project for Igara Tea Factory – 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister; the problem we have is that you, as the Minister of Finance, announced to the country and the farmers that this money is available. We are telling you that this facility is not accessible. Yes, we know the procedures but what we are saying is that the facility is not accessible to the farmers. That is what we are saying. You cannot get it. They make it difficult for you to get it.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, thank you for that wise guidance. The minister had just played I donot want to say the devil’s advocate, but he has just confirmed that it is impossible to access this money. So, Government needs to rethink about this. Why do you make a flowery presentation when this money is not making any – Whose money is it for? This country needs that money. 

The minister should own up, like the gentleman I know he is, and say that there are some problems but let us move on. Madam Speaker, this is a very serious issue. I thought that the minister should own up. I was looking at hon. Fred Omach – if he was the one, he would have owned up already. (Laughter)

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, we appreciate that it has not been easy for some farmers to access this money. However, what is true is that those who have been compliant have already accessed this money, up to the tune of Shs 118billion. Whoever has applied for this money – (Interjections) -What we could do, Madam Speaker –(Interruptions)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, just a few minutes ago, you said that you tried to apply for this loan but that for almost one and half years, you did not access the money. Now the minister is saying that those who comply get the money. So, is he saying that the Speaker did not also comply? What kind of compliancy did the Speaker have to attain in order to get that loan? (Laughter) So, is the minister in order to allude that the Rt Hon. Speaker also failed to comply with the rules? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, surely if I am ineligible, then who is eligible? (Laughter)

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with the Members that a number of difficulties have been encountered and as a ministry, we shall investigate this matter with a view of allowing the public to access these funds. We shall come to Parliament with a report.

The second issue that I would like to address is that of loans being signed without the approval of Parliament. The Constitution provides that loans can only be accessed if approved by Parliament. We are aware of this. However, Madam Speaker, this is a cycle where these loans have to be identified, and competed for by different people, from the different donor agencies like the World Bank, the African Development Bank, etc. Now, donor agencies like the World Bank especially, give countries quotas that they can access within a certain period. When that quota is given and you do not access it within a certain period, say 180 days, another person will take the money.

What happens, Madam Speaker and honourable members, is that once that money is identified there is some level of understanding that is reached between that donor institution and the Government in terms of initiating a memorandum of understanding that we will process that money within a given time. That cannot be signing because we know that there is no such institution that will release money, whether World Bank or the African Development Bank, without a resolution of Parliament and without other attendant conditions being attained. They cannot make such a disbursement; disbursement is made after approval by Parliament. 

That is what has happened with most of these loans, Madam Speaker.We shall work with the Committee on National Economy to ascertain that actually, what happened was not signing but initialling or showing interest or even ring-fencing that money while we process the necessary approvals.

Madam Speaker, the other issue that I would like to address is about exceptions and waivers. It is true that our tax effort as percentage of GDP is relatively low in comparison with the sub-Saharan average of 18 percent. Government is making efforts to improve this performance through the review of tax laws, removal of tax exemptions and improvement in tax administration.

Tax collections have been growing at an average of 17 percent per annum, and this is one of the highest rates of growth in East Africa. We are reviewing this performance vis-à-vis our other partner states to understand why their GDP ratio is higher than ours and yet our year to year growth is higher than theirs.However, it is not true that these exemptions are responsible for the low tax to GDP ratio because although we pay taxes for various institutions, this is not even one percent of the total collection of Shs 7.235 trillion.

That notwithstanding, Madam Speaker, Government is set to review the exemptions so as to minimize them. There are differing views on the rationale for exemptions, and a case in point is the exemption on wheat flour. So, what we are doing, as Government, is to introduce tax measures that will improve our tax to GDP ratio. We implore Parliament to support this cause so that when we bring these proposals, we work together instead of shooting them down.

On the issue of the census, I would like to say that we are aware that census has been postponed many times. However, Government is fully committed to ensure that this census is carried out. The committee notes that this census will be conducted during the vote-on-account period and recommends that Government identifies all resources required for this activity in the financial year 2013/2014 so that it can be effectively implemented in August.

Preparatory activities for this census have been provided for in this financial year. We do appreciate the fact that funds for the actual enumeration process shall be required during the vote on account period, but we shall ensure that they are fully ring-fenced and released fully during the period to enable effective implementation of the census. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue which I wanted to mention, and which has been mentioned by the committee, is the determination of the MTEF by the NPA. First of all, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda mandates His Excellency the President to prepare a budget and lay it before Parliament and estimates of revenue and expenditure for every subsequent financial year. His Excellency the President has delegated this function to the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. These delegated powers are articulated also in the Public Finance and Accountability Act, Section 3, which mandates the development and implementation of a macroeconomic and fiscal framework for Uganda with the minister responsible for finance. It is in that vein that this function cannot be taken away to the National Planning Authority. 

The Act clearly provides the function of the Authority as producing comprehensive and integrated development programmes for the country. That does not mean that they have to allot money in order to implement those functions. The NPA has the opportunity to coordinate during the budgeting process and the Ministry of Finance has allocated funds according to those priorities, with the resource constraint. Madam Speaker, it is in that vein that we implore Parliament not to recommend that the NPA fixes the MTEF ceilings for the development budget. 

The other issue I want to address is the issue of Commissioner-General of URA being a member of the board. The Commissioner-General is a member of the board of URA by virtue of her office as Commissioner-General. The tenure of board members as provided for in the URA Act applies to those members who are not members by virtue of holding their offices. They have a term which is renewable. For members from the Ministry of Finance, members from the Ministry of Trade and those who work in URA, that would not apply to them. The term limits under that section of the URA Act do not apply to representatives of Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Trade and Industry and the Commissioner-General since they are board members by virtue of the positions they hold. 

Madam Speaker, an issue was raised concerning supplementary budgets. It is true supplementary budgeting has been a problem and that is why under the Public Finance Act, which is under review and which is being considered by Parliament, we have provided for contingency funding which will address all the supplementaries that will accrue. 

Madam Speaker, once again I want to thank you very much and thank the honourable members. The issue of the Road Fund is being addressed. I did come here and say that as a ministry, we are coordinating with the Ministry of Works in generating amendments to harmonize the Uganda Revenue Authority Act and the Road Fund in order to remove the inconsistencies. Once that has been done, then it will be amended accordingly. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that save for the recurrent and development expenditure under Vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; vote 108, National Planning Authority; vote 131, office of the Auditor-General; vote 141, Uganda Revenue Authority; vote 143, Uganda Bureau of Statistics; vote 153, Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority, I put the question that the rest of the report be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, the committee chairperson raised a very important issue about the Auditor-General’s report. I had a glimpse at it and I wish that enough copies are availed to all Members. 

Madam Speaker, can we at an appropriate time get that presentation and we discuss it because I do not think we can afford to wait for the PAC report, which comes after a certain period. If we looked at that report and discussed it, it could help us get some proactive preventive pre-audits which could save this country a lot.  

MS ROSE AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report of the Auditor-General, as I lay it on the Table, is actually already in all the pigeonholes of Members. If Members could just try to check, you will find a copy of that report there. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The Member wants us to find an opportunity to discuss it and we shall arrange for it. 

Minister of Finance, there is something we had wanted you to do about accounting officers, which you refused to do. Today, we brought evidence, which hon. Kasaija took. We do hope that before we appropriate money under the corrigenda, you will have handled that issue of the accounting officers. 

10.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, thank you for raising this issue once again. It is quite an important issue, but we have to go case by case. I have already instructed our staff to prepare a statement and actually, I wanted to whisper to you as we leave these Chambers that we will come and explain the case of Lukwago- [Mr Okupa: “They are three”]- I said we are going case by case. Today we are discussing the one mentioned in the report, who is the PS of Ministry of Health. So, Madam Speaker, I will have a statement, with your permission, on Monday to explain to you how the law is operating, which at times has barred us from doing what we are supposed to do. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, may I seek your indulgence that you advise the Minister of Finance to work with the Budget Committee so that we can sort out the issue of teachers, and we are meeting even over the weekend. We do not want a situation, when we come here on Monday, for the Minister of Finance to say that they are not aware of what the Budget Committee is doing. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we had done that in the morning. We had asked them to cooperate with the Budget Committee to sort out the issue of the teachers’ salaries. We did that before we broke off in the morning. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This House pronounced itself on the issue which hon. Kasaija wants to bring back. I think it should only be by way of motion on notice because you had already ruled on that subject matter. If he wants to again come back with a statement, we shall just be wasting Parliament’s time. This is because, Madam Speaker, you had ruled and Government even conceded. So for us to engage in a debate will just be a waste of Parliament’s time. I wonder whether it is procedurally right for us to even entertain him on Monday, instead of proceeding with serious business.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, for the minister to come and say that there are legal issues – What we had directed at that time was that the gentlemen could remain as permanent secretaries but accounting officers could be appointed to handle the docket. So, for him to come and say that there are legal issues is not right. 

We had a case here with Mr Tandekwire; he was the Clerk here but we appointed an accounting officer while he was still here. That is what you guided, Madam Speaker. So does it mean the law was flouted at that time when that action was taken? We took almost two to three hours debating this matter. So it is wrong for the minister to come here and start saying that there are legal issues involved when similar cases have previously been handled.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had indicated to you that we have some important guests who are arriving on Monday, so that might interfere with our sitting of Monday but we shall sit on Tuesday morning. So, House is adjourned to Tuesday at 10 O’clock in the morning. I thank all the Members for staying, especially those who had the stamina to stay since morning, not those who have just arrived. (Laughter) Thank you very much and have a good weekend.  

(The House rose at 10.37 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 September 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
