

Thursday, 7 September 2017

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Just like it happened in the very recent past, we continue to lose senior citizens who have greatly contributed to this nation. 

Over the weekend, death occurred to Canon Justus Byagagaire who passed on at the age of 91 from Nsambya Hospital and will be laid to rest today at his ancestral place in Rukungiri District. 

He was educated in Kinyasano Sub-Grade and Elementary School, Kigezi High School, King’s College Budo, Makerere University and the University College of Wales in the United Kingdom. 

He served in various capacities in the Government of Uganda including as Permanent Secretary. He was also a Minister of Labour and Minister of Agriculture in the 1970s. 

He was one of the Ugandans who worked tirelessly in building the foundation of the post-colonial civil service as well as the governance machinery in the ministries of the Government of Uganda. 

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family and country at large. May we rise and observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Antioch Believers Church represented by hon. Medard Sseggona and hon. Rosemary Seninde. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have a delegation of sub-county speakers and deputy speakers from Ajuri and Moroto counties in Alebtong District represented by hon. Denis Obua, hon. Sam Okwir and hon. Christine Achen. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. Thank you. (Applause)

Honourable members, on Tuesday when we met, there were urgent issues which caused the adjournment of the proceedings of the House to a date that particular matter could be handled and today, I have many urgent matters that Members have requested to be presented. 

However, because the House was adjourned for a particular purpose, I would like to deal with that matter first and then we see how to deal with the other matters later. 

At this time, I am, therefore, without spending any more time, going to the Order Paper and ask for those issues to be handled. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS ON THE RECENT MURDERS IN KAMPALA METROPOLITAN AREA

2.12
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen) (Rtd) (Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker, before I read my statement, I would like to make three preliminary remarks. 

First, I would like to take this opportunity to apologise to you, Mr Speaker and the honourable members, for my absence last Tuesday. My absence was occasioned by a medical condition. I was not feeling very well and as you can hear through my voice, I am not yet at 100 per cent.

Secondly, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you all, fellow believers, for the successful celebration of Eid al-Adha on 1 September 2017. 

The festivities of Eid al-Adha or the “Sacrifice Festival” is a commemoration of man’s submission to the will of God exemplified by the actions of Ibrahim who offered to sacrifice his son, Ismail. (Laughter) Therefore, it is a very important –(Interjections)

The third preliminary remark I would like to make is that the statement I am making today is preliminary because investigations in these matters are still on going.

Mr Speaker, between the 3rd of May 2017 and the 4th of September 2017, a total of 21 women have been killed in the most gruesome manner at different places in Nansana Municipality and Katabi Town Council. May their souls rest in eternal peace. 

Today, 44 suspects linked to these murders have been arrested and 22 of these have been charged in the courts of law. The remaining suspects are at different stages of processing to be arraigned in the courts of law soon.

Now, let me take this opportunity to share with you the individual cases of the incidence of murder. I would like to alert the faint hearted that these incidences are very graphic and gruesome but I have to tell you all the same.

Mr Speaker, on the 3rd of May 2017, a body of an unidentified female adult was found at Nansana West with signs of manual strangulation. This body has remained unclaimed to date. 

On the 28th of May 2017, a body of a female identified as Juliet Nampijja alias Jaliah Nantabazi was found behind Kenjoy Supermarket in Nansana West I. The body bore signs of manual strangulation.

On the 28th of May 2017, a body of an unidentified female adult was found at Nansana East Zone with signs of manual strangulation. The body has remained unclaimed to date.

On the 31st of May 2017, two bodies of female adults, one identified as Patricia Nansubuga alias Proscovia and another unidentified one were found near Kenjoy Supermarket in Nansana West I. Both bodies bore signs of manual strangulation. The body of the unidentified female has not been claimed to date.

On the 5th of July 2017, a body of a female adult identified as Maria Birungi was found at Nansana East II Zone with signs of manual strangulation. 

Later on the 11th July 2017, a body of a female adult identified as Josephine Nakazibwe was found in a rented room at Ochieng zone in Nansana Municipality. The body exhibited signs of manual strangulation.

On the 16th of July 2017, a body of an unidentified female adult was found in a trench at Nansana East Zone in Bujagali and it also had signs of manual strangulation. 

On the 17th of July, a female adult body identified as that of Teddy Nakacwa was found lying in her rented room in Nansana West II Zone. This body also exhibited signs of manual strangulation. 

On the 25th of July 2017, a female adult body identified as that of Juliet Kyandali, a businesswoman in Ganda in Nansana was found murdered in her home in Katabi Town Council

On the 7th of June 2017, a female adult body identified as that of Gorreti Nansubuga was found along Kasenyi Road in Abayita Ababiri with signs of strangulation and a stick inserted into her private parts. 

On the 26th of June 2017, a female adult body identified as that of Faith Komugisha alias Jamila was found at Kitinda near Ssese Gateway Beach with signs of strangulation and a stick inserted into her private parts.

On the 13th of July 2017, a body of a female adult identified as that of Donat Zakanya alias Aisha Kasowole was found at Abayita Ababiri with signs of strangulation and a stick inserted into her private parts. 

Also, on the 21st of July 2017, a body of a female adult identified as that of Norah Wanyama was found at Nkumba Central Zone with signs of strangulation and a stick inserted into her private parts.

On the 24th of July 2017, a body of a female adult identified as that of Rose Nakimuli was found behind Keba Inn near Jantos Bar at Kitala, a few metres from her house with signs of strangulation and a stick inserted into her private parts. 

Also, on the 17th of August 2017, a body of a female adult identified as that of Sarah Nakajjo was found behind Faith International Nursery and Primary School along Kasenyi Road approximately 200 metres away from the shrine of Mr John Bwanika. The body had a stick inserted into the private parts and had a missing left breast. Other body parts were also missing.

On the 14th of August 2017, a body of a female adult identified as that of Aisha Nakasinde was found at Kasenyi Landing Site with signs of strangulation and a stick inserted into the private parts and one leg missing. 

On the 27th of August 2017, a body of an unidentified female adult was found at Kitala Village along Entebbe Road with signs of strangulation and a stick inserted into the private parts.

Furthermore, on the 28th of August 2017, a body of a female adult identified as that of Jalia Nalule was recovered from Nkumba Central in Kayilila Forest Reserve with signs of strangulation and a stick inserted into the private parts. 

On the 4th of September 2017, a body of a female adult identified as that of Mary Nabilanda alias Maria, was found at Nyanama Trading Centre in Bunamwaya near a washing bay with signs of strangulation.

Elsewhere, on the 15th of August 2017, a body of a female adult identified as that of Regina Zawedde was found in Bulaga Town. 

Also, on the 16th of August 2017, a body of a female adult identified as that of Jennifer Namuwonge was found in Bwaise, Kawempe.

The investigations that the Police has so far carried out:
 
The police assisted and supported by other security agencies have been carrying out painstaking investigations in order to understand the motives behind this wave of killing as well as apprehend the culprits involved. So far, the following have been established:

    a) In the case of Nansana Municipality murder, eight of the nine women were murdered by one criminal gang and the motive being for ritual purposes. The prime suspect, Ibrahim Kawesa alias Tetemwa, a notorious criminal who had just been released after serving a 10-year jail sentence confessed that he had been contracted by Mr Philips Tumuhimbise alias Kanyankole a businessman to kill 12 women to enable him (Tumuhimbise) to draw blood for ritual purposes in order to protect and enhance his wealth. 

Kawesa led the police in the reconstruction of all the eight murder cases, demonstrating his participation and that of his associates.

The murder of the ninth woman, Juliet Kyandali, in Nansana Municipality is strongly linked to domestic violence. There is strong evidence implicating her husband. 

The police have established that the motive behind her murder is a conflict of ownership of family property.

    b) Similarly, the murder of Regina Zawedde in Bulaga Town is strongly linked to the family’s conflict over land. On the basis of technical evidence and witness testimonies, one Senoga, a nephew of the deceased has been arrested as the crime suspect.

    c) Concerning the murder of Jeniffer Namuwonge, police investigations using a police dog and other technical devices have been able to arrest Jonathan Mazuku and his wife, Justine Mpamurungi, as prime suspects.

    d) In the case of the Katabi Town Council murder, whereas the police initially treated these as isolated incidents, technical evidence as well as recent witness testimonies now point to these murders being connected to one serial killer known as Ivan Katongole alias Jenus, a businessman.

Credible witnesses have indicated that he is the mastermind behind these killings. He contracts people and at times participates in the murder himself. 

His motivation for doing so is believed to be for ritual purposes to get human blood and body parts in order to build his wealth, protect and enhance his businesses, including his commercial buildings under construction at Kasenyi Landing Site. 
There is strong evidence linking the suspects and Katongole to these murders. Some suspects were found with forms given to them by Katongole to enlist in illuminati (commonly known as devilish worship). Other suspects have the sign of triple figure nine (999) tattooed on their bodies. 

Katongole is physically linked to the death of Rose Nakimuli because he was in her company the night she was killed. The murder of Mary Nabilanda alias Maria links to domestic conflict resulting in her husband killing her. 

Mr Speaker, what related actions have the police so far taken? Following this wave of attacks, the police supported by other security agencies and the local communities have intensified vigilance. Communities have come out to protect their neighbourhoods backed up by both foot and motorised Police patrols. 

Since the institution of these measures, in incidents in Katabi and Nansana alone, 23 women who were targets of rape and murder have been rescued. They are now under police protection under the Police Witness Protection. Suspects have also been arrested in relation to these incidents. 

Honourable colleagues, I would like to share with you some observations: 

    1) Whereas we must effectively deal with and deter this dangerous criminality, we must at the same time deal with the factors that not only feed and fuel criminality but also create the environment in which criminality incubates and thrives. 

	Such factors which we must deal with include moral decadence, primitive selfishness, superstition, drug abuse, alcoholism and prostitution especially in the urban areas. 

    2) Indiscipline is becoming predominant in our country at the family, community and national level. There is need for us to think of re-establishing and strengthening social and cultural institutions as well as governance structures like the local councils to establish community discipline.
    3) Needless to mention, there is need to address the very pertinent question of youth unemployment. Youths are so desperate that they have been lured into being hired as contract killers as a source of livelihood. 

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity to thank hon. Wakayima Musoke Nsereko of Nansana Municipality, hon. Rosemary Tumusiime of Entebbe Municipality, Mr Ian Kyeyune, the Wakiso Resident District Commissioner and his deputy, Rose Kirabira, the mayors of the respective municipalities as well as the local leaders for their support and leadership towards the efforts to fight this violent criminality which has claimed the lives of innocent young women in such a tragic manner. 

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank hon. Muyanja Mbabaali for taking time to share his experiences of similar circumstances in Lwengo District. His suggestions have come in very handy in our efforts to fight this criminality. 

I would also like, therefore, to take this opportunity to encourage you, honourable members as well as the general public, to come forward and share with us your suggestions and thoughts on the way forward; after all criminals live among us. They are our uncles, aunties, fathers and brothers. 

Mr Speaker, in spite of this tragedy, I would like to take this opportunity to assure this august House and the country at large that the situation is improving as we deepen our investigations and strengthen our counter measures, as indicated in the 23 incidences I mentioned. 

We have defeated similar waves of crime before. We are certain that with joint effort, we shall again sooner than later defeat this wave as well. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for listening to me. May God bless you all. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, this statement is made under the provision of our rules that entitle Members to debate the statement for about an hour. That is the statement that has been made by the minister and the debate starts now. 

2.33
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for finally heeding to the call of the House to come and lay this statement before this honourable House. 

I think that these issues started coming up about four months ago. I am happy that the minister has rightly detailed before us the names and the persons that have been murdered in these very sad ways. The question that still lingers in my head is the nature of these murders. 
When these kinds of murder come before us, the way a woman is murdered and also the sticks inserted into their private parts, I think that there is a message that these killers are trying to send, which has not been put in this report. 

How come that from day one, all these women have been murdered in the same manner? All this time the ministry and police have not been able to tell us what is behind these murders. Well, you have told us it is ritual murders but I think that is a bit simplistic in my view. 

The question I would like to put before the honourable minister is; are you in charge of the internal affairs of this country? (Applause) 

Secondly, is this not something that can be associated to conflict? Is this not a conflict that is boiling up or starting in this country? When you look at the way women are killed, statistics have told us that whenever you see such kinds of incidences - women’s bodies are used as terrains of conflict world over because they are the most vulnerable victims in instances of war. 

Therefore, the question that is lingering in the minds of our countrymen and women is whether there is no conflict in this country. 

Can the minister come and tell us whether there is no conflict in the nation and whether people are safe in their houses as we speak right now? This is because ordinary people are being way laid. The women, who are the most vulnerable, are being strangled and just dumped while the police is running around trying to look for solutions, another person is being murdered. 

Mr Speaker, is the minister in charge? Is this country at peace? Can you explain to the country whether we are safe as Ugandans? 

2.36
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs and it is on record that our country has the biggest defence budget in sub-Saharan Africa. 

In the area of security, I believe we have the biggest number of ministers in terms of internal affairs, security and defence. In police personnel, I believe we have the biggest human resource in the whole of East Africa. It defeats logic that within this short period of time, the country with all the different categories of security entities I have enumerated has the highest death rates in the whole of East Africa.

The minister’s statement does not clearly stipulate the political course of these deaths. I, for one, think that the deaths are political ones. I, therefore, need the minister – because you have the department of investigation. You must have investigated and come out with a statement. This is political. 

When many deaths occur in the same way, they are sending a message to the people. After the women, it shall be men and then us the leaders of this country.

I believe that there is something that has gone wrong in your docket and I think that you are not in charge. The Ministry of Internal Affairs must put the police right. How can they kill more than 20 people when there is no report at all? This means that the police is carrying out basic investigations. 

In that case, honourable minister, you need to tell Uganda today whether we are a failed state or not. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

2.38 
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister. 

However, my observation is that Uganda is a country where a murder can occur, and day in and out, it is stayed for another month. 

Mr Speaker, my worry concerns the investigations; whether we shall have the investigations completed. The minister has informed the august House that they have 70 suspects. I believe that the police has no capacity to investigate this thoroughly as we talk right now.

We have had so many murders in the recent past. “Afande” Kaweesi passed away in such a brutal manner and up to now, we have never had a completed investigation. Here we are with the minister trying to convince Parliament and the nation that the police is doing a thorough job. 

Ugandans are suffering – the cardinal obligation provided by the Constitution to the State is to defend the lives of Ugandans. We cannot keep here pretending. There is a problem. Ugandans are watching and I would like you to convince Parliament and the nation; how are you going to conclude the investigations? We want answers. I beg to rest my case.

2.41
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whether they are connected to rituals or murders or whatever it is, where is the police? Where is the intelligence? Where are the crime preventers? Are they crime preventers or they are promoting crimes?

Just the other day, we publically saw misunderstandings between the IGP and the Minister for Security. Intelligence is supposed to feed into the Police. If somebody in charge of security is disagreeing with the IGP, what is likely to happen? What will happen when the IGP disagrees with somebody he is supposed to report to, and is supposed to take his orders? 

I would like to condemn the lack of seriousness and the casual way in which Government is responding to this. I am concerned that whereas the President of Uganda swore to protect life – maybe he is being misled and he is moving around the whole country, talking about what I think is not urgent. He is talking about land, he is talking about people that are disturbing him and yet people are dying in his neighbourhood of Entebbe in Wakiso District.

The President is moving around radio stations talking about our land instead of security and women. Unfortunately, the women thought that he minded more about them.

Mr Speaker, this is disturbing and I would like to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to appreciate that Ugandans are dying and if we swore to protect the Constitution and life, then business cannot be as usual. 

In case you have no answers to this, then you cannot remain in office when Ugandans are dying and you continue telling us that you are in charge. What shows that you in charge? You are not in charge.

Finally, Mr Speaker, to the mothers, we are with you. You are our sisters, you are our mothers, you are our wives and daughters. We take this very seriously and we shall not rest until the ministers do their work.

2.44
MS ROSEMARY TUMUSIIME (NRM, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise as a neighbour to Busiro County South and knowing the pain that these women went through being murdered and the other stories that we have heard. 

I would like to thank the minister for his statement but I remain worried. Just yesterday, there was a meeting for the traditional doctors and when I saw the numbers, the numbers scared me the more. 

I also worry that if there are going to be these kinds of ritual murders – and we only know that there is a serial killer, then who are these witch doctors dealing with the serial killer? Have they been brought to book?

I would like to request that in your investigations, you put these people to task, because wherever these women have been thrown, there is no blood. This means that they are picked, killed and dumped in those places where the police finds them. 

I would like to request the minister to inform us whether those traditional doctors have been found. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.42
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is with great pain that we discuss the death of innocent women killed in a brutal manner. 

When I was chairing the Committee on Gender, we carried out an investigation into child sacrifice in the central region. In the pattern of these ritual murders, there was no incident where a woman was raped. It was all based on purity. They want people without scars, those without pierced ears, boys that were very young and uncircumcised.

I would like to draw your attention to the pattern of murders and Commissioner Moses Binoga of the Ministry of Internal Affairs can bear me witness. That report was laid at the Table but unfortunately, it was not presented in its entirety otherwise the records of Parliament would have this right.

Mr Speaker, they take away private parts, tongues, they never rape women before the murders. The difference is that the pattern this time targeting only women is something that should draw the attention of the State. There is something unique in these murders and they are much related to war crime murders.

Mr Speaker, we should take this seriously. Where there is war and there are rebels, they brutalise women and rape them. Even in the Second World War, the Japanese Comfort Women were raped. 

I interfaced with these comfort women when I was dealing with human rights effect on women in conflict. To date, they still have scars of rape from the Second World War. The whole world knows about the Comfort Women. Those women were forced into prostitution. Some of them were killed and wombs opened.

Mr Speaker, I would like to draw this pattern to the attention of the Minister of Internal Affairs; it is not only a ritual murder, I am sure. In the circumstances of ritual murder, it was only witch doctors - 80 per cent were committed by witch doctors.

In that report, there was a footage, and I would like to particularly request you to recall that report and the footage to be presented to this Parliament in its entirety so that people can draw the difference between these murders.

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that as we castigate the police and tell them about not being in charge, we need to encourage them to do more work and be more vigilant because as we sleep they are out, and there is nobody else we can call upon in that kind of difficulty when there is a scare. Therefore, we need to give them courage and support them to do thorough investigations. We need to support the police in this endeavour.

Mr Speaker, I am very saddened by the brutal manner in which women are murdered and brutalised with sticks. It is terrible. We need to stand up and even pray for those women and their families because how would you feel seeing your daughter brutalised that way? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.51
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Much as the police has made effort to arrest suspects connected to the killings of our young women, there are still rampant killings everywhere in this country.

Mr Speaker, on a daily basis, we read about murders in the newspapers and watch on television. Even as we are talking here, there might be somebody being killed. I am very sure that in the night, we shall watch the news on television about a murder.

Three months ago in Mpigi –(Interjections)– yes, on a daily basis. Can you imagine there was somebody that was killed a day before. Even today, you will see. However, the suspects are never known. There is no report as well.

Three months ago in Mpigi, a young lady had come to Bunamwaya to visit her brother but before she even reached his home, her body was found a week later dumped somewhere in Namasuba. 

I would like to connect her killing to the killings that are happening now. It is unfortunate that her name has not even been mentioned in the statement. This means that the problem had started long before we even knew it.

Mr Speaker, there are also suspects that are known. For instance, in Mpigi, there is violation of human rights by the law enforcement officers. On Sunday, a fisherman was tortured before he was murdered and the body drowned. This is so because his body had multiple injuries, an indication that the beatings might have caused his death. 

The killers of that man were law enforcement officers that had been deployed there to guard the water - they are known but no arrests have been made. They are soldiers; they put on UPDF uniforms and carry guns. Very many people have been killed but nothing is being done. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of women activists coordinated by Women in Development from various civil society organisations. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them.

We also have pupils and teachers of Kaberamaido County Primary School in Kaberamaido District represented by hon. Veronica Isala and hon. Maria Goretti Ajilo. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

2.56
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative, National): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the minister for the statement presented this afternoon. 

The minister specifically mentioned that the undignified manner in which the women have been killed is more than just loss of lives. It is an attack on the progress that women have achieved for the past several decades after Independence.

It is an attack on our dignity as women - when you see them pushing sticks through a woman’s private parts, it has more to communicate to the citizens of a country than what we have struggled for; to accord women the dignity that they deserve as human beings. It is being taken away. They are attacking that and they are taking us so many steps back. Besides losing life, the manner in which they are killed is abusing our feminism as women. This is the main reason we are going to put the minister to task today.

Mr Speaker, security has been the most important achievement for the NRM Government because every now and then, the NRM Government talks about its achievement in security. We are here securing other people in other countries yet we cannot even protect women in our own country. (Applause)

I would like to emphasise to my colleagues in the NRM Government that much as you may continue to sing about your achievement in security, you should also know that our women are being brutalised and killed in a very inhumane manner. 

You must question yourselves whether your achievement in the security sector is still standing in the country.

Honourable members, the minister has presented his report to the House. However, it is upon Members of Parliament to give a verdict about his presentation. 

I would like to say that the Uganda Police Force has failed because since May this year, women have been killed in a similar manner and yet Government had to wait until September, to present the report to us. The whole criminal justice system is collapsing because of the initial stages of investigations; they do investigations in perpetuity and we never hear how fruitful they have been. 

We must give a verdict that the Police force has failed and we must take political action because we cannot allow women to be killed like this; not another woman. We cannot allow our dignity to be tampered with. We have achieved a lot as women in this country and therefore, we cannot throw that hard work down the drain. Thank you.

MR WAKABI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member for Kyadondo County East, who is an independent Member of Parliament to sit on the Opposition side of the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Kyadondo County East is at least not sitting in the gallery. (Applause) This is his first time to speak to this House. He came through a by-election and this is his opportunity to address the House for the first time. Please, proceed.

3.01
MR ROBERT KYAGULANYI (Independent, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to make my maiden communication to this august House. I appreciate my honourable comrade for the interruption because in the process, I was referred to us as an “honourable”. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, at this particular moment, I would like to make it clear that I was elected into this honourable House as an Independent Member of Parliament and also expected my colleagues to know that I should not have been interrupted when giving my maiden speech.

I also rise to respond to the minister’s statement about the ongoing killings of women in a brutal and degrading manner. Anything that affects our wives, mothers, daughters and sisters affects all of us and it is indeed sad that we are experiencing this. 

In my opinion, these killings represent a bigger problem and it is rather disturbing to me that we seem to focus only on the killings of our women, not the killings of all Ugandans –(Applause). It is my humble prayer that we approach and deal with the real cause not symptoms. 

For a long time, we have had unanswered killings right from the Muslim clerics to high profile citizens in Uganda like the late Joan Kagezi, the late Assistant Inspector General of Police, Felix Kaweesi and many others, which cause me to worry. God forbid, I hope they do not come for the Members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, just in Kyadondo County East alone, not a week passes by without finding a Boda Boda cyclist hacked to death and their motorcycle taken. 

Yesterday, in Masaka District, two people were killed and we cannot tag it to robbery because nothing was taken from their shops. That moves me to communicate to the Government that it must not only wait until a problem escalates that it tries to act. Otherwise, they will be seen as fire fighters.

There has been enough reason for security organs to rise up. The manner in which these women are killed has a striking resemblance. If the criminal investigating departments acted after the first, second, third, fourth or the fifth woman was killed, we would be talking about something different in this House. It is unfortunate that we got that communication after the 21st death.

It is even more scaring to see that there seems to be an evident conflict between the Minister of Security and Inspector General of Police. This has moved me to question whether these two organs are trying to fail each other in their duties at the expense of the lives of Ugandans. (Applause)

Is it a deliberate move to divert the attention of the nation from pertinent issues by creating a wave of fear among the citizens? 

Mr Speaker, I would like to state that the most important role of the State is to protect its citizens and any Government that fails at that has failed at everything. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

3.06
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Members for insisting that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes here to make a statement today. 

I do not want to accept the apology of the minister because he is not the single minister in that ministry. There are a number of ministers in that ministry. The ministry had to be forced to come and make a statement because the role of the Ministry of Internal Affairs is to give security to the people of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, it beats me because there are many security organs in this country. We have the Parish Internal Security Officers (PISOs), Gombolola Internal Security Office (GISO), Special Police Constables (SPCs), Regional Police Commanders (RPCs), Inspector General of Police (IGP), among others, but all these security organs, which the country prides itself in, in providing security - people are being killed and the killings have continued for a long time. There are killings in Mbale, Masaka, Mbarara and everywhere and this has been going on. What defeats Ugandans is the nature of killings of our women that has been going on. Serial killers – Honourable minister, you do not have to wait until 21 women are killed and you say the police are intensifying the move to get the perpetrators. If you see two people have been killed in the same manner, the police should come up immediately and find out the killers instead of waiting until 21 women are killed, and say the police is intensifying efforts to trace the killers. This is not proper for Ugandans because you are supposed to protect the citizens who pay for uniforms and salaries of the policemen.

It is very unfortunate that you found out that it is Katongole who bought people to go and kill these women. And you have let this to continue happening without taking any action until the numbers have risen. This is very unfair to Ugandans.

Honourable minister, your ministry has totally failed to protect Ugandans. We cannot move with our heads up because we know we are in danger. The killings have continued to happen. If even the former AIGP, the man who should have been protected highly can die like that, what about an ordinary Ugandan? What shows that your ministry is providing security? This is very unfair. In fact, if you were in one of these countries, you should have tendered your resignation because you have failed to protect Ugandans. (Applause) I rest my case.

3.09
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to the minister’s report, it looks like 100 percent of the women died because of witchcraft.

Mr Speaker, I stay in Nansana. A few weeks ago, a lady was killed and according to the eye witnesses, this lady was a maize seller. She had gone to a nearby shop but as she was still standing in the shop, someone called her. They took her somewhere and murdered her. This happened just next to my perimeter wall. In the morning, we found the woman dead and her face was wrapped with a polythene bag.

Mr Speaker, the next day, the IGP came and conducted meetings with the locals. I actually attended one of the meetings and I could hear the locals tell the IGP that it was witchcraft. Today, the report we have received in this Parliament of Uganda by the Minister of Internal of Affairs says it is witchcraft. I do not know whether the minister investigated it or he just took what the local people said.

Mr Speaker, Ugandans are no longer safe in their own country. Soon, our children in primary seven, senior four and six are going to do their final Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) exams. However, I must tell you that these days, children must be at home by 4.00 p.m. The moment you go beyond that time, even at 7.00 p.m. you can be killed, especially in Wakiso District.

Mr Speaker, I do not know who is in charge of the security of Ugandans. I think there is a big problem. Just like colleagues have said, we would like to see the Ministry of Internal Affairs take action – not bringing reports, which are not authentic. I actually doubt his statement.

Mr Speaker, the people of Wakiso –(Interruption)

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information that I would like to give is that as far as the investigation of the police is concerned – maybe in the report that the minister has presented to the House, he should have told the House whether the deaths of these women happened in the places where the bodies were found. It is highly believed that most of these women are killed from distant places but are dumped in the places where the bodies are found. We would like to get that clear so that we can know whether we are dealing with an issue in Wakiso, Entebbe, Nansana or it is spreading across. That is the information I wanted to give. Thank you.

MS KATWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, as colleagues have pointed out, these killers are sending out a message and I think the minister needs to take charge as the security head of this country. I thank you.

3.14
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a case of deep concern. When you read about the word witchcraft, it is synonymous with very backward societies. For witchcraft to be cited in an official statement of a minister, says a lot about the state of affairs of our country.

In Europe that was the dark ages when they were talking about witchcraft and it was in public - the Viking Era mythology. I think that it is absurd that our ministry can present a report that purports witchcraft. Is it scientific? What methodology did these people use to ascertain witchcraft? I think we need to be worried because diagnosis in hospitals might become witchcraft. If a whole minister’s statement can cite witchcraft and we take it, then God forbid, we might get postmortems from our hospitals saying the cause of death was witchcraft. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, this is something that is diversionary. Departments of government do not rely on words like “witchcraft” that people who are ignorant and not equipped with modern advanced methods of interrogation of happenings use. When I look at this statement, I think our country is getting frustrated. We are being laughed at as Members of Parliament because we talk about these things when people die and then they ask us when we go back: “What happens because you talked about it? What next?”

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to task the minister to go back to Cabinet. This is an issue that would even require the President to make a statement. (Applause) This is something that is affecting women and the safety of our young girls in the municipalities and cities. What will happen when we go to the villages?

Therefore, if murders are happening around State House, we might be looking at an insurgency, Mr Speaker. We are citizens and we demand a more authentic finding than witchcraft. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.18
MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In fact, we are sort of crying and mourning in this House. I am so glad that we have the women activists in the House and I hope, as Parliament, we find solutions. We have done enough of lamentation. We have heard from the minister on the five journalistic questions. What is happening in the country? Who are doing whatever they are doing? We need to address ourselves to why these things are happening in this country. Why are they happening in those places? We do not want an influx in our own districts. We need to address them now.

As for the President, he has already spoken about the killings, for example, the Kaweesi murder. There were solutions already set up; they were going to install cameras –(Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: We received the statement from the minister in charge and everything is on the Members’ iPads. Is it in order for the honourable member to purport that the President has spoken about this particular issue when he has not? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you have any information as to when this statement was made by the President? (Laughter)

MS JACQUELINE AOL: Thank you so much. As a member of the ruling party – (Laughter) - I am going to stand by my word that the President is disturbed about what is happening in this country. He is a human being just like any other person and he is the father of all fathers in this country. (Laughter)

Can we stop storytelling and swing into action as Members of Parliament because security begins with us. Where are the men when women are being killed? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I now rule on the point of order?

MS JACQUELINE AOL: Thank you very much. 

3.21
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. To begin with, I doubt the capacity of the police as far as fighting crime is concerned. Just the other day, I was watching news on TV and the IGP had mobilised sex workers around Nansana and declared them as spies doing the work for the police. 

Mr Speaker, first of all, sex work is a crime itself. Secondly, when you publicly declare spies, you are exposing them to danger. Now, this is a double sword trying to fight crimes against women but at the same time exposing women to crime.

Mr Speaker, the wave of killing of women in and around Kampala is not an isolated case. Killings happened even before; the boda bodas, Muslim clerics, traders, including senior police officers. 

I have information that a number of criminal gangs in and around Kampala are harboured, protected and facilitated by some security agencies in Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, for the minister to come here and begin lamenting about traditional healers is a very serious concern. The president of the traditional healers in Uganda is one of the chief mobilisers to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you make a statement that the criminal gangs are being sponsored by security agencies, you may need to substantiate or withdraw it. It is because that is a very serious remark.

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, if given time, I am ready to substantiate on that one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have to substantiate it now or withdraw it. 

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, I am one of the victims of these criminal gangs. As one of the leaders in Kampala, I have been waylaid several times by the kiboko squad under the protection and watchful eye of the police. (Applause) The most recent case happened in Kampala at Park Yard, formerly a market. The DPCs from all over the divisions of Kampala were around when these criminal gangs were hitting me in particular but also the Lord Mayor of Kampala. I have a very long list of them but I do not have time to exhaust it. I have seen Black Mambas being protected by the security agencies as they kill senior citizens in Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, it is a conclusion rather than a fact? You said you have information that these people are being sponsored by some security agencies; what information do you have?

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, the police has not come out to deny this. It is a fact.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you are not able to deal with the issue I have raised, you will not continue speaking because you have levied a charge on institutions of government. I am asking you to give the information you said you have. If you do not have it, withdraw and sit down. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. I painfully withdraw the statement. However, just to conclude my submission, the minister stated very well that it took Parliament to compel him to come up with a statement after over 20 Ugandans were killed. In his submission, he said they eventually arrested somebody in Nansana using sniffer dogs after nine women were killed. Do we import sniffer dogs? Do we have them around us? If we do, why should it take nine lives before the sniffer dogs could be brought?

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, we have always been talking about elements within police called crime preventers which later became “crime facilitators”. Many of them which I know around my constituency, are hardcore criminals and do crime brokering. They move along with the police and call their colleagues on ground not to come to a particular place saying that: “Today, the operations will be carried out around this place.”

Mr Speaker, the question I would like to re-echo is this: Is the Minister of Security and that of Internal Affairs in charge of security? How can security agencies employ hardcore criminals who are facilitating crimes instead of preventing them? Don’t we allocate enough money for police to perform its work; do you have enough trained police? If you do not have, why shouldn’t we be informed? How can you trust a hardcore criminal to fight crime instead of trusting professional and well trained policemen to do the same? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to instruct that those remarks that offended the rules of this House and were inaccurate to the extent that they were not justifiable, be expunged from the record of Parliament.

3.28
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad that I moved a motion and Gen. Jeje Odongo responded in time. He was very smart in starting his statement.

However, when I was in a political science class 20 years ago, we were trained that when there is so much pressure on government, you institute a commission of inquiry. Today, I see that investigations have to go on. 

In this same Parliament, we talked about the Budo fire where young children were killed at Budo Junior Primary School and to date, we are still waiting for the investigations. Concerning our late colleague, Nebanda, to date, we are still waiting for the investigation. About the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, to date, we miss him and do not know what killed him. The list is endless and does not even need to mention, like the late Norbert Mayombo and the former Gen. Kazini, among many others.

Mr Speaker, I was approached by the former Inspector General of Police, Mr John Kisembo and he requested, with your permission, that he is willing to talk to the committee in charge of this sector in Parliament. However, what he told me was very disturbing. Kisembo said that the police as of now have no ear on the ground. He said this is because CID investigates crime after it has taken place; homicide, infanticide, suicide and genocide. 

During their time, they had special agents that would listen on behalf of government and he challenged me to inform Parliament that there is no listening ear for government currently in the Uganda Police. The ones you have are the operatives who are masquerading in all the villages and the crime preventers who are introduced in every public function. They even come with T-shirts bearing the police logo.

Therefore, Mr Kisembo posed a question to me that: How can you expose a crime preventer and how will he prevent crimes in that village? The crime preventers already have status; sit in funerals and even address people. 

In addition, Mr Kisembo told me that in Uganda today – because he said the ISO is not trained to handle civilian crime, but it is trained to handle the likes of the ADF, LRA and terrorism. Mr Kisembo challenged me that as a country, I should pose this question to you: Where is the listening ear of the government? This can even happen tomorrow and you come on the Floor of this House to give us the list, date and scene where someone was killed. The ‘why’ is absent throughout your statement.

Furthermore, Mr Kisembo said that when some people took over government in this country, they called for the file from the special branch offices and they found all details of what they were doing in those files. They said that this was a very dangerous group and they can trace people in every place. Their next mission was to see how to disband that group. 

However, 30 years later, we are paying for the ultimate price of having a government without effective intelligence. The operatives who should be informing government are harassing women and bragging with pistols in night clubs and bars.

Therefore, the challenge I would like to give to the Minister of Internal Affairs, who is a very good person – and for your information he was even the best in targets in East and Central Africa. No one can beat him in the targets of AK47 –(Laughter)– but now we would like to prove your targets through achieving results and having these criminals arrested.

Thirdly, the churches – Minister of Ethics and Integrity let us not downplay the role of rituals in our society and I am glad the minister raised it. Is there anybody in Uganda regulating the number of churches that are to be opened? Is there anyone monitoring and supervising them? There are very many wooden churches and people are praying that they want to go to heaven. For heaven’s sake, this can be where these ritual practices can start, not all churches mean well.

I have seen pictures in social media where people kneel down to kiss the shoes of pastors. There are also pastors who claim to be having “holy rice” and the churches which are mushrooming everywhere can be useful raw material for human flesh –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Odonga-Otto, for giving way. The information I would like to give is in regard to the sectoral linkage in terms of managing security in the country. Apparently, we are boasting of crime preventers in every village of this country and mushrooming churches including Ngora. For example, in Ngora District, there is a church where children were killed; they used to pray in that church, but there was no information about it until we raised a serious issue and my colleague, hon. Abala, was furious about this particular issue.

Therefore, the information, I would like to give to the House today, is in regard to the modalities in which even humble women who leave their homes safe and find themselves dying on the streets of the city where we have security. We have police, UPDF, crime preventers and everyone working for the security agency, I wonder whether we are safe if those humble people cannot be saved.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I still insist that the Minister of Ethics – we are putting you on notice and we will request you to bring the list of all licensed places of worship in this country. This is because as an advocate, we are also finding problems. We know that marriage should take place in gazetted places but you find people coming from a swamp claiming to have been from a church in the swamp and they say they are husband and wife –(Laughter)            

MR SIMON LOKODO: Thank you, hon. Odonga-Otto and I would like to thank you for the observations about the current status of religious and faith-based organisations that are flooding the country. 

I would further like to inform this House that the government is fully aware of the presence of these churches and therefore, an effort is being made to ensure that whoever comes out as an apostle, a prophet, a pastor or a reverend must have clearance from some main supreme church. 

I, therefore, inform you that I am formulating a religious and faith-based organisation policy whose other role will be to register and to de-register those religious organisations depending on how genuine their practice is. Hence, be sure that we are going to identify them, know their operations and origin so that this country can be safe and not be misled in the guise of religiosity. I thank you. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you, honourable minister. I am glad you are going to come up with a policy on the churches but we also need a policy on traditional medicine and witchdoctors. This is because they are now making advertisements on radio stations concerning loss of a lover, need for a job and so much more. These are all dangerous situations that can prompt them to request for body tissue and organs. 

I have driven through Masindi and Hoima while going to Gulu and I have heard radio advertisements from people such as Dr Mulungu-Mulungu from Zanzibar and Mama Fiina. For heaven’s sake, in a country where we say “For God and my Country”, something should be done to regulate traditional herbalists. There is a clear distinction between traditional medicine and witchcraft. The whites have brainwashed us to believe that traditional African medicine does not work. We have anaesthesia in Acholi and that is not witchcraft but it is traditional African medicine. However, these people who invest in spirituality of human beings and go under the water –(Interruption)

MR OYET: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you my colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the House is that our record today shows that powerful men in this country have organised dinners for the traditional healers (the witchdoctors). That in simple terms is a promotion of that practice. Once we promote that practice, the person or the witchdoctors may go for the raw materials and their key raw materials are the flesh. 

You find that some of the body parts of all the women that are being killed are being removed. Where are they taking those body parts? I would like to thank Gen. Jeje Odongo, the Minister of Internal Affairs, for being honest as he has always been. He has never been a dishonest character and that is why he captioned the report – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, are you giving information? 

MR OYET: Yes. The final point of information that I would like to give to my colleague is that when Maj. Kiggundu was killed, his wife Mama Fiina called for a press conference. She said that she was going to help the police get the culprits; those who had killed her husband. If you can adore such a character, what do you expect to come out of such people? 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker, I do not want to waste my time so I plead with the Minister of Internal Affairs because we are tired of these killings. When you go to a police station to report a crime, they tell you that they do not have fuel. In that case, you have to hire a boda boda for the police. The police therefore usually ask for fuel; how do we run a country like that? The police usually collect money in that when you want to arrest someone, you have to give them fuel and allowances for them to board a boda boda. However, when it comes to stopping Besigye from going somewhere, there is enough fuel for that. 

We are tired of these kinds of double standards and I challenge the generals – I have seen Gen. Kuteesa clad in uniform and well equipped. However, you cannot be a good General without human beings. 

I think we may need an “Operation Wembley” because it cleared Kampala of crime. If the police are joking, at an appropriate time, if these incidences continue, we shall move a motion for the army to probably take over. We are not going to just continue being kind. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is important and urgent but we need to draw it to a close. The statement has been issued and the debate has ensued. I am going to ask the Leader of the Opposition to speak. Thereafter, we shall hear from the Leader of Government Business and the minister will respond. 

3.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for bringing a statement that I feel was not so conclusive, detailed and informative. The statement only informed us of the women that have died and possibly the locations where they have been found dead. However, it really lacked details on how government and his department intend to bring us, as a country, out of this mess. 

Mr Speaker, colleagues have spoken about how sad, bitter and heavy-hearted they feel about the gruesome murders of our mothers, sisters and wives. I saw this lacking in the statement of the minister; so my question has been: Have you bothered to even follow up on some of these murdered women and reach out to their families? 

Some of the women have left behind young children. For the ones that you say were unclaimed, I would have loved possibly to see a statement in the papers. It would not have done us bad to say, for example, there is a body that was found in Nansana and ask anybody that might have information on the person to step forward. I would have loved to see that in papers. 

Mr Speaker, the killing has taken long. It started with boda boda cyclists. It went on to university girls and boys, the sheikhs and now it is coming to the women. They have been dealing with businessmen and women and nobody seems to be taking stock and record of these continuous murders in the country. 

Hon. Komuhangi talked about something that we should consider seriously as a country. She said that this could be a targeted war. We should even find out why they are now moving from Makerere and the many other areas and are going towards Entebbe. They are trying to test the power base. Is government in charge? Twenty women have died within the vicinity where State House is. Have you tried to ask yourselves why Entebbe? State House is located in Nakasero and the other one is in Entebbe but people are dying around State House. 

Let me just give you an example of Betty Katusabe, who died here at Pine under the watch and supervision of police. The girl was raped and bottles were inserted into her private parts. She cried out to police but the police officer at CPS came and watched her being brutalised and went away and they started cheering until the girl died. 

Another woman died near Kasese Police Station at the railways. The woman cried out to police. The neighbours came in the morning and said, “There was a woman crying the previous night.” When they reached the house, there was a lot of blood. They went to the neighbours’ room and found a house accommodating boda boda cyclists. These cyclists were found with a lot of blood and that is when they went to file a report at police. At the time they were being arrested, their boda boda motorycles were at a washing bay being cleaned and they had patches of blood. But in three hours, the police had set them free.

This is the police that we are talking about. When my sister Komuhangi said that we should also applaud the police, I said yes we are running out of patience. We have tried all we can and as Parliament, we have appropriated funds to police. There is no police budget that we have thrown out but the best they can do is to buy tear gas. 

Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that we sit here, and all of us including those we thought would be in power, all seem helpless. Where do we go then? If the minister can also come and say it is ritual murders that we are finding out. It is government licensing ritualists – I mean these witch doctors. We are now saying that it is “illuminati”. As a country, we do not believe in witchcraft and “illuminatism”. So, how do we arrest these “illuminatis”? Which case will you put against them? Is it in our books of law that you can institute a case of “illuminatism” against them?

What do we have to do as a country? We are demanding for accountability from those who wield power. We are saying that enough is enough. Women have died under situations that would have been controlled. These killings went on in Masaka – I am surprised that the minister is saying that “We are trying all that we can and the killings are coming to the end.” Just a day after we demanded for a statement, another person was killed in Masaka. Killings are continuously happening but no step is being taken to fix the problem.

I am calling upon government to act. Prove to Ugandans that you are still in charge. Prove to Ugandans that they are safe in your hands or else pack your bags and go, so that someone else, who can be in position to take care of Ugandans, can take charge. I would like to propose to government – maybe before I make the proposal, the police that is supposed to protect us – the other day I was reading a newspaper, 87 drug traffickers were aided by police to escape. These are criminals and yet police is supposed to prevent criminality, but they are aiding criminals to escape. Where do we run to?

Mr Speaker, when the minister was talking about the ritual murders – let me tell you what we found on the bodies of the women who died in King Mumbere’s palace. Two of the women had been killed with guns but still sticks were passed through their private parts. These were killed by soldiers, not ritual murderers. When I see this happening even in Nansana – women killed and after being killed, sticks are stuck into their private parts – it brought those sad memories of those pictures of the Bakonzo women that I saw; being undressed, those that had died with sticks stuck into them through the whole system of a woman. I was alarmed and I asked myself whether we were still a country that believed in humanity?

I would like to propose that as we demand for accountability, government pronounces a day of mourning for these women that have died in these gruesome murders – so that we can have a day to ourselves, and maybe those who wield power can give accountability to the country; as they propose to us the ways which they think that they will employ to ensure that such murders do not happen again. We are tired of seeing dying women and yet we are “bleeding” paying taxes to ensure that security systems are working.

Mr Speaker, I pray that the proposal is taken in good faith by government – declare a day of mourning so that the dear ones of these fallen women can know that there is somebody who feels for them. Look out for the children of these victims and ensure that they have a future. Those that have not been identified, I wish it were still possible to display their pictures, they have relatives. They can come for them and accord them a decent funeral.

As Ugandans, we feel that our lives are in danger. When officers of police continue supervising people doing criminal acts like hon. Kasibante was talking about, then it is like you are really justifying criminality. As a country, we may not move in such a way. The hon. Nabilah mentioned that a country that is priding in going towards a middle income status, and you still believe in witchcraft, is a shame. It is a big shame. We should be talking about how to wipe out diseases but not coming out to say that we believe in witchcraft. We, as a country, have a motto that says “For God and my Country”. Indeed, for God and my country, I beg to submit. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether the minister should come to respond first and then you – honourable minister, I think you should come first and then the Prime Minister can wind up.

GEN (RTD) ODONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must admit that we have had a very interesting afternoon. I have listened to your concerns, I have listened to your criticisms and I would also like to continue to listen to your suggestions on how we should deal with this problem.

What is important to recognise is that a crime is a crime. It is a problem of our society. Security begins with the individuals and begins with us all as individuals. I took note of your comments and I acknowledge them. As I pointed out from the very beginning, this is merely a preliminary report. Investigations are continuing and when we are done, I will come back with a final statement. I thank you.

3.54
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to salute hon. Jeje Odongo, the Minister of Internal Affairs, for a good statement on this situation. Secondly, I would like to convey our sympathy and condolences to the families, relatives and friends and indeed to the whole country on the loss, of not only the young ladies that have been raped and murdered but to all the victims who have fallen because of the selfishness, brutality and beastly behaviour of some of these criminals; Kagezi, Kaweesi and many other people have perished, in Masaka and many other areas. We, therefore, convey our sympathies and indeed our solidarity.

I so far have heard a heated debate about backwardness here and issues of witchcraft. As much as our motto is “For God and my Country”, the fact of the matter is that backwardness and witchcraft still characterises our country and our society. That is why we say that we must transform this country from backwardness to modernity. This is because it was in recognition of the fact that this country still had backwardness in it.

Mr Speaker, we will not benefit by denying reality. The sooner we face reality and deal with it, the better. There has been some tendency of pointing fingers. Actually, if there is any issue that unites this House and this country, it is these criminal activities that have taken many of our young people, who are so innocent. Today, we are talking about women, rightly so, but the other day, there was a spate of killing children. All of us can remember this. Tomorrow, it may be men. What appears to characterise – there are many different causes but what appears to be fueling it is the ridiculous belief that if you take somebody’s private parts you will end up being either richer or something like that.

Therefore, in a way, the characteristics of our society have to some extent fueled it –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, I hope my brother from Kalungu will listen to my point.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, as I conclude, there are many causes of this problem but one of them is this belief that people will become wealthy by taking people’s parts.

However, I would like to stress one point and that is to do with police. There have been some harsh remarks made about police. I think the issue of the police in my view and as the minister has said, the police has done some commendable work and indeed because of this work, some of the people have already been charged. Some of these people’s papers are being processed so that they can be taken to court.

However, let me also –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. The Prime Minister has not conceded to your point of clarification. He has the right to accept or not. Therefore, you cannot keep calling out all the time because he has not accepted.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your protection. The point I would like to stress is that instead of pointing fingers at the police, let us also point fingers at ourselves. We are members of society and we should therefore call on all members of our society in Uganda to be vigilant and to report to the police whenever there is a suspicious situation or move or somebody who could be linked with these criminal activities. Therefore, it is not work for police alone but for all of us.

Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

MS AMODING: Mr Speaker, the issue we are dealing with is a matter of internal affairs and security of the country where lives have been lost in the saddest circumstances. These are our mothers, daughters, wives – the mothers of this nation. I am at pains to give the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister this point of order because there is information that we have before us. He is trying to defend the police well knowing that there are some circumstances that the police has not been able to deal with which has been laid before the House this afternoon.

Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, are you in order to say that the police is delivering perfectly well on this matter and saying that the honourable members have not done their part? Our duty is to bring this issue on the Floor. May I give you information before I raise a point of order to you - according to the information I have here, 70 samples were sent to the government analytical laboratory but out of that, I think the minister has not reported on the others; he is only saying 40. Seventy of them are pending in the government laboratory and they need to conduct five DNA tests but there is no money. 

The total sum of the DNA tests that are supposed to be conducted is Shs 350 million. As we speak now, the laboratory needs only about Shs 100 million to successfully conduct these tests to be able to link the murders to the randomly arrested suspects all over the city. Are you therefore in order my senior, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, to say that police is doing well on this matter and to be joking about a very important matter like this one?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the information we have received in the statement shows that there is some action that had been taken, that there is some achievement that has been made in the way of apprehension, detention and processing. That is work. Therefore, you cannot say that they have not done anything. That would not be correct. Therefore, I cannot rule the Prime Minster out of order on this matter.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your obviously wise ruling on this matter. As we have heard from the minister, 22 people have been charged, others are in the process of being charged. No one can say police is perfect – far from it. Or that it has done everything perfectly well – definitely not. We know there are gaps in police but the fact of the matter is that police has made some good progress; they need to do more with our support.

However, there is tangible progress being made and should be recognised. Therefore, if I may conclude my remarks –(Interjections)– we do not accept because people force themselves on us. I would like to salute you, Mr Speaker, for making a ruling in this House that people should not make allegations that are not substantiated. It will increase the respect of this very august House if we can substantiate what we say.

As I said, this matter affects government, the Opposition and the entire people of Uganda. The police may have its own weaknesses but has done some good work. We should give it support and we should get more information and pass it on to the police so that it can do even better work. 

Government will do all it takes to work with everyone concerned to ensure that the country is on top of this terrible scar on the people of Uganda. And by the way, the issue of security is a fundamental right and all of us should make it a reality by being security conscious and working with and supporting the police and other security organs. Thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on the matter of procedure on the pending outstanding business in Parliament. Mr Speaker, the Leader of Government Business and colleagues, in August, the President declared the target of getting the first oil in 2020 and during the budget process, in October, I did request that we get an inter-ministerial presentation to the effect that we have the budget for all activities to achieve this very important target for the country.

The ministry of energy did submit the energy side of the statement, but we did not get the Works  and Infrastructure statement including roads, air and water transport. We did not also hear from the Ministry of Water and Environment, given the sensitivity of the Albertine and National Environment Management Authority (NEMA). We did not hear from the Ministry of Local Government and that of Public Service, aware of the physical planning issues and its related challenges.

Mr Speaker, for the last two months, as leaders in the region, we have been running around. When you go to National Petroleum Authority, they say they have no money. When we went to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, they said they had no money. The districts have not been given the wage bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural point?

MR MUKITALE: The procedural point I am raising is: now that it was agreed here on the Floor of Parliament that the Ministry of Energy and Minerals would coordinate other ministries, including the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Works and Transport, Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA) and others, to bring a comprehensive matrix in Parliament both on funding and timeline and on programmes so that it does not suffer what we suffered in the last two months, where the oil companies are ready but Government agencies do not have money. 

Mr Speaker, I have met the Prime Minister for some fire-brigade attempts but I think there is a problem. We need to be open and say we did not provide the 10 per cent we discussed in the budget to fund those very institutions we put in place to ensure that as oil companies are working, the Government is also working.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to request that you direct the lead ministry and all other agents to bring that report and confirm to us the agency operations and the budget. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to say something, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister because it turned out not to be a purely procedural matter?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true I have had some discussions with hon. Stephen Mukitale about this matter. His concern was that there was inadequate sensitivity resources and coordination over oil issues. I indicated to him that Government had prioritised the oil extraction and that as a result, all Government ministries had cuts in order to raise enough money to build 10 oil roads.

I also informed my brother, the hon. Stephen Mukitale, that the Minister of Energy and Minerals chairs an inter-ministerial committee to ensure that we are on course in terms of oil extraction. In addition, I assured him that if necessary, the Prime Minister would call the committee concerned to ensure that this coordination is optimally taking place. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I think that is a correct line of action and even hon.  Stephen Mukitale and I will give further thought to this matter to see how some of the pending issues could be more amicably and rapidly resolved so that there is no obstruction to our programme to have oil out on schedule.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Do you have further question? 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I would like to request that since it was on the Floor of Parliament, that the lead ministry and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development pledged to bring a report to Parliament – because different ministries are supervised by different committees of Parliament. The committees also need to know what they did not provide in their sector budgets. I think it would be proper that these ministries bring a comprehensive report on the Floor of Parliament such that the different ministries and committees of Parliament are aware of their sectoral budget; that way, by the time we go for the next budget, it will help us to know whether they require a supplementary or it can be catered for in the next budget so that Parliament is fully engaged. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, for this particular matter, a pledge was made to this House that a statement would be brought that captures all those issues. Would you like to task the responsible ministers to come since they are here today?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is a right of colleagues in Parliament to be fully briefed on the progress that is being made, not only in the oil sector but in other sectors as well. 

Therefore, without any doubt, the Minister of Energy and Minerals should, within the next two weeks, prepare a report and bring it to this House, so that colleagues in Parliament can be kept abreast and the whole country can know what is happening and the progress we are making to get oil out on schedule .

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is in relation to the debates we have had.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Prime Minister to take time and visit and study those factors that might be affecting the policemen to perform poorly. 

I do not believe in the Inspector General of Police (IGP) who exposes the policemen in public by asking the people whether they like them or not because that is killing the morale and performance of the police men.

Secondly, at night –(Interjections)– yes, policemen can dose on pickups and everywhere but when you expose them to the public, you weaken your security. 

I would like to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs, as a well-trained soldier - let us shift our heads - I would like to move my brain from Democratic Party (DP) to NRM briefly. Imagine the death of Kaweesi - whether he was heavily guarded or all the 20 people arrested were all involved in the killings. If you carry out that investigation, you will get the performance.

Finally, Mr Speaker, one time we had an issue here where masts were stolen from the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. Mr Asuman Mugenyi was ordered to carryout investigations and within two days, he had discovered the thief whereupon even the NRM Caucus could not move to support the minister; they had no option but to censure the minister. 

Mr Speaker, there are people in police who you have sat on    yet they know what to do but you are using junior officers who know nothing because they come from bigger families and all that. That is the procedural matter I am raising - if we are to sort out - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you rise on procedure, you seek the guidance of the Speaker. All the matters you are talking about are not being addressed to the Speaker.  How do I rule on your procedural matter? n other words, they are not procedural matters. Please, leave it there now. You have said what you needed to say under the guise of procedure and I will not permit you to continue violating our Rules of Procedure.

MR SSEWUNGU: Most Obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Let us get to next item. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PROGRESS OF REGISTRATION OF LEARNERS AS RAISED IN PARLIAMENT ON 13 JULY 2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you had indicated you had issues with this statement. Are you now ready with it? Please, respond on the record.

4.15
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The activity of registration of learners is a joint activity by the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I am still consulting my colleagues at the Ministry of Education and Sports in order to produce a joint statement, which I promise will be presented earliest next week. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE LAWLESSNESS OF THE BODA-BODA 2010 ASSOCIATION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, today, is your day.

4.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement by the Ministry of Internal Affairs in response to an issue, which was raised by the hon. Waira Majegere, the Member of Parliament for Bunya County East on the lawlessness of the Boda-boda 2010 Association. He raised specific concerns about “the misbehaviour” of the association but we are giving a little broader answer.

Mr Speaker, the boda-boda industry in the country has grown phenomenal over a long period of time. I think Members may not have a hard copy of this but it was circulated on the network some time back. I do hope diligent Members who have their iPads can open it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All Members are diligent. 

MR OBIGA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. The industry consists of bicycles, motorcycles and tricycles which are commonly known as Tuk-tuks. At the moment, it is estimated that there are over 150,000 boda-boda motorcycles in Kampala alone. It is difficult, at the moment, to establish a fairly accurate number because of the fluidity of the industry with members going in and out of the business. It is even more difficult to estimate the number of riders and the people employed in the industry as it involves many riders sometimes riding one motorcycle, stage management staff and other auxiliary employees. 

Now, due to the nature of their business, the competition and to create some order, the boda-boda riders have mainly, on voluntary basis, organised themselves in some kinds of associations. 

In Kampala, there are over 20 associations operating from various stages. Some of these are what we are referring to as the Boda-boda 2010 Association, Century Boda-boda Association, Kampala Metropolitan Boda-boda Riders Association, Safe Bodas Association, National Federation of Professional Cyclists, Kawempe Division Boda-boda Cyclists, National Coalition of Boda-boda Organisations, National Resistance Movement Boda-boda Cadres Association, Uganda Boda-boda Industry, Smart Boda-boda Riders, National Federation for Cyclists and Riders Association with affiliate members of about 20 associations, Kampala Boda-boda Industry, Kampala Civic Centre Boda-boda Transporters Co-operative Society, Central Union of Boda-boda Riders Association, Rubaga North Boda-boda 2012, Kampala Boda-boda Riders Savings and Credit Society, Boda-boda Protection Unit Security Council, Security Boda-boda Owners and Riders, Boda-man Riders Uganda Limited, Widen Boda-boda Rider Mind Association and many others.

These, as I have said, are voluntary and not legally registered associations. Some of them are registered like the SACCOS. However, they have existed because of the existence of the industry and they have been allowed to operate. 

Now, the main causes of conflict among the riders at the moment are: the lack of policy and guidelines for the entire industry, leadership and business wrangles within the sector, political interference or patronage by different forces and individuals, the deliberate misuse of the Boda-boda industry by some forces for other ulterior motives such as criminal activities, insecurity and other individual interests.

Mr Speaker, the Boda-boda sector and industry is here to stay, in our view, for the foreseeable                                                                                                          future. Government recognises its economic importance and the need to organise it and give a better direction to the sector and the entire industry. 

Accordingly, an inter-ministerial committee involving Ministry of Works and Transport, KCCA in the case of Kampala, the Ministry of Security, Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Police have been formed and directed to draft a Cabinet paper for Government to come out with a policy and operation guidelines on this matter. Apparently, it will not only be for Kampala but the entire country. 

The committee has begun its meetings and was slated to present a paper to Cabinet for discussion; the paper will be brought to Parliament. 

Now, regarding the issue of the Boda-boda 2010 Association specifically, this association, as I have said, is a voluntary association like any other – (Interjections) - it is not about the law. 

Their activities must be and are being held within the law. If they transgress, they must be reported as individual members of the association to the relevant law and authorities for action. 

The act of attacks quoted by my colleague, hon. Waira Majegere, which happened on the 22nd of July 2017 at Nateete - that situation arose when Century Boda-boda Association called an annual meeting for its SAACO members. The police advised them to get a police clearance specifically for the date and venue so they (Police) could secure the meeting. Century Boda-boda Association did not get that clearance. 

However, on 12 of July 2017, when Century Boda-boda Association SACCOs members assembled in the hall for the meeting, members of the Boda-boda 2010 attempted to gate-crash into that meeting. The police however, obstructed them. Thereafter, because of the fracas, members of the SACCO adjourned their meeting on the advice of the police to another day. 

However, as Century Boda-boda Association members came out, a scuffle ensued around the meeting place but outside the hall, between the two groups, involving fist-fights and stone-throwing between the two groups. The police dispersed both groups. 

A General Enquiry File (GEF) because of that has been opened and the Police are following the matter. The police have taken statements from the various people who were suspected to have started the fracas as well, the leaders of the associations have been summoned to come and make statements. 

At the moment, it is difficult to say who started the outside fracas because the police had stopped both groups from meeting in the place. 

On the contrary, reports at the Police indicate that the act of indiscipline was committed by not only Boda-boda 2010 members, but also other associations in the industry and they are being dealt with by the police and leadership of the concerned associations. Since these associations are voluntary, they have frequently and regularly used the services of the police.

Therefore, this is a matter that happened to members of the Boda-boda 2010 Association. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Waira Majegere for having raised this matter and I encourage more ideas to be presented forward to enable Government generate a policy to reorganise the industry for the betterment of the country. Thank you, for listening to me. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you will recall this is not a typical ministerial statement that would attract a one-hour debate. This particular issue was raised as a question and so we shall treat it as a question and I will ask hon. Waira Majegere to ask a supplementary question, if there is need.

3.28
MR JAMES WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for attempting to come up with a solution. Why I say he has attempted is because -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ask a supplementary question.

MR WAIRA: It was not a question. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was a question according to the rules. Ask the supplementary question, please. 

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, it was not a question. I raised my point and the Speaker who was in the seat instructed the minister to come up with a statement on the basis of that request. After I made my request -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you have no supplementary question, please resume your seat. You raised a question and the Speaker asked the minister to respond. That is a question. This is not a statement that requires a debate.

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: I would like to be on record that it was not a question and I have – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, then please resume your seat. Let us get to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE HOSTING OF THE THIRD EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY ARTS AND CULTURE FESTIVAL (JUMUIYA YA AFRICA MASHARIKI UTAMADUNI) (JAMAFEST) SEPTEMBER 2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister.

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: Point of procedure, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please proceed.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, I am here this afternoon to brief you that Uganda will host the third edition of JAMAFEST from 7th to 15th September 2017. 

Mr Speaker, Article 119 of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community provides for the promotion of cultural activities including fine art, literature, music, fashion and design, performance art and the development of the cultural heritage, historical materials and antiquities of the partner states. 

To this effect, the 20th and 23rd meetings of the Council of the East African Community Ministers, held in March and September 2012 respectively, directed the East African Secretariat to organise regular EAC art and cultural festivals in the East African States, on rotational basis, every two years.

Thereafter, the Republic of Rwanda organised the first edition in Kigali in February, 2013. The Republic of Kenya organised the second edition in Nairobi in August, 2015. Uganda participated at both editions of the festival. 

Mr Speaker, in the 2015 edition, honourable members of the Sessional Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development of the Ninth Parliament attended, which was a good gesture and a sign of support. At the closure of the event, Uganda expressed interest to host the third edition of the JAMAFEST.

Mr Speaker, the second extraordinary meeting of the East African Community Sectorial Council of Ministers of Education, Science, Technology, Sports and Culture, approved the offer by the Republic of Uganda to host the third edition of the East African Art and Culture Festival to be held in mid-September 2017 in Kampala.

Mr Speaker, the objectives of JAMAFEST are:

    a) To provide the platform to showcase art and culture as primary drivers of regional integration and sustainable development.
    b) To bring together East African cultural practitioners and administrators to share and celebrate the rich and diverse cultural heritage as well as contemporary practices in East Africa.
    c) To provide further space for inter-cultural dialogue amongst the people of East Africa.
    d) To foster economic development of East Africa through nurturing the growth of a strong, creative and cultural industry.
    e) To promote art and culture as a tool in the celebration and branding of East African identity and image.

Mr Speaker, the theme for the festival is “Culture and Creative Industries: the Engine for Unity and Employment Creation.” 

Mr Speaker, it is expected that the festival will provide – 

    a) an opportunity for celebrating the rich and diverse cultural heritage for the East African people; 
    b) a regional platform for showcasing and marketing cultural and creative products; 
    c) a platform for employment opportunities for the culture and creative industries stakeholders; 
    d) an avenue for participants’ knowledge and skills in the field of culture and creative industries to be enhanced; and
    e) an opportunity for increased public awareness and knowledge of the East African integration agenda.

Mr Speaker, the key activities will include discussion and symposium. A two-day symposium will be held from 11th to 12th September, 2017 to discuss the contribution of culture to employment and wealth creation, unity and peace building and sustainable development, and it will be at Hotel Africana. 

There will be an art and craft exhibition, demonstration and sales, where an array of partner states and Ugandan cultural products and services will be displayed from 8th to 14th September at Kololo Ceremonial Ground. This will be to show the processes of product development to enhance young people’s knowledge and skills on the value and cultural products and services. The market place will also be provided for the cultural and creative participating artists to sell their products. All these will be at Kololo.

Live Performances

Live performances of poetry, storytelling, drama, comedy, fashion show and acrobats will be provided at the national theatre and Kololo ceremonial Ground from 10th to 14th September. The carnival will be on the 9th September from the Constitutional Square to Railway Grounds, from 3.00 to 5.00 p.m. and children’s games within the region, among others.

Visits to natural and cultural sites will be arranged within Kampala City Capital Authority and the surrounding areas for participants to experience the beauty and learn from each other’s experience for the promotion of tourism. 

Mr Speaker, only five out of the six partner states of the East African Community will participate at the festival. South Sudan will participate as observers because of their situation. 

The venues for the festival will be Hotel Africana, Kololo Ceremonial Ground and National Theatre. I am happy to report that the National Theatre has been renovated to match the occasion. 

His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda and the Chairman of the East African Community, will preside over the opening ceremony of the third edition of this festival on Sunday, 10 September 2017 at Kololo Ceremonial Ground. 

All invitation cards for Members of Parliament and EALA Members, both current and outgoing, were distributed and you are warmly welcome.

Other venues are not by invitation, people will just be walking in to watch and participate.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request that Parliament notes that Uganda will host the third edition of Jamafest in three major venues of Kololo Ceremonial Ground, the National Theatre and Hotel Africana. Parliament should also note that the theme for the festival is: “Culture and Creative Industries: the Engine for Unity and Employment Creation.”

Further Parliament should note that His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda and Chairman of the East African Community, will preside over the opening ceremony of the third edition of the festival on Sunday, 10 September 2017 at Kololo Ceremonial Ground. 

I also request that you accept our invitation as Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, to the opening ceremony at 2.30.p.m on Sunday, 10 September at Kololo and as well request that you support your constituencies to participate in the Jamafest. Thank you very much.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, this is an information statement about the hosting of this event, we can only have short interventions.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister and Government for hosting the Jamafest celebration in our country. 

I am only seeking for clarification about the participation of districts. I got concerns from my district, especially from my paramount chief, asking about their facilitation and also yesterday the women groups asked me whether the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has got some arrangement for transport because they have been informed, but the information looks to be scanty. Thank you.

4.39
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and the minister. I would like to find out from the minister - you talked about Hotel Africana as one of the venues. Is it one of our cultural centres? I am asking this because I think when we talk about our cultural events; they should be cultural in nature? Why should we host such an event at Hotel Africana?

Secondly, why should the event be taken to Kololo, where we have always been holding swearing-in celebrations, instead we should take it to a place which is cultural in nature? This is because most of the people will be encouraged to come in formal attire so the venue should have something to do with culture.

Like my colleague said, what are you doing about the facilitation for our chiefs? Some of our chiefs do not have enough money in their coffers. For example, the Emorimor of Teso, we do not have bark clothes to sell, how will he get to Kampala with his team? What about the people who are managing the cultural centres around the country, what are you doing about those people? I fear that the people who will celebrate will be those around Kampala? What do you have to say about all this? Thank you so much.

4.41
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you for the presentation, honourable minister. After we have held this cultural event and aware that tourism is one of the sectors that bring a lot of money to Uganda, what would be the action point after hosting this event? 

In terms of preserving our cultural heritage and popularizing cultural centres for them to be effective and to attract tourism, what are the action points? This is because it should not be just a matter of holding events and it ends there yet we spend a lot of money. This event should be able to attract more tourists into the country.

Secondly, how shall we raise the standard of tourism in the country, in terms of identifying the potential areas, like in Teso, we have Nyero Rock Painting, which would be one of the very potential areas for tourists from the different parts of the world? As we host this event, how are we going to showcase these areas that are potential for future tourist attraction? Thank you.
 
4.42
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for providing us with this information about the Jamafest. I was one of those Members of Parliament who attended the Jamafest in 2015 in Kenya but which was well organized. It was free entertainment. Different cultures displayed their cultural dances, drama, craft and we really enjoyed it. My prayer is that the one we are going to hold in Uganda should be also well organized like the one of Kenya.

Therefore, may I know how many districts are represented? I am asking this because Uganda has got various cultures – the rich ones like the one for the Kakwas. However, you have just told us that we should come with our people yet you never informed us in time for us to organise our people to also come and display their culture. 

Therefore, I hope that our Jamafest will be colourful and I would like to encourage all Members of Parliament to attend the show and see for themselves. Thank you very much.

4.43
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues in thanking the minister. Honourable minister, you have requested that we mobilise our constituents, but I would like to inform you that there are people who are ready to come. You have given us three venues, which one do you expect our people from the constituency to come and participate from?

Secondly, which contribution is your ministry going to put in place to help us mobilise these people because as I talk, there are very many groups, which are getting ready to come. 

Further, have you already invited some groups or it is just an open invitation? Is the open invitation to all districts or it was to only specific districts and/or groups? Otherwise, I would like to thank you so much, the theme is so good and I am interested and waiting for the day. Thank you.

4.45
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, honourable minister for the statement. I would like to request that since this is the ministry under which the youth fall, one of the most important things to note is that art and culture have been neglected by most of the schools. Therefore, you may not have many young people involved because they have not been attracted to exercise their creativity.

This is something which the ministry, in tandem with the Ministry of Education, should emphasis because after it has rotated to other countries, Uganda will get another opportunity to host the Jamafest. Therefore, we are looking forward to the next since this one has already been rolled out. Thank you.

4.46
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Janat Mukwaya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The participating groups were already selected from the districts in a process that took place last year. The ministry went to different districts. After mobilising, we sent out documents and invitations and it has been on our website because you cannot plan for this activity within a week; we started last year.
        
There were also competitions within the districts and the best traditional groups have been selected. The group representing a district will be facilitated by the ministry, not any other entity. We are giving them transport and accommodating them throughout the period. 

However, when I was a Member of Parliament, I would take opportunity of such activities to expose my people with great pleasure, because I knew that in turn, the people I would bring to Kampala would do the needful when I needed them to do that. That is why I was appealing to you though I am not going to support you. I know the situation is not very good but KCCA and the Lord Mayor are doing mobilisation. 

To my young sister, you are aware that schools compete in music, dance and drama.  Their school competition ended last year and so the four best performing schools in Kampala are going to represent us due a meagre budget. 

I would, therefore, want to encourage everybody. There will not only be the opening session at Kololo there will also be a children’s corner, where the children from various schools in East Africa are going to exhibit the games we used to play while we were still young.

There will be wrestling, the bark cloth or the Adungu drum; there will be space for those people making drums - all those cultural things will be exhibited at Kololo. 

We will also have a symposium at Hotel Africana for the practitioners, educationists and all the people who will be willing to participate. It is a two day meeting; it is limited to the above mentioned categories. That evening, we shall also have the oldies night. The programme is going to be released tonight and I will circulate it into your pigeon holes. 

Additionally, there will be a fashion show at Hotel Africana as well as poetry, music, dance and drama at the National Theatre. 

We are organising a market place for food. Our people are going to showcase our local food like Kalo and the Kenyans will be selling their local food. The Tanzanians are already here and I am glad to report that 800 of our foreign delegates have already arrived. Accreditation will be at Hotel Africana for those who want to participate though we are still working on the invitations to Kololo. 

On that note, I would like to thank the Members of Parliament from Kampala, Mukono, Masaka and the neighbouring districts. We could not invite participants from all districts of Uganda to the event due to a small budget. Nevertheless, every culture in Uganda has been represented because we are 58 groups; we have managed to get 58 units exhibiting our traditions. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you are invited; please participate, especially at Kololo event. And for the oldies night, I know many of you will not qualify but I am sure you will be properly represented. (Laughter)

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we do item 4?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INVESTIGATE THE EVICTION AND DISPLACEMENT OF SMALL SCALE ARTISAN MINERS IN MUBENDE DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe we could first receive the papers before handling the motion.

LAYING OF PAPERS

STATUS REPORT ON PERFORMANCE OF LOANS APPROVED SINCE THE EIGHTH PARLIAMENT

4.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT (Ms Evelyn Anite): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the status report on performance of loans approved since the Eighth Parliament. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The report is committed to the appropriate committee for examination. 

TREASURY MEMORANDUM ON THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (COSASE) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF SELECTED STATUTORY CORPORATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2013/2014 AND 2014/2015
4.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT (Ms Evelyn Anite): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table Treasury Memorandum on the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE), on the Report of the Auditor-General on the public accounts of selected statutory corporations, for the financial years, 2013/2014 and 2014/2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises to look at and report back to the House, if there are some gaps. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INVESTIGATE THE EVICTION AND DISPLACEMENT OF SMALL-SCALE ARTISAN MINERS IN MUBENDE DISTRICT

4.52
MR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to investigate the eviction and displacement of small-scale artisan miners in Mubende District. It is moved under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

The motion reads: “WHEREAS the landlords, tenants, artisanal and small-scale miners in the sub counties of: Kitumbi, Kassanda and Bukuya in Mubende District, who have been operating in the area for 30 years, have recently been evicted and displaced by police and military personnel; 

NOTING THAT the small scale miners and artisans in Mubende applied for a location license from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development in 2015 but did not receive any reply and instead learnt that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development had granted a mining lease of 21 years and an exploration license of three years to Gemstone International for over an area of 207.8 square kilometres in the same area;

HAVING REGARD to Article 244 (1) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda that vests the control of all natural resources, including minerals, under the protection of Government, on behalf of the people of Uganda;

MINDFUL THAT the Mining Act, 2003 vests the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development with the responsibility of regulating geological mapping, issuing exploration and mining licenses and administering the mining sector;

EMPHASISING THAT the Government of Uganda, in Vision 2040, committed to among others to facilitate and nurture human resource and skills development through support to the geo-science industry research and development, acquisition of modern scientific knowledge and technology, and the building of knowledge networks for geo-scientists, engineers, geo-economy, technicians and artisan miners; 

COGNISANT THAT the mineral policy 3001 places emphasis on stimulating investment in the mineral sector by promoting private participation, regularising and improving artisanal and small-scale mining and ensuring that mineral wealth supports national, economic and social development;

ACKNOWLEDGING THAT artisanal and small scale mining in Uganda provides a source of livelihood for over 200,000 men and women;

EXPRESSING SERIOUS CONCERN about the continued failure by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to establish an effective regulatory framework to guide artisanal mining operations, leaving the sector largely informal and exposed to crime and conflict, exploitation and abuse by investors; 

CONVINCED THAT the displacement and eviction of small-scale miners has led to the deprivation of a source of livelihood for over 60,000 people and destruction of property;

AND FURTHER THAT the regularisation of small-scale miners shall build a strong mining industry that will be a source of revenue to the Government;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this House as follows: 

    1) That the evictions by Gemstone International and police be reconsidered and Parliament investigates this matter.
    2) The Government, through the Attorney-General, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and Gemstones International compensate the small scale miners and the artisanal miners.
    3) The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development fast-tracks the regularisation of external mining in Uganda to recognise them.
4)	The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development integrates and rehabilitates artisanal miners and gazettes mining areas for them.”  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the member for Kassanda South, member from Ngora District; both the constituency MP and the district member for Bukoto East and member for Buhweju. Would you like to speak to your motion Member for Kassanda North?

MR BUKENYA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to briefly take you through the ordeal of our people and I am going to do it with a heavy heart. On the 3rd August at 4.00 a.m. in the morning, over 20 trucks of heavily armed UPDF officers, police field force unit officers, escorted by tear gas trucks, armored personnel carriers arrived in Bukuya police station, which is seven kilometers and fifteen kilometers from Rujinji and Rubali mining villages, respectively.

Attempts to establish the reason for their presence were met with no significant responses, except the officers said that we do not know why we are here but we are waiting for further orders from Kampala. On the 4th August, the same military attacked and surrounded mining camps of Rujinji Parish. At 7.00 a.m., they issued orders to all the occupants and miners in the camps to vacate within two hours. We need to remember that this is done without earlier notice. 

Fellow Ugandans started scampering for their lives and they were not allowed to carry any of their property, goods or merchandise. Through our intelligence sources, we managed to establish that the operation was commanded by colonel Balikuddembe of the first division and AIGP, Asuman Mugyenyi, the director of operations in the Police. Attempts to reach colonel Balikuddembe were futile and on Friday, 5 August, 2017. I went to the AIGP, Asuman Mugyenyi. I had difficulty even in meeting him. Initial discussion on phone, he said that he was at the airport and had just returned from Zambia. On contacting the personal assistant of the IGP, Mr Kayihura, he managed to lead me to the director of operations office. We found him at his desk taking a cup of tea. We discussed with him issues concerning the operations and he assured me that he had orders from above, and that no one was allowed to leave the camp with any property as it shall be used as exhibits by police.

Early on Saturday 6th August, 2017, another team of military officers surrounded Rubali Parish and issued the same directives to all the occupants of the mining camps. Ugandans still run away for their dear lives because they were scared of guns. Fortunately, no bullets were fired. This was possibly because people from Bukuya had never seen such military hardware and merchandise in their life time. They only watch this in movies and cinemas.

However, after people were made to leave their property in camps, unprecedented looting of people’s property has taken place under the supervision of police and the military officers there. As a result of evictions – 

    i) Ugandans are being denied their livelihood, both social and economic;
    ii) Ugandans have been denied their access to their lands, home and even to their gardens;
    iii) Ugandans have been forced into untold poverty;
    iv) People evicted from the mines have nowhere to go and are now living in churches, bushes, plain fields and schools;
    v) There are also allegations now that over 15 Ugandans were buried in mining caves during the eviction.

The people that were in camps some of them were licensed gold miners and licensed gold buyers, people were running SACCOs worth over Shs 600,000,000 and others were doing different businesses among which were general merchandise, hospitality business, transport and other businesses.

Allegations were made by authorities that most of these people were foreigners. As the MP of the area, I know that there are two Chinese that had come from Buhweju and also eight Tanzanians that were running a secondary gold refining business out of the mining area. Allegations that there are many Rwandese were also unfounded. Mr Speaker, 50 per cent of my voters speak Kinyarwanda. Like in many other areas of Uganda - for instance Mityana, Kiboga, Kyankwanzi, Gomba, Nakaseke, Isingiro, Ntungamo, Kiryandongo and possibly Omoro (Laughter)– even some of my colleagues here speak Kinyarwanda like me, but more importantly, Banyarwanda are a recognised tribe in Uganda by the Constitution.

On allegation that Ugandans were carrying out illegal mining, I would like to clearly state that this is false, based on the following: 

    i) The Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources licensed miners.
    ii) It also licensed gold buyers
    iii) There are other traders within the camp that were doing other businesses and were licensed by the Local Government and the Government of Uganda. Out of the 60,000 possibly less than 2000 people, were actively involved in the gold mining business, others were running other businesses.
    iv) There are two presidential proclamations that encourage artisanal mining; one is the State of Nation Address, June 2016 and two, the President at a campaign rally in Kamusenene in Bukuya, in January 2016. He clearly encouraged these artisanal miners to continue work and to organise themselves into bigger groups.

As artisanal miners, we were ready to work with the Government, and we are still ready to work with Government in the re-organisation of the mining sector, for the benefit of all Ugandans. In spite of our readiness that was communicated clearly to the authorities, all these operations were carried out in complete disregard of civil community leadership and also leadership in the mining camps. It is also alleged that these miners were using unsafe methods. It is true that the methods we were using were rudimentary, but similar methods are used in South Africa, in Rwanda and in Tanzania.

What we expected as citizens, was the leadership and guidance from the ministry of mineral resources, in assisting us to transit to the modern methods as other Governments are doing. It is unfortunate that the Government that is empowering artisans in Kampala is the same Government on the other hand disenfranchising Ugandans in other areas. The investor that is being protected by Government has been mining for over 27 years, and has nothing to show. He has been getting exploration licenses for over 27 years and the licenses are awarded in complete disregard of the available laws of the country.

I therefore submit that – 

    i) Government compensates Ugandans for the loss caused;
    ii) Parliament investigates the suspicious circumstances under which the investor is granted exploration licenses;
    iii) Parliament sets up an investigating team on the allegation that Ugandans were buried in mining caves;
    iv) I urge Government to allocate at least five square kilometers out of the 208 square kilometers of Ugandans’ land of exploration to Ugandans in order to avail employment to Ugandans and improve on the local economy;
    v) I urge Government in the medium term to come up with a proper policy of mineral management in the country. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, the mover of the motion, the substantive prayers you have made in your speech in justification of the motion are not contained in the motion. How do we deal with that, because now we are going to deal with the motion not your speech?

MR BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I pray that they are added in the amendments. I move to amend that the prayers be included in the motion. They include:
“
    i. Government compensates Ugandans for the loss caused;
    ii. Parliament investigates the suspicious circumstances under which the investor was granted exploration license;
    iii. Parliament sets up an investigating team to investigate allegations of Ugandans buried in mining caves;
    iv. Urge Government to allocate at least five square kilometers out of the 208 square kilometers awarded for exploration to the investor to Ugandans in order to avail employment to Ugandans and improve the local economy;
    v. Urge the Government in the medium term to come up with a policy of mineral management in the country.”
Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, for moving the motion. Honourable members, the motion is seconded by five people but what I am going to do is to allow one person to second the motion and then I open the debate. The other Members can participate in the debate instead of them being seconders of the motion.

5.09
MR PATRICK OSHABE (NRM, Kassanda North County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the motion on investigation of the manner in which the artisanal miners were evicted in Mubende.

Mr Speaker, while the artisanal miners of Mubende are grieving for the loss of property and source of livelihood during the eviction, artisanal miners of Buhweju have been taken to court by a Chinese investor and those of Busia are on tension about what will happen next.

Mr Speaker, allow me to put this in context by giving you a few examples. Mr Kiganda a resident of Nakasozi who happened to be my neighbour had previously owned a poultry business, which he sold off and put all his capital in acquiring pick up to sale drinking water in the mining camp of Lujenje. He had begun living a happy life because of that new job.

Mr Sunday Nsubuga had resigned his previous job where he was earning salary to try a life as a gold trader.  Hajji Ibrahim of Kigalula had sold his piece of land to invest in buying a jaw crusher and he had discovered a better livelihood. 

I know many others that bought taxis and bodabodas to transport people, others set up grocery retail shops, bars, accommodation, entertainment, butcheries among other businesses they were running in the mining camp.

Mr Speaker, the motion has informed us that over 60,000 people from all parts of Uganda had discovered the gold camps in Mubende as a new source of employment and as a source of livelihood. For us in Mubende District, it was a new market to supply our produce, beef, dairy products and the others. All these were harshly evicted and their property and livelihood destroyed on the 4th August.

Mr Speaker, the mayhem happened while Parliament was on recess otherwise, we would have appealed to your office much earlier. As Members of Parliament from Mubende and neighbouring districts, we were forced to think about a recall of the House which was overwhelmingly supported by over 150 Members who appended their signatures within just two days because of the manner in which such evictions where made.

We thank you honourable members for showing solidarity with the artisanal miners. We further appeal to you to debate this matter in a manner that they would be reinstated in their places of work.

Whereas, before evicting them, Government never minded about the revenue from indirect taxes they were generating from the transaction of goods and services, like fuel and groceries consumed by a  market of over 60,000 people on daily basis which is estimated to be around Shs 2 billion per year - I am reliably informed that the Mubende district local government was expecting about Shs 500 million this financial year in local revenue from just trading licenses. This is a big loss which will have impact on service delivery in the district.

Mr Speaker, gold exports from Uganda have risen from $237,000 in 2014 to $340 million in 2016. This has made gold export the second biggest foreign exchange earner for this country.

Mr Speaker, the rise in gold exports coincides well with increase in number of artisanal miners across the country and more so in Mubende. 

With the eviction of these artisanal miners, Mr Speaker, gold exports will go down and certainly, the foreign exchange we have been earning as a country from that will be lost. This loss comes at a time when after 30 years of her involvement in gold mining in the area, the so called invest Gertrude Njuba, who heads the land desk in State House has declared nothing in the coffers of Government as revenue from the gold mining activity she has been carrying on over the last 30 years since 1987.

Mr Speaker, if this Parliament allows the investigation in this matter; these things will be brought to light. We strongly as Members from Mubende and other Members, protest actions of alienating majority of Ugandans for the interests of the few by stopping them from benefiting from God given natural resources but more so, we strongly protest the manner in which Police and UPDF implements the evictions. It was so inhuman.

The UPDF deployed at night, it was as if they were going for a war zone with all sorts of machinery and in the wee hours of the morning, our people where left to scatter for life.

Mr Speaker, this country’s natural resources should be used for the benefit of all Ugandans not just a few individuals. Those that are charged with the responsibility of regulating the natural resources extraction should strongly allow for co-existence of big investors and small investors.

Mr Speaker, the artisanal miners are investors who would have been given support to grow instead of closing them out. During campaigns, my colleague has informed this Parliament that the President promised them support and in his State of the Nation Address of 2016, H.E the President promised them support and in his State of the Nation Address of 2016, His Excellency the President commented that he would organise artisanal miners into associations that the NRM Government would support.

Despite these promises and even though, artisanal miners had formed themselves into associations and applied for mining licenses, the line ministry denied them mining license. Even those that got location and gold buying licenses were equally evicted. I have heard some Members say that they were using rudimentary and unsafe methods, which was destroying the environment. Yes, this could have been true but National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) and other environmental bodies have done nothing to educate and train them into the safe methods. I can challenge NEMA and the Ministry of Energy and Minerals whether since 2012 they have held any training for the artisanal miners.

Mr Speaker, it pains to know that the investor preferred by Government has shown a lot of incompetence since she got her first exploration license in 1986 and a mining lease of six square kilometres, more than 15 years ago; she has either failed to mine gold or consistently mined and declared nothing to Government.

Mr Speaker, the people that occupied the six square kilometres that was leased to Gertrude Njuba in Kamalenge were displaced and poorly compensated and up to now, they are still suffering and they are seeing no benefit at all from the Kamalenge mines. To our surprise, Gertrude Njuba’s exploration license continuously has been renewed even against the Mining Act, which stipulates three years for exploration.

Mr Speaker, we first learned about Gertrude Njuba’s company as Kamalenge mines, later it changed names to AUC Mining and these days, it is called Gemstone Mining, a clear indicator that such an investor may be involved in dubious transactions, which is forcing her to often change trading names.

Mr Speaker, Parliament should take a decision on whether someone holding a mining lease must hold it in perpetuity even when that investor has failed to do proper mining. Before Uganda’s local content law, which we are working on as a private members Bill, Parliament should protect the local people who are continuously being excluded from benefiting from the extractive industry.

As I conclude, allow me to make a plea to individuals that have had the opportunity to serve in Government to stop making decisions that deny Ugandans a right to earn a living. They should stop making decisions that deny Ugandans a right to pay school fees for their children, a right to survive in this hostile economy for the common man. Most of these artisan miners were looking for food, school fees and better livelihood; evicting them from their source of livelihood amounts to denying them a right to live and condemning them to perpetual poverty and their children to grow without education.

Honourable members, let us stand out on record as a Parliament that represents the common man not those who are privileged as we demand the return of artisanal miners to their work places through this motion. Let us allow the artisanal miners supply the gold refinery industry that is being established in Entebbe.

Mr Speaker, we believe they can be organised, pay taxes and they are law abiding citizens. I thank you, Mr Speaker. For God and my country. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion, which I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to investigate the evictions and displacement of small scale artisan miners in Mubende District and the specific prayers are contained in the motion as amended. That is the motion that I propose for your debate and debate starts now. I will start with the Members who are listed as seconders of the motion and then I will open it up.

However, as a guidance, as we debate this matter, we should be able to separate the urgent and general matters about artisan participation in the economy, so that we can see how we can handle it properly. I am saying this because our own committee is already deeply involved in these processes of carrying out a country wide consultation on this particular subject; I had a brief meeting with the chairperson yesterday. Let us extract the urgent matters, put them separately and take decisions on them and take decisions on the general matters that we could maybe think of as we give time for the committee to finalise its report and then we come back and debate it. However, there are urgent matters that we should deal with in relation to what has been presented. With that guidance, let me have the honourable member for Buhweju County.

5.23
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we agree on the time? Can we do three minutes so that we can process these matters first?  Okay, we shall stick to three minutes.

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. Some of these investors masquerade. In Buhweju, we have a company called Sino Watson. It had been issued an exploration license which expired after seven years but in just two months before the recommended 90 days, they changed their name to Hubei Exploration Company. This very company is issuing us with notice that Buhweju people are mining the gold of the Chinese; you can imagine the people of Buhweju are mining gold of the Chinese.

Mr Speaker, the license they have was acquired illegally because they did not get the recommendation from the Chief Accounting Officer (CAO) and there was no instrument from the commissioner.  These people have a lot of power; they have policemen and the army. As I talk, the people in Buhweju are worried. Mr Speaker, we should remember that the people of Buhweju are fighters. The history is very clear that is why as their leader, I am very worried. In Ankole region, they were the first people to kill the white man. These people are swearing that they are going to be the first to kill the Chinese; I am worried.

Mr Speaker, in such circumstances, where you have very small scale miners that have existed since 1930, which is the source of living for the people yet you are going to evict over 2,000 people because some two Chinese have an illegal license and a lot of security - 

Mr Speaker, the reason they change names after expiry of 90 days   is because they want to fail the small scale miners. They do not wait –(Member timed out.)

5.26
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kassanda County South, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand to support the motion moved by the honourable member for Bukuya County.

Mr Speaker, from the security perspective, the way the security personnel carried out that operation in Bukuya on 2nd August, was unprofessional in nature in the sense that the local leaders were not informed and Members of the Parliament of that area were not informed. However, we still got the information that our people were evicted and in the process, a lot of property was destroyed.

In addition to that, there are allegations that some of the properties have been stolen by the security personnel who were sent there to protect the mine. This is a serious allegation of an unprofessional nature, which should be investigated to the conclusive end. 

As I talk, the crime in Mubende District is on increase because the people who have been working in the mines do not have what to do. They are jobless and they have resorted to house and shop breaking. This is a big problem in Mubende.

Lastly, we would like to request this House through its relevant committee to investigate that matter to the conclusive end and ensure that the artisanal miners are taken back to the places where they were operating from, so that they feel like other artisanal miners in other parts of the country. There are artisanal miners in Buhweju, Namayingo, Busia and Karamoja, who are operating. Therefore, we would like to request that you treat the artisanal miners in Mubende the same way you treat those in other places. I beg to submit. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.29
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving us the chance to speak as we weep for our people in Mubende; a district which supports 100 per cent the NRM Government with seven Members of Parliament in support of the NRM Government but the President has paid us in a good currency.

Mr Speaker, why am I bringing the President into this fracas? Ms Gertrude Njuba is in charge of land desk in State House. If someone from State House who is supposed to help citizens with land challenges is the one evicting over 60,000 people, can you tell me that my statement is not valid?

Mr Speaker, when the late President Idi Amin expelled Asians out of our country, he was intelligent enough to give them three months, an equivalent of 90 days. However, in our current regime, you only give people two hours to evacuate moreover in their own country –(Applause). Whom should we hail – (Interjections)? He was very brave to expel the Asians because if he had not expelled them, I am telling you Members, we would also be servants to these Asians. Where is this country heading?

Mr Speaker, I do not know if we Ugandans feel that we are citizens in our own country because we are being displaced, our property is being rooted in broad day and yet there is no intervention.

Mr Speaker, in Mubende, we are already disappointed.  As an individual member of NRM, I am very disappointed. We did not expect this from the Government.

Mr Speaker, you advised us to point out the urgent issues. In that regard therefore, I would like to point out that the property that was rooted by the Uganda People's Defence Force (UPDF) and police, something urgent should be done –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will now open this debate.  However, we will have to roll it out quickly so that we can take decisions and give guidance on what is going to happen. The minister is here. I would like to request that we keep our remarks brief. I am going to start with the honourable member for Dakabela.

5.33
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the arguments for the motion and I have also listened to a few seconders of the motion. I take great pity with my sister on the front bench because if I have to deduce and relate this to a particular issue back home because it tends to be not an issue of policy but an issue of manipulation in this case.

Recently, I was back home but my people asked me a question. They said, “Honourable Member of Parliament, we send you to Parliament but we hear of these people called technocrats, how do they look like? What do they eat?” This is another case that points to action and manipulation by our people in their offices.

This peculiar case and I think from the position of policy and government, there is an element that people particularly in charge of licenses play a big role in manipulating and that has led into the issues that we are discussing .

Mr Speaker, on that basis, I strongly support that Parliament supports this motion and an investigation should be carried so that these people can be helped and matters be brought to conclusion because our people have suffered. We have very fake investors in this country. They come with big names but at the end of the day, they do not give us anything; no value for money. I therefore stand to support this motion in all its possible terms. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.36
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion.

Mr Speaker, Mubende is one of the areas which are prone to land evictions. The area we are talking about is as a result of land within the peripherals. I understand that the legal framework governing the mining sector is very clear. However much the minerals are owned by the Government, they are in trust for Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, the area we are talking about accommodates more than 100,000 employees. Some of these beneficiaries come from Mubende Municipality, which is my area of jurisdiction. Some Members of Parliament from that area are finding it difficult to appreciate what is happening. We are in a situation where land evictions are happening in rural areas and the evictees come to urban areas like Kampala. They start vending and again, they are chased away. Then, we experience an unregulated influx of people from rural to urban and urban to rural. 

Mr Speaker, I understand the government is trying to regulate the sector. I fully support that. However, the question I would like to ask is: how are we are going to accommodate the artisanal miners? 

Secondly, the activity we are talking about, Mr Speaker, has been going on for more than 25 years and the locals have not benefitted and yet you are again making things worse. As area Members of Parliament from Mubende District, we request for a policy which accommodates the local miners to work hand in hand with the foreign investors instead of a statement for evicting them –(Member timed out.)

5.38
MR ABDULATIF SSEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I strongly support the motion. However, what we should ask ourselves as legislators is whether when we are legislating on behalf of the people who elected us, we bear in mind the level of unemployment in Uganda. Unemployment in Uganda is at its peak especially among the unskilled and semi-skilled people. The issue is unemployment. 

Now, when we see our own Government, very much aware about this level of unemployment in our country, issuing those directives to vacate over 60,000 people, then I do not know whether they sit down to ponder about the implication. 

Mr Speaker, here in Kampala, we have been complaining now and then. That is why I request Members that whenever a colleague brings a concern from his electorates, please support him or her. We have been saying now and then that people are being evicted from right and centre. People were evicted from Park Yard within only one hour and they have gone to various places in your areas including Mubende. Now, as they settle in Mubende, they are again being evicted. Where do we want our people to go? The onus is on us as Government to prepare our people so that we may, together, appreciate that we have the issues of unemployment and find how best we can address it. 

If in the campaign, the President promised he would reorganise the artisanal miners - (Member timed out)

5.41
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I will restrict myself to the legal validity of this motion. I would like to draw the attention of the honourable members to Article 244(1) which says subject to Article 26 of this Constitution, the entire property in, and control of all minerals et cetera, belongs to Government. Therefore, before you think of evicting people, you must subject your actions and omissions to Article 26 which provides for, inter alia, prompt payment of fair and adequate compensation prior to the taking of possession and acquisition of property.

Therefore, as a matter of fact, there is no way Government unless there is a valid court order can justify their actions. I would like to support this motion in totality that compensation is long overdue in this matter. (Applause)

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this is the beginning of the start. We are yet to see. If we are not very careful as Members of Parliament and we do not synchronise the proposed constitutional amendments to this Article, then we are throwing our country into chaos. I wish to rest my case. Thank you.

5.43
MR EMMANUEL KALULE (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just this afternoon, we had the issue of insecurity in this country where people are being murdered in cold blood. Now, unemployment is a source of insecurity in this country. You cannot evict 60,000 from employment and you think you are promoting security in the country. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, we must have some justice in whatever we do. It has to be fair to our people. Surely, if just one individual is claiming ownership of that land or mining right, why can’t Government compensate this individual and let the 60,000 people carry on with what they are doing? 

Again, Mr Speaker, when you come to think about it, one of the arguments people raised was that there was no hygiene in the camps. Now, why can’t Government go out to ensure there is hygiene there? Let them construct toilets and put water there to allow our people go on with what they are doing.

Otherwise, we are crying for jobs and yet we are chasing away people from employment. Now, these people who have been chased away from Kampala and went to Mubende to do artisanal mining, are being chased from there. What will happen next? Aren’t you creating an army that is going to fight Government? 

With those few remarks, Mr Speaker, I support the motion.

5.45
MR GEOFREY DHAMAZUNGU (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you very much. I also stand to support the motion. I happened to get a chance to go to Mubende. The first challenge we got was the permanent secretary trying to refuse Members of Parliament to visit certain places. However, we stood very firm and went to all the places including the so called investor’s area. We had two rallies with the people and they were really crying. 

I would like to say this is not an issue for Mubende alone. I come from Busoga and I found over 200 people of mine helpless. We found people from all parts of this country. Therefore, it is not an issue for Mubende. They were all carrying posters saying “Parliament, save the situation”. We committed ourselves and told them we shall come to Parliament - and I would like to thank the Members who have moved this motion.

I would like to add two things: one of them is about the looting. We met the SACCO managers who had a SACCO but they were crying that they lent money to people who have disappeared with their money to an extent that even their office was looted. This is terrible and as Parliament, this is a testing moment and we need to do something. I support the investigations into this case.    

5.47
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At the moment, the situation in Mubende is bad. I am one of the people who got an opportunity to go to Mubende immediately after the evictions. One wonders what the motive of making all these Ugandans suffer is. As my colleagues have indicated, it is not an issue of Mubende and it is not only the people of Mubende who are affected because we found people from all over the country, including Masaka where I come from.

The people who were evicted from the mining areas have gone to the neighbourhood and when we speak about the problem and threats of diseases breaking out; if Government does not rescue the people around Mubende mining areas, we are headed for disaster.

My humble appeal to whoever is concerned - may be the Minister of Energy will come on the Floor and explain why this had to happen within two hours. We witnessed children being abandoned by their mothers and they are at the LCs. If you go to Mubende, you will prove that these people abandoned their children after being frustrated and some of the children do not go to school. The situation is bad. 

I, therefore, second the motion of investigating not only Mubende; let this be extended to Buhweju, Karamoja among other places where artisan mining is being carried out.

I would like to find out from the minister about the Minamata Convention, what has been done to operationalise these and how has the ministry come out to assist and guide the artisan miners in Uganda? As I second the motion, I call upon the Government to come out –(Member timed out.)

5.51
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also stand to second the motion and I feel hurt and disappointed for our civil servants who misuse their offices and tarnish the name of the Government, the President and the party. It is unfortunate and we have been seeing these where these officials use the name of the President and offices to disturb the communities. 

I support the motion and request that the affected people be reinstated –(Applause)- because it is the President who has been saying that we have to support our people economically so that we empower them such that the Vision 2040 can come to pass.

Also, our Mining Act does not allow the artisan miners to work along with those who have licenses unless we amend the Act. Therefore, as the colleague has already read the Constitution, we should give our people priority because it is Uganda we are looking at, we are not considering an individual. An individual should not have a right over all these people to get all the economies of their entire areas and those who are born in the area or who have come maybe in groups to see their future also come true other than make people suffer like this.

It is unfortunate and we pray for them and beg that the ministry – honourable minister, you have to help us to ensure that those affected people are reinstated because they have a right and we should not look at one person at the cost of many other people. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is coming to 6 o’clock and I wanted the House to rise at 6 o’clock for today. However, like I said at the beginning, there are two aspects of these issues; there is the urgent bit of what is being stated of children being abandoned, property destroyed and people displaced and they have nowhere to live and no means of survival. This is urgent.

There is also the general policy issue of how to treat these categories of people who are participating in the economy through these processes; that one I said, was something that the committee was handling. How do we split the issues and deal with them now? I wanted to call the minister at this point and ask her to address these two issues and see how we proceed.

5.54
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I can read the concerns that colleagues have brought out on this matter because it affects our people and we all wish well for them.
 
This is a matter that has not started now; we have been at this matter for some period of time on how we can harness our mineral resources in the country so that both the country and people benefit from it.

I am implying that as Government who hold in trust these minerals for the people of Uganda, we should be able to reap benefit from them. At the same time, we also want our people to participate in the process of harnessing these resources. 

However, as we harness these resources, we need to bear in mind how we are doing it. Are we going to achieve our objective? Are we minding about our health, lives, the environment and the way we are handling these resources?

The Committee on Natural Resources have visited the site and have seen for themselves. When you go there and see what is happening there, you wonder what is going on. It is a death trap   

because people have died in the holes. People are using mercury, sun light and are dying of cancer day in day out. Is that what we want? We are going there and in Buhweju we shall be there so - (Interruption)

MR OSHABE: Mr Speaker, we have been very clear from the motion in our submission and everything about the eviction of the people. A law has been highlighted here that if Government wanted to do something she should comply with Article 26. We are talking about people’s lives, survival of Ugandans and people who are staying on the streets. 

Mr Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to behave or speak as though she is discussing policy matters that should have been brought to this Parliament a long time ago? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, like I tried to guide, there are the urgent issues that are likely to help us with and then there is a broad policy thing that the committee will come back to the House with. 

Please -

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was simply building the issues on the ground to share the facts with you as they were. There are licenses issued on that land where we have over 60,000 people doing artisanal mining. We issue a license to a person who has fulfilled the conditions in accordance with the law. We do not issue a license unless the applicant has acquired surface rights. (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Honourable minister, you are saying you issue licenses in accordance with the law. A mining license is not supposed to exceed 21 years but for Krone Company, you have issued a license of 25 years valid from 2010 to 2035. That same investor mistreats artisans as it is happening in Mubende. We have actually had problems because communities there have actually rebelled and chased him away because of what is happening in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. (Applause)

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, the issue that affects the artisanal miners in Mubende has been considered by Government. When the eviction was carried out, some artisanal miners who had accepted to set up associations had actually been allocated land to carry out their artisanal mining. 

Therefore, the issues at hand include; allowing the licensee carry out operations in accordance with the license that has been issued as well as having the arrangement for these artisanal miners who have already formed groups and associations. 

There are five associations; Bukuya Traders Mining Group, Namulanda Artisanal Association Limited and Single Artisanal and Small Scale Miners Association Limited, Bingo Investments Limited and Kitumbi Kayonza Miners Association Limited. 

Out of these five, three already have location licenses because we want to bring order in the mining sector so that the processes and the activities are carried out in a manner that protects lives and property of the people. In the arrangement-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are those three groupings that have formed associations on the ground? 

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, the fact that the eviction was carried out - because out of the 60,000 people, we had 171 foreigners. Therefore, right now, the ministry is undertaking an environmental restoration to fill those holes that were created during the mining and this process is going to take 60 days. 

For the artisanal miners returning to work; they have three locations licensed and the areas are going to be marked off in 60 days because first of all, we are restoring the environment and filling the death traps that I am talking about. Then after that, we shall mark off the three areas, which have been given to the artisanal miners. They are registered and so, we expect that they should be able to come back after three months. We will continue to monitor the production from the artisanal miners through the centralised buying centre, which is operated by the registered mineral dealers. Of course, we shall also continue training and sensitising them. 

Mr Speaker, in terms of the review of the mining policy and the mining law, the draft Mineral Policy 2017 and the principles embodied in the Mining (Amendment) Act has been completed and so, this paper is going to be presented to Cabinet as soon as possible. That is what I can say. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, in the meantime, what happens to the 60,000 people who have been displaced? 

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, the issue is they have a license that we have already issued out. Due to the fact that we have asked them to organise themselves, when they organise themselves, it is easy - (Interjections)- no, not all of them. It is easy to have areas allocated for them so that they are able to do their work. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the issues are not - 

MR BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From what the minister is saying, it seems she has never been to Kitumbi. The initial communication from the permanent secretary from the same ministry said that they had collected people’s property, labelled it and they were going to give it back to them. 

When we went to the camp, there was nothing. All the property had been taken out and ferried on army trucks. People have lost their property and have nowhere to stay. Even the license she is talking about is awarded to the same person for exploration every three years and yet the Mining Act states clearly that when you reapply, you are only entitled to 50 per cent. I think everything she is telling us is defective. I would propose that the exploration license is halted. 

Two, the Ugandans need to go back to their land since they were evicted without compensation. (Applause) Three, If Government wants to do mining there, they should first compensate Ugandans for their mining rights. 

Those groups she has mentioned are there but one of them and the leading group is co-owned by people in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Therefore, the whole process is flouted. We can avail this information at an appropriate time. They are tempting us to say very many things we may not want to say here but for the minister, it is unrealistic for someone to get an exploration license of 208 square kilometres fraudulently, after paying Shs 6.5 million only and you have a right to displace every one? We have all these records, honourable minister. We have them and we can show you. Do not tempt us to say things that we are not supposed to say.

In a discussion with hon. Anite who led the investor to the President, says clearly that the President directed them to evict those who were close to the investor. When they went to do the operation, they evicted people over 20 kilometres away from the investor. We do not know what their interests are. People have lost their money, they have nothing to do and the minister is here saying “60 days”. Sixty days from when?

Secondly, they are doing all these things in disrespect of local leadership and even the miners do not have this information. She has it on her desk and she has come here to tell lies. Mr Speaker, I do not know how to progress but my request is that the license is terminated or halted up to when this case is investigated fully. The same person is getting the same license.(Applause) 

MR MUGOYA: Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give Dr Bukenya, is that there is no license that was given under the Mining Act in the eyes of the law. If you do not respect the grand norm, which contains the jus cogens, those are international and national recognised conditions, prior to the issuance of a license. Then in law, there was no license that was given to this investor. Whatever Government did, it was a nullity in the eyes of law.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I can just read part of the law here. It is section 43 (3) (h), which says that one of the conditions for issuing a license is, the applicant must have secured the right of the land. This is the mining Act, 2003. It is very clear here but according to the testimony, I think the surface rights of land were not secured. Therefore, it is null and void.

MR OSHABE: Mr Speaker, we are here asking Parliament to allow our people to go back to work. The minister has just informed us that right now, they are closing the caves where people go to do mining. She has also indicated here that they are doing that to protect the environment. She has just said those same words here. The action of closing a cave where somebody has been working and open a cave and do artisanal mining, it is an action Government or the minister is doing at this very point.

If you go to where that same investor they are giving a mining lease, there are bushes. It is a bush. The place where people are doing their activities is where she wants to do the exploration. How do you want to do exploration where people are saying that there is gold here? Let her go and do the exploration elsewhere and leave these people here. Honourable minister, these are Ugandans, the people you are supposed to find jobs for, they have found a job for themselves and they have found somewhere to survive. You need to cordon off that particular place and leave it out of the exploration zone, for Ugandans to survive. We are just requesting this. In the organisation you are talking about, you want Ugandans to benefit. Let them benefit by supporting the mining. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have guided us very clearly that urgent issues should be addressed by the minister. As area Members of Parliament, we have information that in the process of covering these caves, as the minister has just mentioned, 15 people were covered under ground. She has not talked about it. Our voters were buried in the caves and the minister has not talked about it. We have these facts.

Secondly, the security personnel that are there – good enough the ministers of Internal Affairs are here – we have information on record that the security personnel that are there, instead of guarding these gold mines, they are also mining. We, therefore, need the ministers to say something here and it goes on record. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we need your help here. I am really trying to help here. There are urgent matters. There are the big policy issues that you would like to deal with at your own time. However, right now there are issues about people that have been affected by this eviction and those are the activities that they are talking about. I would like to make a statement on that. Otherwise, I have to make a statement from the Chair, which I do not want to.

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, I would like to request given the issues at hand that you give me some time to consult with Government and get back here on Tuesday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we agree on this? In the meantime, what happens?

MS MULONI: That is why I am asking – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are going to give you time to consult but in the meantime, what happens to the people?

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, it is for the same reason that I am asking for time to consult.

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I look at this issue, it is a very serious matter. The manner in which we are trying to handle this issue, it appears that we do not care about our people. Let us not care about our people when we go to look for votes. We are here because of the same people. I would like to raise my procedural issue particularly in the manner when evictions were carried out. 

I have heard from the minister. The issue of mining in that area was not an issue of a week, it was not an issue of two days; this mining has been there for some time. If Government established that what was done on ground was not in line with the expectations and policies of Government, why didn’t they give these people enough time before they evicted them? We have seen evictions in our area where Government in the end creates an emergency. We create internally displaced people, issues Government could have avoided.
 
Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to pronounce herself on the state of affairs of these people so that Government comes up with an internally displaced people’s camp. These people cannot stay in the neighbourhood and streets as I have heard from my colleagues. We really expect the minister to come up with a solution to help these people. Don’t you think that it will be too long to wait for Tuesday, when people are in trouble?

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two procedural concerns. The first is about the illegality following the quotation from the Constitution by hon. Sabiiti. Secondly, the Constitution on mining rights, compensation and land acquisition. Therefore, there are illegal issues and the irregularity is in the procedure - how you have managed the entire compensation and acquisition.

They are two - the first is the illegality based on the Constitution and the second one is how you have proceeded in management and administration of the mining area vis-a-vis the investor and the people. Therefore, basing on that, even if the irregularity at the level of procedure were right, they could not get over the illegality. 

Mr Speaker, I would like you to guide the House. Should we proceed when there are grave cases of illegality and irregularity? (Applause)

6.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion, seeking the House to investigate the evictions in Mubende. I think we have debated this motion and we seem to have a consensus generated by the House.

Many issues are coming, which may need urgent attention. However, whether the minister is compelled to take a decision on the people evicted at this time, we still have to get proper guidance based on the motion on the fact that it is seeking to investigate the evictions. I have a feeling that it is not only handling Mubende. 

I would like to inform the House that Busia District has the largest gold deposit in Uganda and issues that are in Mubende are in Busia as well. Therefore, we believe that this investigation is wider - it may not only handle the eviction in Mubende because even the many people from Mubende have shifted to Busia.

Therefore, how we recover these people within this short time is also a process; whether the minister issues a statement now that let the people now go back, I think there is need to have some bit of order on how they will get back when the House has agreed. That is why I said that we need a thorough and wider investigation. I know this touches all of us. I would just indulge the Member that while he is directly affected by the evictions because he is a Member of Parliament from Mubende, we also understand the dilemma that these Members are facing.

Therefore, we are not standing here purposely to speak for only Mubende but we are seeking a solution that is going to cover the whole country because gold deposits are spread across this country. Even in Namayingo, there was an eviction; I am a neighbour to Namayingo, barely five kilometres to the gold deposits; I also lost people there.

However, people left, probably the Members from Namayingo did not bring the issue here to Parliament. Therefore, I believe these investigations are going to help all of us not only Mubende.

I would like to indulge the guidance of the Speaker on how we can proceed. In Busia, we would like this investigation to cover a wider process but also have the people of Mubende get back within the shortest time possible and also create order on how we can have them back to these places of artisan mining.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable member, that is exactly the question I posed to the minister. If you were listening to what I asked, that is exactly what I asked. I said, there is the long term and then the crisis issue, which is happening right now.

I said the committee is doing countrywide investigations in these matters. If we are going to give Government time to go and handle this thing, what happens from now as we rise to the time that we will come back? I want that assurance about what is going to happen and we see if the House can agree on it and we move.

6.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are happy that we can be given some two days to act on this situation that needs Government to act on. What will happen? From the issues that have been raised, there are people who have been evicted and property has been lost. There are also issues to do with a people who are suspected that they are covered.
	
In my submission, I think Government is going to get on the ground tomorrow; those who are covered must be evacuated immediately. We are going to Cabinet tomorrow because some of the issues of compensation of property need other inter-ministerial approach. For example, Finance and Lands to take a decision immediately. Therefore, tomorrow we are going to Cabinet to look at these issues, make a decision so that when we come here on Tuesday, we will be reporting to the House that these were the issues and this is the action that we have taken, not just a situation analysis.

Therefore, we are going to identify the issues on the ground, take action so that on Tuesday, we are saying that on this issue this is what has happened. I think that would be a better way of handling the situation rather than coming to the House and say, “We are going to take this action” and then, it does not happen. 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, honourable minister. In the Speaker’s words, he said he knew because the honourable minister had already requested up to Tuesday. However, the Speaker’s words were clear - from today up to Tuesday, what should we do to our people? What are you planning? What is the immediate solution? For Tuesday, you have told us and we have accepted but from today? 

MR NAMBESHE: Honourable minister, this is a humanitarian crisis. The eviction has caused a displacement of the people and even disruption of their normal lives. They are homeless and this is a disaster, which requires emergency response. These people need relief aid in both food and non-food items; they are internally displaced. Therefore, a stopgap measure is the clarification I am seeking. 

Honourable minister, you have made mention of the dead, which is good but must we accord the dead priority, instead of the living? The dead also deserve better, they ought to be accorded decent burial- but begin with those that are still alive. Give them relief aid even tents.

MR BAHATI: That is exactly what we are saying that we are going on the ground tomorrow. Those who need relief, Government must take immediate action. However, we cannot tell the actual act that we are going to do in the House now, because there are people who probably need food and those who might want shelter and all that is going to be catered for. Tomorrow, Cabinet is sitting and probably, a team will be sent to go on the ground to assess the situation so that we can handle this issue as an emergency. On Tuesday, we will come and inform the House on the action that has been taken. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. A motion has been moved in this House to carry out investigation on the evictions of those people and the prayers have been clearly laid out.  The procedural issue I am raising is; why don’t we adopt this motion and leave it to the ministers to handle because they know what is expected from the motion instead of asking them to give answers to this motion? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the motion proposes long term things and emergency interventions. For the long term interventions, a committee of this House is already involved in that process. That is why we needed to harmonise what the motion will finally look like and that is the reason the minister had requested that we could conclude this motion on Tuesday, when everyone is resourced with information and then we can take the decision on it. 

When the minister made that request, I asked them, what happens from now to Tuesday, when we come back to look at this motion for determination? That is where we are, honourable members. Is that satisfactory, mover of the motion?

MR BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the challenges of the members of the Executive who are here. I also appreciate the proposal that immediate action be taken. However, I would like to request that the action must be taken in consultation with a team of Members of Parliament from Mubende. Therefore, I propose that we stay the decision of the motion up to Tuesday –(Interjections)– because the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has said that he is going to sit in Cabinet since they cannot take major decisions alone.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are not doing these things because we like doing them. We are doing them because an emergency has been created by some acts of people who acted purportedly under the law but exceeded some of the authorities. As a result, they have caused a problem. In this particular issue, there are mixed issues; there are general issues of policy, which we do not have to take a decision on because a committee of this House is examining them. The committee will report to the House and then again, we shall take a decision and so, this particular decision will not have been sufficiently resolved with the study the committee has done country wide.

Honourable members, when the committee comes with that report, then the general issues of policies and recommendations will have to be adopted by the House. We cannot adopt this motion based on the general principles because it is not sufficiently resolved. The issue that we need to take a decision on is: what happens to these people from the time we rise now to the time we resume on Tuesday? That is what we are talking about. (Applause) The minister has made those proposals and that is what the mover of the motion is responding to; that it is satisfactory in the circumstances because they will be there to follow up. 

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to beg for your indulgence, Mr Speaker. We are equally concerned with what has happened to our people. Much as they are people from Mubende, they are all Ugandans and we are concerned.

The urgent issue that would be handled now probably would be relief. However, I would like to add that even if it is relief, it may not be given tonight. It would be given tomorrow but even if it is to be given tomorrow, Cabinet as a team has to decide what is required, how much is required and how is it supposed to be delivered.

I am requesting this august House to bear with Government and give it up to tomorrow to sit in Cabinet and agree on this urgent issue, which we have already accepted that it is important that the people must be given at least some relief to start with as we wait for Tuesday. I am only begging for your indulgence that you give Government up to tomorrow to go to Cabinet and agree on the way forward. The reason colleagues have requested for Tuesday is because Saturday, Sunday and Monday, we shall not be in the House. That is why I am adding my voice to that of my colleagues to beg for their indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not the Speaker’s indulgence. I think the issue has been agreed on how we will proceed from now. Is that satisfactory Members? Can we adopt this position and move with it as way to come back so that there is an activity going on with the people on the ground? (Members rose_) Honourable members, usually when the Speaker is speaking, Members sit down. Except, I think these are very unusual situations. (Laughter)

MR BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, we would like to propose that tomorrow, the Executive provides relief in form of tents and food –(Interjections)– they have money for disaster preparedness. For the long interventions, they will come on Tuesday, so that we can take a decision.

MR OSHABE: Hon. Bukenya, I would like to inform you that what people want is to go back to work. They do not want relief. I know Cabinet will sit tomorrow and start discussing relief. People want to go back to work and to be compensated. They lost their property. They have their work place and that is what they want to do. It is unfortunate for us to sit and agree that Cabinet will come on Tuesday and tell us that they have given the people some relief. People do not want relief but they want to go back to work.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Our people have been working on their own and they have never been beggars. Giving relief is not sustainable; it is demeaning to our people. We pray that if these people are reinstated, even tonight, they will never ask you for food and we shall never beg for food from these people. We do not want food. We have enough.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House does not and should not act in vain. I will be one of those disappointed people if we start saying things just because they sound popular and we make decisions based on them and yet at the end, we come back here three months later when nothing has happened on the decision that was very popular in the House. We would like to be practical in what we do. We do not want high sounding things that do not make sense.

Honourable members, I would like us to become reasonable in the circumstances and deal with the realistics right now. What is practical to be done between today and Tuesday when we come back? Is it practical to say these people should go back to their land? What is practical between today and Tuesday when we come back to finish this motion? This is what we should think about. The sentiments are very clear that we want something done to assist the affected people. We have all agreed on that. The question we should be asking now is: how do we do it and what do we do in the next three days?

MR ANGURA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that I was one of those who were privileged to go to the mining site. Indeed, those people are suffering. Our Members of Parliament from that area are in problems about the suffering of their people who were displaced. 

Mr Speaker, we should give long term solutions to those people not short term. Between now and Tuesday, I would like to request the minister to make a statement that will benefit those people  that will give them hope that Government is going to manage this issue. I would like to also suggest that this issue should be handled gradually. If these people prefer to go back to their offices, I think Government needs to first of all re-organise their offices. How can Government start re-organising mine after mine? The mines are quite many. Can we tell these people that we are going to start re-organising their mines, such that they can go and work in the shortest time possible as we empower them? Otherwise, the sight and scenes of that place is not good. The displaced people are very many.

The children that have been talked about here; they presented to the committee more than 10 children and wanted us to bring them to Parliament. 

To my colleagues from Mubende, you have not been asking for relief. However, I would like to say that whereas the offices of those miners must be opened today, as you would wish, the relief would be something that will make them see that Government is coming to support them with some food. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I hear final statements from the minister and then, we see how to move?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we know that this matter is urgent but we are going to sit tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. to find a way forward on how to handle this matter with urgency. We are going to assess the situation. Even if we are going to ask people to go back; there are some things we must handle before that. Therefore, there is need for us to sit as Cabinet tomorrow morning and assess the situation as we take action, such that on Tuesday, when we come back to the House, we can give accountability that this is what we have been able to achieve in the short time. We beg for your indulgence, colleagues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that satisfactory honourable members? Can we adopt that position of resuming here on Tuesday and we hear what the Government has been able to do, and then take decision on the motion that has been presented to us? This House is adjourned to Tuesday 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.41 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 September 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 

