Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Thursday, 5 September 2019

Parliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I have a small alteration on the Order Paper. You will recall that on Tuesday, a statement was made by the honourable Member from Mityana Municipality in relation to the current security situation. We had agreed that the minister would respond today but it is not on the Order Paper, yet the minister is ready with his response. In the circumstances, I will cause an alteration under responses by ministers to issues raised, to allow the Minister of Internal Affairs make his statement. The Order Paper is accordingly amended.

Honourable members, I would like to plead with you to help this House when you have information that this House needs to process. This is a national Parliament. The discussions here are televised and monitored internationally. So, they affect people directly. Even just by saying what we say, people get affected. Therefore, statements by Members must be out of well researched facts, so that they are entirely factual and if anybody is hurt, it is the fact that has hurt that person. However, if it contains falsehoods, then it causes some difficulties. I urge you, please.

I refer to a statement that was made about Gen. Jeje Odongo in regard to some Turkish citizen. It was made very eloquently by an honourable Member of Parliament here and the General had the opportunity to respond to it. If only the honourable Member had the courtesy to call Gen. Jeje Odongo, some of those statements would not have been made on the record of Parliament. 

I am waiting for the honourable Member to come and make that statement, and I will be making a directive to expunge some of those statements that were made from the record of Parliament because they are entirely not true.

Another statement was made - and I have had phone calls from people - about tugende boda boda something in Mbale. Again, the Member who raised the matter should have cross-checked with the directors of these companies to see what the facts are.

Honourable members, these situations where we find ourselves in - Somebody tells you something and the next thing you are doing, even before making one phone call to cross-check whether it is true or false, is getting up on the Floor of Parliament to make such statements. You hurt people and yet those people do not have access to this House. They cannot come and defend themselves. So, we owe it to Ugandans and everybody else that the statements that we come to make here are factual. That means that one should take time to cross-check and confirm. Be satisfied yourself that this matter is factual so that when you come to raise them, it is okay.

The second thing I would like to talk about is what is going on right now. We all know that the issue of migration is as old as mankind. People migrate from point A to point B and it has been happening for many years. People migrate for several reasons though basically two; in search of opportunities and in search of security. If their security is threatened, they try to look for places elsewhere.

In case the opportunities are squeezed out from the area they are, they try to go elsewhere to seek for opportunities and sometimes, they find themselves in foreign countries. However, the situation that is going on in the southern part of Africa is very worrying. Unless Governments come together to find a solution to this situation, it is not right. (Applause) Something has got to be done because all these things will eventually have ramifications. You have heard about what a country in West Africa has decided to do in retaliation. We do not want this situation happening in Africa.

We now have this term called xenophobia. Xeno is a Greek word meaning foreign and phobia is fear. So, it is fear of foreigners but other people in Europe and other places have a very subtle way of handling it. They do not beat people though they can make it so difficult for you to get there through visa restrictions. You cannot enter their countries anyhow or they go into agreements with other countries like those bordering the Mediterranean Sea.
 
They sign contracts with them to stop anybody trying to cross and pay them money to do all those things. That is why you have heard of issues similar to slavery happening in some parts of Africa. Otherwise, what is happening in South Africa where now there is outright violence against human beings is not right. 

Governments should come together. Our own people have been affected. Several citizens from other countries have been affected. Our Government should interest itself in the discussions so that we find a lasting solution on how to handle people who move in search of opportunities because if they continue like this, they will excite others who never had a problem with this situation to also start acting accordingly, which would be disastrous.

The third point is about urgent matters that we raise before this Parliament. Those of you who were in the Ninth Parliament will recall that I used to put these matters at the end of the sitting. 

I would use the last 30 or 45 minutes of the day’s sitting to entertain urgent matters and this had two advantages. It would keep Members here and alert but also by that time - because in my communication I would have highlighted issues, which are going to be raised – the ministers would be contacted to come and wait for their questions so that they can deal with them and that would stop us from talking to ourselves. Therefore, today will be the last day where I will be entertaining urgent matters at the beginning of the sitting. They will come right at the end of the sitting. If your matter is very urgent, then you will have to be patient until the end to raise them and if they are not that urgent, then you can go away. Therefore, I am going back to my Ninth Parliament procedure of having these matters handled at the end.

The fourth thing is on the Bills, which are returned by the President. We are getting into a situation where we look like we do not respect our rules and the laws we make. There are timelines in our rules and the Constitution about how we deal with Bills that are returned by the President.

We had the debate on the breach of constitutional provisions on Tuesday when we were handling the report on the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, which is coming today. That is exactly what we are doing. 

The Sugar Bill, 2016 was returned to this Parliament in December last year. It has violated every law regulating issues of how we handle Bills returned by the President. There is no rule standing when we come to look at this Bill.

Why don’t you take a decision? If you want to withdraw it, then do so. If you want it processed, we gave you timelines on how this matter should be brought back so that we handle it and finish the Bills. We do not know anything that is happening anymore with the Bill. It is causing us some challenges. People say when Bills come to Parliament, we delay with them and yet, some of the delays are not our making. 

The delays the other Bills suffer in this Parliament – the sad bit is that most of the crucial delays are caused by the movers of the Bills themselves; be it Government or Private Members. They cause delay of their own Bills. After a Bill is processed and a motion is moved for its Second Reading and we get to the committee’s report, that is when people say, “By the way, we need to consult”. 

By then, it is time for a decision. We need to vote on the principles of the Bill, go to Committee Stage and finish the Bill, Clause by Clause, while accommodating amendments that are sustainable. Unfortunately, that is the moment we choose to take and process the Bill away from Parliament to where we do not understand. 

If you look at the Bills, which are on the business to follow on the Order Paper, they have suffered what I am talking about. Some of the movers of the Bills write letters to the Speaker requesting her to give the committees more time. How do we do that? 

Hon. Alex Ndeezi, the Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development is smiling because he is one of those affected by these kinds of letters. (Laughter) As the chairperson of the committee, he is affected by a Member who is asking for extension of time on behalf of the committee. How does that work?

In that regard, the following Bills will come to Parliament next week and we will process them with or without the reports of the committees: The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, The Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, the Law Revision Bill and the National Graduates Scheme Bill. So, hon. Ndeezi, if you are not ready, we will not wait for that report. We will proceed without it. 

That is the only way we will be able to help this Parliament deliver on its purpose. By the time we are passing some of the laws, they will no longer be necessary. They will have expired by the passage of time and yet, we are spending time trying to work on them. So, let us make ourselves relevant in these areas and see how to proceed. Today, I have made a long communication but I think these issues are important and they should be considered. 

Some honourable members have asked to comment on a few issues. I can entertain them today at the beginning of the sitting for the last time. Next time, comments will come at the end of the sittings.

2.19
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statement you have made is very comprehensive and it touches on many areas for which personally, I would like to thank you. 

I would like to take it a step further to ask the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to assure Ugandans that our citizens in South Africa are safe at the moment. We are seeing on social media what is happening but social media cannot give us full information.

Secondly, on the issue of the Bills, Mr Speaker, maybe the Business Committee should also try to synchronise the programme. Right now, Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill has been ready for the second reading but the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has been in the countryside getting inputs from the electorates on the Bill, an assignment which was given by the House.

This is one of the areas where we need to know whether some members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs should remain to take care of the business on the Floor or we allow them to do both. I can see them quite crowded. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

2.20
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Commenting on your communication today - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you are now coming on urgent matters. 

MR MBABAALI: No, I am still commenting on your opening remarks. 

Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rules allow but in a very limited way. So, be brief. 

MR MBABAALI: Mr Speaker, when you talked about matters of national importance coming at the end of the sitting, that is a good point because whenever they are raised, there are no ministers to answer them instantly. We end up with ministers having a lot of work in the next sitting. We also get a lot of work when reading through the responses. 

At the same time, Mr Speaker, what you said about South Africa is very serious. It is a pity that Ugandans are attacked in South Africa when Uganda is one of the pioneers in the freedom fight against the apartheid. We fought for our fellow Africans in South Africa. We take it seriously that the Africans have now turned against each other. That is where I rest my case.

2.22
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the problem in South African, may be you need to find time and ask Government to explain how African Governments are generally preparing for their nationals because what we were convinced as being the Global Village is becoming narrower.  In America, there is a huge debate on immigration and closing of Mexican borders. 

What is driving the Brexit is more of intolerance. The same thing is happening in the European Union. The world is closing in on us. Therefore, we need to ask African Governments in their interactions to devise means of how to provide for their citizens within their borders. What is happening in South Africa is regrettable because we have been taking South Africa as the African Capital. 

What must be of importance to all our economies is as to whether we are prepared to answer the urgent calls of the youth. You have very many young people. You have immunised and educated them but there are no jobs. The world is becoming smaller.

In my humble view, therefore, you need to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come to this Floor and fundamentally explain our policy on externalisation and how we are handling our citizens across the world. Intolerance is growing. We do not like it but that is the trend. We cannot stop it. It is a global trend now.

Therefore, my humble view is that Government, from which this side sometimes asks for answers in their manifestos – we hope those that will stand for presidency will have profound manifesto that speaks reality. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules allow short interventions from the communication and not a full debate. We cannot take a decision on –

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a small clarification of guidance from you. Can Government help us to know how many Ugandans are in South Africa and how many are in danger? Nigeria estimates that they have 21 million Nigerians outside their country. However, they are trying to take a record to establish who is where.

As I said that Government explains, we may need to know how many Ugandans are in South Africa, where they are, those who are safe and those who need immediate help.

2.25
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all inform the House that at the Pan-African Parliament, Members of Uganda – and also as the entire Pan-African Parliament – issued a statement yesterday at the continental level regarding what is happening in South Africa.

It is unfortunate that we were not placed on the Order Paper but as a team representing Uganda at the Pan-African Parliament, we have also come up with a harmonised statement that we would like to present in this House. However, it is regrettable that what is happening in South Africa is not an issue of how many Ugandans are there; we are talking about a united continent. Of recent, the African Union endorsed a common document for travel, meaning that Africans would be free to move within their own continent.

Therefore, the xenophobia in South African is uncalled for and we condemn it in the highest sense. However, it is very important to remind South Africans that they are part of Africa unless they exit. And it is very important for us to know that South Africa, as a republic, hosts very many institutions of the African Union. Therefore, our safety as Africans and other people while in South Africa is not guaranteed.

Mr Speaker, at an opportune moment next Tuesday, the Pan-African Parliament delegation will present a detailed statement regarding what is happening. I beg to move.

2.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Alex Ndeezi): Mr Speaker, it is about the communication from the Chair specifically about the matter of presenting of Bills. I would like to say that we very much appreciate the guidance you give us in relation to presenting of Bills. 

I seek your guidance on one specific aspect; that specific aspect is the manner in which the mover of the Bill asks for more time. We have been used to the practice of writing directly to the Speaker.

Today, you made specific reference to one of the Bills pending in our committee. I am happy the mover of the Bill is here; for us, we almost finished our work.

I would like to request you, if possible, to put it on record, to tell us whether or not the movers’ request for an addition of two months has been granted or not granted. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said that once a Bill is brought to Parliament, it ceases to be the property of the person who proposed the Bill and becomes the property of Parliament. Therefore, the mover of the Bill has no prerogative or authority to keep extending time for Parliament or seeking anything to that effect.

Therefore, any letter that had been written seeking extension of time on behalf of the committee is invalid and the committee should not act on it. Please, finish with your report. You have today, the weekend and Monday. It will be on the Order Paper on Tuesday.

2.29
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a very important matter concerning the Kumi-Ngora-Serere-Soroti Road; the Old Mbale Road. The road has become a death trap for the people of Ngora. The potholes are throughout the road.

We have tried to consult the Uganda National Roads Authority which seems not to be acting on anything. For over a year, they have not done any work. I am happy that last Saturday, you passed there and felt the impact of that road from Kumi to Ngora. People are involved in accidents every day, yet UNRA is saying – by the way they do not have a contractor.


Secondly, they say that they are not ready to fix that important road. That is why I would like to ask a few questions to the Minister of Works and Transport and UNRA. They should tell this Parliament why they are neglecting this road and yet, it is an important road.

Thirdly, I am also wondering why the tarmacking is taking very long and yet, this road connects the entire community. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister of Works and Transport to come and tell the people of Ngora, Kumi - where the road passes - Serere and those who go to Soroti, why they do not want to finish working on this road.

People of Ngora pay taxes and die in car accidents. That is why I am concerned because the people asked me those questions. I remember they also asked you, Mr Speaker, about our road. It is a shame. That is why I would like the minister to come and tell us only the truth.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give further information regarding what my area Member of Parliament has spoken about. As you realise, Kumi-Ngora-Kagwara Road has been mentioned every year. 

Whenever budgets are presented to this House, that road is in the plan. When it comes to actual implementation, for the past five years I have been in this Parliament, those roads are mentioned in the budget reading but nothing has taken off.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, as you are aware, I am sure when you used that road, you had a challenge. We would like to be informed by the relevant ministry on how far they have gone in terms of addressing the issues of Kumi-Kagwara Road. As the people of Teso, we feel disturbed and yet, we are part of Uganda that needs to be addressed and given services from the Government, especially in terms of road transport.

Mr Speaker, we call upon the relevant ministry to come and address this Parliament as regards the previous five years accounting for the Kumi-Kagwara Road.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The budgets for the last five years have been closed and accounted for and so, we cannot go back there. Anyhow, where is the Minister of Works and Transport? This is not just for Teso. I do not come from Teso; I come from Uganda and I have also driven on that road. (Laughter)

Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -

2.34
The Minister Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I spoke to the Minister of Works and Transport yesterday. You know you instructed me to call her. I rang her and she said she would come. I thought she had come because I left this House a little bit early, with your permission, Mr Speaker. 

Anyhow, I will attempt to again get her here so that she can come and explain – (Interjections) – sorry, I have a hoarse voice; you will excuse me. My voice is not the normal one. (Laughter)

I am ready to go and telephone so that she can come here and explain. Could I do that, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. We will handle this matter a little later.

2.35
Ms rose ayaka (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on an urgent matter of national importance. There is a water crisis in Maracha Town Council. For the last one week and more, there has not been supply of clean water in the urban area.

The water, which is supposed to have been supplied in the centre is supposed to have been undertaken by a company called Umbrella Water, under the guidance of the Ministry of Water and Environment.

However, this company has no capacity to supply water. Their equipment is dilapidated and so, the people are suffering and relying on the river for water, which is subjecting them to waterborne diseases and other sanitation issues. For that reason, the people are saying that the ministry should have an intervention.

My prayer is that the ministry should engage the National Water and Sewerage Corporation to supply water, not only in Maracha Town Council, but also in the other urban areas in the district especially Alikua, which has always been hit by lack of water.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is happening with the Ministry of Water and Environment? They are never here. Questions have been pending.

2.37
The Minister of Internal Affairs (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The latest I know is that the Minister of Water and Environment is away on duty but I will let him come and make a comprehensive statement in due course, over this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about the ministers of state? They are two.

Gen. (RTD) Odongo: I have not consulted on those ones but I know that the minister is not around.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon is a group of students from various universities across the United States of America. They are here on a study programme under the Auspices of the School of International Training, Uganda. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

MAJ. (RTD) guma GUMISIRIZA: Mr Speaker, we are in the dying days of this Parliament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By whose diagnosis? (Laughter)

Maj. (RTD) guma GUMISIRIZA: I am saying that we are in the final stages of this Parliament. I have observed with sadness how the business of the House gets bogged down because of the continuous absence of the colleagues, the ministers. (Applause)

The Rules of Procedure of Parliament clearly state that if Cabinet is not available, then there is no way we can transact business here. In essence - we have been having sitting after sitting but we get bogged down every other time because issues of national importance are not responded to. 

Procedurally, Mr Speaker, why don’t you put it squarely to Government – because how can you ask my senior brother, hon. Gen. Odongo who is in charge of police and prisons, questions on matters of water? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this will not be the first time we are raising these issues. I do not want to be offensive but a leader one time said that sometimes you work with people and you have the feeling like you are working in a cemetery. There are many people under you but nobody is listening.

We have said this many times that there should be ministers and the sectors are known, to respond to these urgent matters and deal with them so that we move on but here we are –
 
HonOURABLE members: We can bring a motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What motion?

2.41
Ms jane avur (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent importance. About a week ago, there was a medical camp at Pakwach Health Centre IV whereupon over 380 had surgical procedure of hernia and hydro cells. 

As a matter of follow up, I visited the Health centre IV but what the medical team informed me, which is the matter of urgent importance that I would like to put before this House, is that Hepatitis B and Bilharzia are one of the major causes of death in Pakwach District.

The two diseases have similar symptoms. Most times, the patients vomit blood or are short of blood in their system. Because we neither have a district hospital nor a district ambulance, when they go to Arua Referral Hospital for blood, the blood they are given is not sufficient to sustain this alarming situation.

My prayer is that there should be a quick and robust intervention by Government to address this situation because the rate of death is alarming. If not addressed very fast, our population may soon be depleted.  Thank you.

2.43
The Minister of state for Health (General Duties) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime back, we presented a detailed report here on the state of the health sector in this country and the gaps that we are experiencing.

The Member has talked about two things; the causes of death, the challenge of lack of an ambulance, a general hospital and these are some of the things that we stated in that detailed report.

We have written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and I strongly believe the ministry is trying to find resources to enable us deal with gaps specifically in regard to having health facilities in different parts and districts in the country.

We are addressing the issue of the health centres III. However, when it comes to the health centres IV and the general hospitals, we still have a challenge.

Mr Speaker, that also takes me to the challenge of the ambulances in this country. Government has tried its best to procure ambulances and from our statistics, we have ambulances in different parts the districts in the country. However, those ambulances are not doing the work that they are supposed to be doing because of lack of adequate funds to maintain and provide fuel for them.

Ministry of Health has come up with an ambulance policy, which is awaiting discussion in Cabinet so that we have a standalone ambulance service away from the facility so that if there is any need, somebody just calls like the way Uber is operating now. You just call and the call centre should be able to detect which ambulance is nearest to you -(Interjections)- yes, because Mr Speaker, if you go now to any hospital where we have sent -(Interjections)- yes, that is the policy that we are coming up with. Even if we gave ambulances to these hospitals right now, when you go there, they will tell you to fuel the ambulances to bring a patient.

This is what we are trying to do. Therefore, I request my colleague to be a little patient. Otherwise, Pakwach Health Centre IV is operational. 

She has talked about the challenge of blood. Time and again, I have stated on the Floor of this House that we have no factory for blood. The factories are each one of us. When we come to collect blood here in this Parliament, we always get disappointed. The last time the statistics from Uganda Blood Transfusion Service shows that we got just 20 units of blood from this Parliament and yet, there are very many eligible people.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I know hon. Odonga Otto raised the challenge that when they go to some facilities, they are charged. I would like to request colleagues that we have a blood drive now, please, let us donate blood; every eligible person, please, donate blood so that we can avail this blood to our hospitals. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure specifically rule 217, which requires a minister to submit to Parliament an action taken on a resolution or directive by Parliament.
It is more than six months now since the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries was directed by this House to report back on the   actions he has taken in filling the vacant position of Deputy Executive Secretary in Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation. At that time, the Minister -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, just deal with the procedure issue, please.

MR OTHIENO: Mr Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is; is the House proceeding well when the minister has failed to come back and report to the House on the action he has taken since he asked for two weeks and it is now more than six months? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right if this House directed the minister to come and report to the House on the progress or action he has so far taken?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, please extract this minute. The minister responsible for this sector should come to Parliament on Tuesday afternoon to give us a report on the status of this particular office and officer. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker sir, I rise on a procedural guidance from your chair. It is very important. The Minister of Health has just said there is no factory for blood and that even in this institution of Parliament, they came to mobilise for blood but they did not get enough. 

The guidance I am seeking from you, Mr Speaker, is whether the minister can come and make a formal statement to this House on the status of blood in the country. In some hospitals in Kampala, you pay Shs 3 million to get blood. People are giving blood free but the hospitals are selling the blood they are collecting free.

Therefore, I am seeking guidance - if the minister can come and give a comprehensive statement to the whole country so that the unsuspecting members of the public help us in arresting those health centres that sell blood. Without money, you cannot get blood in all the health centres and especially the private ones and yet, we give it free. They just give you a soda and biscuits and yet, for them, they are selling it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It sounds like a point of clarification. Minister, please.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is very unfortunate if there are some institutions or private facilities selling blood. Blood is supposed to be given free of charge. Therefore, Mr Speaker, allow us to do some investigations with the help of hon. Odonga Otto and others who can give us information and we will come to this House maybe in a month’s time after doing our own investigations and report. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.51
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. From Monday this week, the downpours in my constituency covered two parishes, Busubi and Nakatete destroying homesteads. Roofs of houses were blown off, plantations destroyed and this has happened in ten villages of Dongwa, Nakatete, Bunyere, Degeya, Kyakanyomozi, Kyamaganda and Kiryangoma. This is not the first time. It has been constant for the last four weeks but this has been the worst.

I call upon Government to intervene and give support of relief to the people who are affected.

My prayer is for the Office of the Prime Minister to extend relief to the affected individuals by providing iron sheets, seeds and some financial support.

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES)(Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, just like I stated here yesterday, when we get these reports as I will be happy to receive from my honourable colleague and sometimes, supplemented by the Chief Administrative Officers who are the district disaster management chairpersons, we critically analyse the reports. Where we think the community can recover on its own without necessarily being given relief support, we just advise accordingly. Where we think the community’s lifeline has been disrupted to the level of desiring some intervention, we also act accordingly. I will be happy to receive the report and then, we will make the intervention.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, please, pass the report. It should have been ready by now and with the Office of the Prime minister. Give it to the honourable minister to process accordingly.  

2.54
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance regarding justice and human rights of our people. 

A senior commissioner of police, Joel Aguma, was arrested on 22 November 2017. He was produced at the General Court Martial on 27 November 2017 and charged with unlawful possession of firearms. 

On 14 February 2019, the High Court ruled that he should be released and paid Shs 200 million as damages. However, up to now, he has not been released and he has not been paid. 

Mr Speaker, the Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP) Aguma is still in detention at Makindye Military Police Barracks. He has been detained there for more than three years and his family cannot access him, yet, he was the bread winner. 

His children are not going to school. His sick mother, a widow, is also suffering. The family and members from the Lango community are asking for the intervention of this Parliament because right now, ACP Aguma is still illegally detained at Makindye Military Police Barracks. 

We would like to know Government’s intention of keeping our brother in detention up to this time with no explanation. For two years now, we have not been able to access him. He is not being seen and he is suffering, probably in a safe house. I do not know. 

He was arrested together with the former Inspector General of Police, who was released, and yet our child from Lango has not been released. We do not know the crime. The court has clearly stated that he has no case and it was dropped. He is supposed to be paid Shs 200 million for damages. 
Therefore, Mr Speaker, we are asking for the intervention of this Parliament that our child be released.  

2.57
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. No one should suffer injustice. The Assistant Commissioner of Police, Joel Aguma, first of all, was not arrested together with the former Inspector General of Police. That is not factually correct. They were arrested on different occasions for different reasons. 

The Assistant Commissioner of Police, Joel Aguma, was arrested on more than one charge. One has been discharged. The others are still outstanding and the court process is on-going. 

Therefore, it would not be correct to say that we should release him, when other cases are still on-going in court and demand his presence.

Once these are discharged, certainly, the process of law and the court processes, which will determine which way to go, will be adhered to. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we now go to the Order Paper? 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION ON BENCHMARKING VISIT TO THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF LEGISLATIVE AND DEMOCRATIC STUDIES, NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, ABUJA – NIGERIA

2.59
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the report on the benchmarking trip to the National Institute of Legislative and Democratic Studies of the National Assembly of Abuja – Nigeria.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS OGWAL: A delegation was constituted to go to Abuja – Nigeria to study the status of the Institute of Parliamentary Studies; it is one of the institutes quoted in the continent as having the best practice.  

The delegation was led by me, the presenter of this report. For the purpose of record, I am Mrs Cecilia Ogwal. (Laughter) Protect me, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was for the record. If you say “me”, who is that? 

MS OGWAL: I was accompanied by a member of the steering committee and a legal officer. We were able to understand, when we were in the institute, that it was established for the purpose of servicing only Parliament; that is to carry out research, write reports, help to amend the laws and sometimes help to structure motions or carry out legal reviews. 

However, the institute proved to be very useful, not only to Parliament but also to the entire country and region. Therefore, the status of the institute was changed from the Institute of Parliamentary Studies to the Institute of Parliamentary Studies and Democracy. 

I am happy to report that because that institute is of great importance in equipping members of Parliament with skills to articulate unique and specialised issues, its impact was felt. A decision was taken for it not only to service the Parliament of Nigeria; it is now serving the interests of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) - the entire western part of the continent of Africa. 

Therefore, it is a very important institute, which is very well structured and now, it has a state-of-the-art and modern new site, which is housing the institute. 

What we learnt there is that the institute must be owned by Parliament and members of Parliament. It must be ran and guided by the members of Parliament, if we are to fully benefit from what this institute will be doing.

In Abuja, the institute is chaired by the Speaker of the Senate. It has six members of the senate and six members of Parliament – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, aren’t you going into the full details of the report now?

MS OGWAL: I am only giving the summary. I want Members to appreciate it because this report will help and guide Members when debating the Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, kindly, stick to the rules. 

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform Members that it is very important that members of Parliament and the Speaker of Parliament take interest in ensuring that the policies of this institute will take care of the unique interests of Members of Parliament. 

We came back better equipped and our minds are open to other areas, which we had not known at the time we moved our Bill. We pray that when the Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill is brought to Parliament for second reading, we will welcome amendments to enrich the Bill to serve the purpose of Parliament and the staff. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Please, Clerk, schedule this matter at the time we will be handling the Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill. This report should be read in full before we open debate on the principles of that Bill. Please, make that to happen. Thank you.

RESPONSE TO AN ISSUE RAISED HON. FRANCIS ZAAKE ON THE CURRENT SECURITY SITUATION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this matter was raised under rule 46 and that rule applies accordingly.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker, on 3 September 2019, hon. Francis Zaake while raising concerns regarding the current security situation, made outlandish allegations to the effect that perhaps, security agents and agencies are behind the insecurity incidents we are witnessing. This is absolutely far from the truth.

In order for us to fully understand and appreciate the current security situation, it is useful for us to pause a little and reflect back on our recent history.

Early last year, about April, we went through a period of security anxiety marked by murders of women in Entebbe and Nansana, kidnaps and assassinations. I came here on 9 May 2018 and made a statement in relation to that situation. I, shall therefore, not repeat what I said then. 

Last year, on 20 June 2018, His Excellency, the President of Uganda, took it upon himself to address the nation, through this august House, about the security situation. In his address, the President explained 12 action points that Government would address the security situation. Some of these action points included:

1. 	Installation of the CCTV cameras;
2. 	Recruiting and deploying local defence units;
3. 	Fingerprinting of guns;
4. 	Establishing the forensic laboratory to assist in scientific investigations;
5. 	To require every vehicle to have electronic number plates;
6. 	Re-introduce the 999 Police response system;
7. 	To address the question of social media misuse; 
8. 	To outlaw the wearing of hoods, especially by boda boda riders;
9. 	The introduction of helmets with illuminated numbers;
10. 	The introduction of more scanners in public places;
11. 	To regulate the use of drones and UAVs;
12. 	To encourage installation of private CCTV cameras; and
13.  	To address the socio-economic conditions of our society.

The above are the action points the Government would undertake to address the security situation.

Where are we now on some of these action points and what have been the benefits?

In relation to the installation of the CCTV cameras, in phase one, which was planned to cover Kampala Metropolitan policing area, we now stand at about 70 per cent. We hope to conclude the installation of the CCTV cameras in Kampala Metropolitan area by the end of September 2019. Thereafter, we will proceed to phases two and three to cover the rest of the country.

We have recruited and deployed a number of Local Defence Units personnel. More have been recruited and will soon be deployed immediately after their training. The 999 Police speedy response units have been reconstituted.

We have finger printed nearly 68 per cent of the guns within the police force, in the army, private security organisations and those held by private individuals. The exercise is continuing in the east, north east and north.

The question of the forensic laboratory to assist in scientific investigations still lies with this august House. I would like to appeal to the House to expedite the process of the establishment of the forensic laboratory.

We will continue to work on all the other action points and in due course, I shall be briefing this august House on the progress on these actions that we shall have taken as and when necessary.

What are the benefits that have accrued so far? 
In December 2018, you will all agree with me, that we had one of the most peaceful Christmas celebrations. On 3 June 2019, we had nearly three million people gathered at Namugongo shrines for the annual Martyrs’ Day celebrations.  There was no major security incident, apart from petty thefts.

Recently, my colleague, the honourable Minister of State for Internal Affairs released the annual crime report. In that report, he clearly demonstrated that there was a noticeable decline in crime rates in nearly all types of crime. These achievements are commendable by all means because they are not accidental. Rather, they are a product of deliberate actions by the security agencies.

Mr Speaker, in spite of these achievements, it is also true that in the recent weeks, we have witnessed disturbing trends in the form of murders, of especially boda-boda riders and some kidnaps, which have resulted in deaths or murders.

I would now like to turn to these developments. Let me begin by making some general statements. There is no society that is totally crime free, Uganda inclusive. The duty of Government and security agencies is to minimise the occurrence of crime. That is precisely what we are struggling to do here in Uganda as I have just demonstrated. 

Secondly, on the whole, the security situation is actually relatively good. The apparent bad situation is social media hype. There are many good acts that the security agencies have achieved that are not talked about. However, when one bad incident occurs, it makes rounds on social media and creates the impression that the situation is very bad. 

On the flipside, the social media hype is actually good. It informs the general public and increases their awareness and alertness. 

The security agencies have tried to understand what drives this new trend I have just alluded to. We have concluded that there are certainly factors driving this trend. These include but are not limited to the following;

    1. Politics. This is one of the drivers. The greatest success of the NRM Government has been, and is, among others, its ability to provide security of persons and property to Ugandans. Our population understands and appreciates this. This is why the population has always voted in the NRM so that it can continue to guarantee their security. Many detractors of NRM know this and are now attempting to create the impression that NRM has failed to provide security.

    2. Drug abuse; we have noted with concern that there is a perceptible increase in drug abuse, particularly among the youth. This abuse unduly influences their behaviour patterns.

    3. Receivism - this is a term that refers to a situation where an individual has served his jail term and when he is released, he again commits a crime and is once again jailed. 

You will all recollect the video clip, which showed two individuals strangling a boda-boda rider. You will also remember the broad day light robbery at a hardware shop in Nansana and the robbery at Kanyanya. You also remember the attempted robbery, which occurred in Mbale which resulted in the death of one policeman. 

Security has been able to establish that all these four incidences were carried out by one gang. These individuals had been in Luzira prison together. They were released in April this year and soon after, they resumed their criminal acts, some of which I have just mentioned. The good news, however, is that this gang has been dealt with. 

During this same analysis, we, as security agencies, have also carried out a self-examination and analysis. We have established that there is need for self-rectification. For example, we are going to improve our 999 and fixed lines calling system so as to improve our contact with the population and our response time. 

We shall also improve our command levels for both the local defence unit as well as at the police station level. 

We are going to improve monitoring of our officers at the reception counters at police stations. 

We have noted the following challenges:

    1. There are quite a number of duplicate telephone handsets in circulation. These duplicates make it difficult to track dubious callers because their International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI), the identification for each phone, are duplicate. 

    2. The crime of snatching vehicle number plates is inadvertently helped by the tedious process of replacing number plates. We, the security agencies, are now engaging URA on this matter.

    3. Acquiring CCTV cameras for private individuals is still expensive. We are now engaging the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with the view to review the tax regime on this. Removing the tax altogether would be a desirable end so as to make CCTV cameras for private individuals more affordable. 

We are taking this line because we have seen how some of the private CCTV camera footages have been helpful in fighting crime. 

Let me now turn briefly to the specific matter of murder of boda boda riders and kidnaps. I would like to state that Government is carrying out multi-sectoral consultation between the Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry of Information, ICT and Communications, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Security, Ministry of Kampala Capital City Authority and the Ministry of Local Government with the view of coming up with a policy guide on how to control and manage the boda boda industry. 

The outcome of this multi-sectoral consultation will feed into a committee chaired by the Prime Minister on this same matter and the resolutions thereafter will be used to assist in the management of this industry and hopefully improving the security of the same. 

In as far as the kidnaps are concerned, as we continue to implement the action points that His Excellency directed and as we continue to build capacity, we are sure we shall address this challenge as well. 

In conclusion, security is not as bad as it is being portrayed. It is continuing to improve. I would like to encourage all of us to avoid politicising security. (Applause)

Security is a common good. Let us all work together on establishing security. 

I would also like to particularly thank the general public for their awareness and support. (Applause) Together, we Ugandans can make Uganda a much safer and better place to live in. For God and my country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is under rule 46. Can hon. Zaake ask a supplementary question? 

3.23
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for the immediate response, although I am not satisfied with his answer to my question. My question was specifically about the kidnaps and the murders going on these days. I gave him an example of how the relatives are not being helped by the police. We have seen these and read about them everywhere. In the case of the murder of James Kalumba, I even sent the minister the evidence to investigate. 

We are not politicising this matter. These things are real and people are being kidnapped every day and they are being murdered. The cases we came up with are just the few examples but many cases go unheard. Even as we speak now, there is someone else who is being kidnapped. We are going to read about these things in the newspapers. These cases are not specifically being handled.

My supplementary question is: What are you doing in these cases to help the relatives to get justice because the police are not responding to them? 

Secondly, you talked about improving the emergency line. You have always promised these emergency lines but I have tried to contact the “999” and I can tell you that one can spend the whole day calling the number without getting through. I have even put my fellow youth to try these numbers but the calls never go through. They always tell people: “Our officers are busy.” The police do not even pick the private numbers for the police officers in the different police stations. Please, address this issue because it is very important.

You talked about the people who are committing crime, saying these are the people who have come out of prisons. What is Government doing to help these people who are coming from prisons to commit more crime? You just release them and put them to the public and they have nothing to do. As you are aware, we have a problem of unemployment and this is why all these crimes are coming up. 

Please, Government do something and come up with relevant policies so that the security situation in our country is improved.

GEN. (RTD) JEJE ODONGO: Mr Speaker, let me take this opportunity to, first of all, thank hon. Zaake for what he has additionally raised. However, let me say this: Earlier this afternoon, Mr Speaker, you cautioned us against making un-researched statements and I would like to follow from that. It is helpful not to talk in generalities. 

Kindly, if you would like us to work together – as I have appealed – let us be specific. There are indeed some cases, which we make but cannot be proved and it becomes ping-pong and makes work hard and wastes a lot of time. Let us be specific and let us work together. I am completely sure that we will be able to come to the bottom of this.

Secondly, sometimes when you ask that, “What are you, the police, doing?” I am reminded of a situation of a child who had a very good meal and went round to ask the mother: “Did you put salt? What else did you put?” Just enjoy the meal; do not bother about how the mother cooked the food. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am in a difficulty. Matters sometimes raised as matters of national importance end up generating statements, like the one the minister has just delivered which ordinarily – I think – should have fallen under rule 51.

The difficulty I am in – and the reason I am raising a procedural issue – is that the minister raises issues of policy, pleading that people should not politicise security, yet, he is himself politicising security.

The people who are serving in this Government, including those who joined it yesterday, always want to take credit for the security. Hon. Jeje Odongo knows – and it is written – that the past Governments were also providing security. In fact, when they were arresting criminals, some of them, including hon. Jeje Odongo, were helping them to escape. I think you remember how you helped Salim Saleh to escape, yet you were serving Government. (Laughter)

In addition, ministers and serving soldiers in this Government –  if you have read the books of Matayo Kyaligonza and hon. Pecos Kuteesa, they clearly state that their job was to make sure that people in Kampala would go to sleep by 9.00 p.m. It is written and you must have read these books. They were engaged in acts of terrorism.

The fear I have, Mr Speaker, is that people who are going to read history and they are fed on this falsehoods that hon. Jeje Odongo begins by condemning –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedure? (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Yes, the procedural issue I am raising is exactly that; that this Parliament owes it to those who will read the Hansard. Why is it that when matters of this nature are presented – and they require responses and clarifications – they are not treated under rule 51 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda for us to be able to respond to the falsehoods being peddled by those whose duty was to help criminals escape when they were in the past Governments? This is a ministerial statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, rules are made to be followed. Rules are made before the game, not during the game and not even after the game. We have rules. The honourable member, in his own wisdom, chose to come under rule 46. He made the selection deliberately knowing that it would deliver on its purposes and it has so delivered. The rule says you ask a supplementary question and we close. 

Therefore, are we proceeding properly? Perfectly. We are following the rules. I do not have anything else to add, unfortunately. (Laughter)

RESPONSE ON THE INCREASING DEATHS OF LIVESTOCK OCCASIONED BY WILD ANIMALS IN SERERE DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the minister for tourism here? He is not. The Minister for Water and Environment is also not here. Let us go to next item, please. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 63/03/10 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we are now on question for oral answer. Honourable minister, this is item No.5. Is that a statement from works? Okay, honourable minister, please proceed.

3.33
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): “The work plan of UNRA for FY 2015/2016 included tarmacking of 28-kilometre Bubulo-Bududa circular road. The same road is reflected on page 251 of the NRM Manifesto of 2016/2021, as one of the roads that were to be worked upon. Can the minister give an update to have it tarmacked?”

3.34
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Mr Speaker, I am here to respond to an issue raised by hon. Khainza Justine MP for Bududa District. The question was to give an update on the plan to have Bubulo-Bududa road eventually tarmacked. 

The development of Bubulo-Bududa circular road to paved bituminous standard is in the National Development Plan II and in the NRM Manifesto. It is also listed among the roads pledged by His Excellency, the President for upgrading.

Furthermore, His Excellency, the President, in his letter dated 28 December 2018, directed me to include the tarmacking of this road in my ministry's plans and budget for the subsequent financial years.

In order to inform the planning, budgeting and implementation, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) has procured a consultant to carry out the design of the road, environmental impact assessment and a resettlement action plan. This exercise is expected to be substantially completed in December 2019.

Once the design of the road is completed and studies for environmental impact assessment and resettlement action plan are finalised, the tendering process for the construction of the road will commence.  

The road could not be tarmacked during the financial year 2015/2016 when it was pledged because the sector budget for road development was over committed. This forced Uganda National Roads Authority to prioritise the budget on the already made commitments on: the running contracts; counterpart funding for externally financed projects; and for land acquisition for projects for which Government had secured external financing for their implementation. These undertakings required huge multi-year financial outlay. 

Even then, the resources available could not adequately cover the existing financial obligations and covenants within the financing agreements with our development partners.

The plans and commitments have been bigger than the resources allocated to the sector, which has slowed the implementation of many other projects. 

With the increase in the Government of Uganda fiscal space by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the sector will be able to sign more contracts to expedite the implementation of road projects in the mid-term, including Bubulo-Bududa circular road.

As of now, we are doing the studies, which will be ready in 2019 and then works will start. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much.

3.36
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for the statement. She talks of the next financial year, which we await but currently my appeal is the maintenance the road is not in good shape. Much as we await the other budget we should have it maintained during this period.

MS AZUBA: Mr Speaker, I have heard that comment and I promise we shall be having that road maintained because it is already in the plan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that we had the report presented and the committee was asked to go back and give us a proper direction on what we should do with this matter. I am sure that the committee is now ready to guide the House on what we should do. 

I had proposed a question for debate and the committee has just reported so we had not yet debated so chairperson update the House on what you came up with.

3.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Patrick Opolot): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed the House directed the committee to handle the matter. I would like to report that the committee sat and even interacted with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Allow me to lay a copy of the report and the minutes of the committee meeting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: let the records capture that.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Speaker, just as you have stated today, we interacted with the minister who came to give his explanation and he apologised for the mistake committed by the ministry, for not laying to the House the Supplementary Appropriations Bill in compliance with the Constitution.

As such, in admission the minister confirmed and reaffirmed the position that Article 156 (3) of the Constitution and Regulation 18 of the Public Finance Act were violated.

The committee further noted that way back in 2017 there was again a breach of timelines, as per the law, in laying the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for 2015 and 2016.

The House asked the minister to apologise, which he did. The House went further to ask the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury to also come to the bar and provide an apology. 
However, up to now, no apology has come from the PS/ST. 

The House has, therefore, noted that this error is becoming chronic with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It, therefore, recommends that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2019 should not be read the second time because it was introduced in Parliament outside the legal timeline as stipulated in Article 156 (3) of the Constitution. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the report of the committee. We were not very clear on what – 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Speaker, I also wanted to state that this is the only report from the committee. There is no minority report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it was there, you would have stated it. (Laughter) I can see that there is concurrence on this subject matter. 

Honourable members, that is the recommendation from the committee. I had already proposed the question for debate. Let us debate this matter. 

Honourable minister, do you want to start the debate? Why don’t you wait and speak after?

3.45
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): I thought there was a preliminary – I have a preliminary guidance I wanted to give this House. 

Mr Speaker, mistakes are made for sure. Article 156 on Appropriation Bill reads, “Where, in respect of any financial year – the Constitution of Uganda –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it Article 153 or 156 you are reading? 

MR KASAIJA: I am reading Article 156 unless my edition is out. Article 156(3) reads:

“Where, in respect of any financial year, a supplementary estimate or supplementary estimates have been approved by Parliament in accordance with clause (2) of this article, a Supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced into Parliament in the financial year next following that financial year to which the estimates relate, -“

Mr Speaker, we submitted to the Clerk on 28 June 2019. The financial years of 2018 to 2020 started in June 2018 and it will end in June 2020. 

Therefore, - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, be clear. You submitted the Bill on the 28th June of which year? 

MR KASAIJA: It was submitted to the Clerk on 28 June 2019, which presupposes right at the end of the Financial Year 2018/2019. The Financial Year of 2019/2020 started on 01 July 2019.

So, in view of that – because when I met the committee this morning, the issue was that I came to Parliament too late. When I went back and scrutinised the wording of this Article, I do not seem to be out of time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me understand this. The financial year in question is that of 2017/2018. The supplementary schedules in the course of that financial year were approved by this House and the expenditures were done. The Financial Year of 2017/2018 ended on 30 June 2018. 

The Supplementary Appropriation Bill was submitted on 28 June 2019. Is that correct? Do you have a receipt of the copy you gave?  It was then gazetted on 28 June 2019.

The procedure would have been that it should have been submitted at the beginning of the next financial year; in other words, at the closure of the 2017/2018 financial year. That is the time the Supplementary Appropriation Bill should have been submitted. 

The question is, therefore, - because the Constitution only says the “financial year next”. The question that we should be asking is; what is the next financial year after 2017/2018? The answer is the Financial Year 2018/2019. When does that financial year end? 

They took the whole of the year and submitted the Supplementary Appropriation Bill at the end of the next financial year. Therefore, they still handed in the Supplementary Appropriation Bill in the financial year next but after the period had almost expired. 

What does the Constitution say? Does the Constitution provide for the period when this Bill should be submitted? The Constitution only says “a Supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced into Parliament in the financial year next following that financial year to which the estimate relate.”

Therefore, is 28 June 2019 in the financial year next to Financial Year 2017/2018? Is that correct? The answer is yes. Now where is the gap?

3.53
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I have utmost respect to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, where he changes goalposts- when we waste a lot of quality time of this Parliament means we are not honest to goodness.

In the meeting we had with the minister, we interrogated that question in very detail. The honourable minister apologised and withdrew that letter he is referring to. In our understanding he formally withdrew that letter in a meeting we has this morning and a few hours ago; after interrogating that question.

The heading of the letter of the Bill says it was gazetted on 28 June. If you are to take that, it is within the limits of the law. However, we went ahead with the minister and that is why he is not being honest, and interrogated our rules of procedure introducing rule 127 that calls for the first reading.

The first reading which we want- because a letter written to the Speaker or Clerk is not what is envisaged under the law; what is envisaged under our rules of procedure is housed in rule 127.

Mr Speaker, the Constitution he has clearly quoted talks about introducing the Bill. Now, introducing the Bill by extension in our rules of procedure can only be housed under rule 127 which I will read verbatim to the members: 

“(1) 	at the time of introducing or presenting Bills, the Speaker shall call successively each Member in whose name a Bill stands on the Order Paper;

(2) 	The Member called under sub rule (1) shall rise and move that the Bill be read the first time and no question shall be put.

(3) 	The Clerk shall read aloud the Short Title of the Bill and the Bill shall then be taken as read the first time.”

Mr Speaker, when you interrogate that rule - and this is the technicality to which this Parliament can be taken for a ride. The honourable minister gazetted that Bill on 28 June but knowing it was a Friday and Parliament does not sit in anyway on a Friday and he is aware of these technicalities. Parliament will only sit on Tuesday the next week. That would have been the 3rd or 4th of July, clearly out of the stipulated Constitution timeline.

When we interrogated that with the minister in the committee, the honest Catholic Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Kasaija and a senior, admitted, apologised and even begged to withdraw that letter he wants to refer to that was written to the Clerk. And he withdrew it saying it was inconsequential and was sorry about it.

Now, for him in a few hours to turn around and comes to this plenary to change goalposts and wants to play on the psychology of this committee- the very debate we have been having –(Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you hon. Kivumbi. When you read Article 156 of the Constitution, it is not clause (3), you read it starting from clause (2) and not for clause (3) because it is itemised.

They are saying that in respect of any financial year if it is found - a Bill of appropriation is brought in Parliament and we approve, a supplementary comes in when there is a missing gap in that financial year. Why do you bring supplementary in the next financial year?

Mr Speaker, in 2015, it was the same mistake which was committed to take Parliament that we do not read these supplementaries. Finance has a prerogative, if money spent by three per cent and it is more, it can bring a supplementary and we approve them and say spend. However, even the supplementary they have brought is more than three per cent and that is unconstitutional. 

It becomes unconstitutional that even the supplementary you are bringing, Parliament did not allow you to spend because it is above three per cent which is within the Budget Act and the Public Finance Management Act. Therefore, it is an illegality that you want Parliament to pass and it is unacceptable.

If it is three per cent, you have a leeway and you do not need to bring a supplementary -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. James Kakooza, you know we have this issue of relevance.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: What I am trying to say-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Please we have this issue of “relevance” and the matter before the House is very clear; nobody is talking about three per cent. We are talking about a Supplementary Appropriation Bill which should have been submitted the “next financial year”.

The presentation from hon. Muwanga Kivumbi is that even if an attempt was made to gazette it within the financial year next; the Constitution is clear about introducing it to Parliament. That it is not possible that it could have been to Parliament within that financial year.

Therefore, his argument is that it is only practical that it must be introduced in the second financial year and that is where the argument is. Therefore, those of three per cent, you will be taking us to laws that we do not need to go to right now. Let us deal with the matter before us. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, you are exactly spot on. The bone of contention which the minister must answer to is in the word “introducing.” Now, introducing if you read both the Constitution and Rules of Procedures refers to first reading.

Now, you did not introduce this Appropriation Bill within the Financial Year next. You introduced it in July of 2019. You should have done so before 30th or 31st of June of that very year. Therefore, you are time-barred.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it can only be 30th June there being no 31st June.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yeah it is 30th June. He should have introduced it before 30th June of that financial year, which he did not do.

Mr Speaker, why we took exception is that, you were in this very chair when you asked the accounting officer of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come here and give an apology. He did not and it is now becoming kind of impunity, under-looking Parliament, thinking that at any time you will come to this Parliament and get your way. You have just said earlier that rules and laws are made to be followed.

Therefore, we are saying that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must follow the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, this is where we are. Let us limit the debate because the issue is very clear. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is Prime Minister’s Question Time but just give me five or 10 minutes to settle this matter before we come to that. 

The specific supplementary expenditure relates to the financial year 2017/2018, which ended on 30 June 2018. The Constitution requires that within the financial year next, the Supplementary Appropriation Bill should be introduced to Parliament because in the course of the financial year 2017/2018, the schedules would have already been approved by Parliament. Therefore, the Bill combining all the schedules for the final appropriation by Parliament of monies already spent would be introduced in the following financial year 2018/2019.

That financial year ended on 30 June 2019. This Bill was gazetted on 28 June, two days to the end of the financial year next. I have not been able to confirm whether it was a Friday or not. Clerk, can you confirm to me whether it was a Friday as stated by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi?

If it was a Friday, is it possible that it could have been convenient for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to introduce that Bill to Parliament before 30th June? 

It has been confirmed that it was a Friday and so it was not possible for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to have introduced that Bill to Parliament before 30th because 30th June was a Sunday. Monday was 1st July, which was another financial year.

Therefore, it has been established beyond doubt in my mind that that provision of the Constitution was not complied with. 

In situations where constitutional or any legal provisions have not been complied with, what does the law say would be the avenue to deal with it? Does it say, “Do not do anything” or does the law propose a way forward?

The law proposes the way forward in Section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act, which states that where there are such breaches, the minister should be called upon to explain and that explanation should be to the satisfaction of Parliament. However, that if Parliament is not satisfied, then it would do as it pleases but bearing in mind that that money was spent already two financial years ago. Secondly, the books for that financial year have to be closed and you can only close them by doing the final appropriation of the supplementary expenditures of that financial year. 

Those are the situations we find ourselves in. Do we take the avenue of Section 78 or we take what the committee has recommended? Let us have a debate.

4.08
Mr SAMUEL odonga otto (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a given – if hon. Adolf Mwesige could listen to me – that the Constitution has been violated. I do not think it is a debate; it is not.

However, Mr Speaker, the law is not interpreted to create an absurdity because the fact remains that the said Supplementary Expenditure Bill is incurably defective, if I may use that word. The money has been spent. I was seated near hon Alum and saw the areas where they spent - missions abroad et cetera. The list is very long.

The question we should ask ourselves is: what remedies do we have? In the law school, no matter how long the problem question is, the last question any advocate should ask – Gen. Moses Ali knows because we were together at the law school; he is my old boy as a learned colleagues –(Laughter)- what remedies do we have in the circumstance?

We seem to have only one remedy because the money has been spent. We cannot reverse the process. It has been spent in activities that we as Parliament also have powers to look into through other committees, whether Public Accounts Committee or Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE). The money has been spent yet the Constitution is very clear on how it should have been spent. So, it looks like we are flogging a dead horse. We will talk until the hens come back home.

As you may know, this is not the first time money has been spent without the approval of Parliament. I do not want to give other examples. So, in the circumstance, I would propose, in line with what hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi said as per Section 78 of the Public Finance Act - that the minister comes here and puts on the same rob he put on before the committee – because this is a national Parliament - and uses the same tone he went with before the committee - as Parliament, we should make it a risky business in future for anyone to spend money and walk away. 

Therefore, the minister should bring that same humility he took before the committee and explain the circumstances – in any case the money was spent for a just cause - in line with what the Speaker guided and we proceed.
 
Otherwise, if he insists and hardens, then the doctrine of separation of power will be invoked because it is not a coincidence that all these big shots are here today while they are not here every day. (Laughter)

We do not want to get to the situation as if Parliament is interfering with the work of the Executive. The minister should swallow the bitter pill - the promise is on the Hansard record for our children that these things will not happen again in future and we see how to proceed. It may be illegal – I was boxed in this House, which was illegal but the fact remains that I was boxed. Therefore, illegality is not everything; we need to proceed as a country.  Thank you.
 
4.12
Mr Robert kasule (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank hon. Odonga-Otto for his words of wisdom he has sent to the minister. I think we do not have to labour in vain. Given the fact that a breach was committed, it is known and the minister cannot again insist that he has constitutional powers to still go ahead and convince Parliament because the facts are already known.

Therefore, I would pray that laws are meant to be implemented. You did not implement as the law said and this is the august House that should make the final decision on what happens. Therefore, if you apologised again, just as you did in the committee and I hope that they accepted your apology, do it here and we conclude.

I understand honourable minister wants to answer questions. Therefore, the ten minutes the Speaker said would be appropriate for you to make the apology needed. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need your guidance. According to our Rules of Procedure, rule 7 and 8, whether a mere apology from the minister will cure what he has committed against the law. 

I am asking myself, doesn’t he have a better way of how he can go back, prepare himself then present it other than merely a House that makes laws telling a person to just apologise and do away with law that we made. You breach the law we have made and you come to us and say, “I am sorry” and we say- carry on it is okay. I need some guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the law does not talk about an apology. It talks about an explanation. In addition, there is no definition of an explanation. It could have an apology at the end, so there is no contradiction. It is up to the House to evaluate and if it is satisfied – procedure?

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker as you have stated, once you breach financial laws, this Parliament has procedures of audit queries after it has been found. What you have stated stands as an audit query. Even if you apologise today, the Auditor-General will go to the ministry of finance and if it stands as an audit query, Parliament cannot pronounce itself and say somebody has apologised. It must go to the Auditor-General and he brings it then Parliament pronounces itself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you see honourable, how does it go to the Auditor-General when the financial year is not closed.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: It does go there. The Audit Act says, where the Auditor-General thinks that there is a controlling amount of money the Auditor-General gets interested and investigates that matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, that is not the kind of audit we anticipate in the Constitution. The issue is for the Auditor-General to start auditing the financial year, the financial year books must have been closed by this Parliament through what it has allowed to be spent. How is he going to audit and then there are parts that were not yet appropriated but spent, how will he audit those. Please.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, the supplementary appropriation comes because there are some estimates that are found. In addition, if these people in finance did balance their books-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you by any chance suggesting that supplementary expenditures should not be audited?

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: What I am trying to say is that even if it is a minister, this is a breach of the law. In addition, once it is a breach of the law-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, you have come back to where we were.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Yes, that is what I am saying that even if the minister comes to apologise, it stands as an audit query.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure?

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Procedurally, I did not expect the minister to hold onto the letter addressed to the Clerk on the 28th June because that particular letter is in itself defective. In addition, he is aware that even the Constitution quoted there is not quoted as Article 156 but is quoted as section. Therefore, we advise that to guide Parliament and the meeting he should never quote that letter.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, on the issue of section 178 which we are quoting of the Public Finance Management Act, we cannot move there on account of Article 2 of the Constitution which talks of supremacy of the Constitution. I thank God that the Attorney-General is here; I do not know how we can overstep the supremacy of the Constitution in order to allow section 78 of Public Finance and Accountability Act.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, on the 01 June 2017, you guided the House on the same kind of discussion and your guidance was very clear. The minister was requested to apologise and House felt at that time that the apology of the minister was not adequate.

We moved further to say that even the technical officer- the Secretary to the Treasury should apologise publically and to Parliament. This was the decision of Parliament which was resolved on the 01 June 2017.

Therefore, on account of those three, Mr Speaker, are we proceeding properly because the minister has not withdrawn that letter, which he claims he wrote to the Clerk?

Secondly, we have not considered the Attorney-General to guide us on the supremacy of the Constitution; and thirdly, the decision that Parliament has already taken on a similar breach- (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Further procedure.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is clear that the Constitution has been breached and we are labouring to find a remedy. However, I would like to invite the House to look at the remedies that are proposed under section 78 (2) of the Public Finance Management Act. I would like to read it. It says, “Where it is established that the institution or department did not meet the requirements of this Act or contravene the Act due to negligence or misconduct of a public officer of the institution or department, the public officer shall be held personally liable in accordance with section 79 or 80 of the Act”.

Under section 79, there is a list of offences at the end up to (q). However, it says a person who commits an offence under this section shall on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding 500 currency points or four years -

Section 11 of the Public Finance Management Act gives the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury duties to advise the minister on economic, budgetary and financial matters. Therefore, the issue here is whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury is personally liable. 

Will this House take a decision and say that money has been either spent legally or illegally, so it cannot be recovered? Will the House recommend to the Executive arm of Government to go back and take action on the officers that are in the ministry? Or will the House find it fit that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, stands personally liable and is prosecuted? This is because that is what the law says here. 
Then the House can go on and pronounce itself that money was spent illegally and the officers that are responsible for this delay are held personally liable under Sections 78 and 79 of this Act. Thereafter, we would be able to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no money that has been spent illegally. The money that was spent was within the provision of the law and the schedule to that supplementary allocation was brought to this Parliament and approved in time. Therefore, there was no money that was illegally spent. 

The procedural hitch that has now come up is a constitutional requirement that the final appropriation – because you cannot appropriate by approving a schedule; you appropriate by an Act of Parliament, which comes through as the Appropriation Bill itself or the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, like in this case. That is the only way now Parliament would have given its final sanction to those expenditures. 

That is the breach that has taken place; that the particular law or proposal for legislation was not brought within the time the Constitution provides it should be brought. That is the breach. Therefore, issues of illegal expenditures do not arise.

Honourable members, we need to go to the Prime Minister’s Question Time but let us do this; we have established where we are on this matter. It is true Article 156(3) has not been complied with. Therefore, that breach is there. The issue of the Public Finance Management Act overstepping the Constitution does not arise because a similar provision is also found in the Act. Therefore, it is a breach of both the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act. Hence, there is no inconsistency in the way we are handling this thing. 

Like hon. Odonga Otto put it, what remedy do we have in the circumstances? We have to close the financial year. If there is a breach, how do we handle it? If there are people responsible for the breach, what sanctions are available within the law to deal with them? It is as simple as that. What do we do? 

Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the concern is that you have given so many apologies and it looks like it is becoming your trade. Like now, after a few weeks of absence, you have come to apologise. It is now beginning to look like you only do apologies and nothing comes of them. That is the fear that members now have. They say that you have done it before and you are going to do it again. Next year, you will come and apologise again and business goes on. What guarantees do we have that this year things are going to be different? 

4.26
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is a pity on my side that this slippage has happened once again, for which I am extremely sorry –(Interjection)– Resigning will not be the answer. 

Next time around, I would like to promise this House –(Interjection)– I do not know whether you and I will be here. There could be chance that I could die tomorrow. There is always that possibility, Mr Speaker. I always keep that in mind. 

I would like to promise this House that this will and should never happen again. As the Speaker said, you actually did approve the money. Therefore, the law was broken but at least, as far as the money is concerned, you gave the approval. There is no money that has been misappropriated and stolen, unless the Auditor-General tells us so. 

I suggest and humbly pray that we proceed and get this matter out of our way so that we can go to other important issues this Parliament is going to handle. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we now going to debate by way of procedure? I thought the procedural issues are clear, honourable members. If you have a supplementary point that you need to make, just make it but the procedural issues are very clear. Honourable members, this is not a debate. That applies to members from Kumi, Bukoto and Ajuri. Please resume your seats.  

4.29
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Mr Speaker, you had guided that one way of dealing with this matter is by the minister offering an explanation as to why they slept on the job, woke up a few hours to the end of financial year and deadline and then started fidgeting by writing letters, which he is now withdrawing. 

I had actually thought that the minister, hon. Kasaija, would come here and explain that they probably did not read the law and discovered it later. It appears like since the new Public Finance Management Act was enacted by this Parliament and set various deadlines, they are almost not meeting any of those deadlines. 

I remember one time, we were summoned from recess to come and receive accompanying documents. When they laid the budget framework paper, he did not bring those documents. Then, we were brought here quickly, received them and then went back – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That sitting actually lasted three minutes. 

MR SSEMUJJU: With due respect, it appears as if the standards that are set by the law cannot be met by this particular minister or a set of ministers in that ministry. Therefore, the one who appointed them will either need to find a new set of human resource or the ministers are too casual and do not respect Parliament. 

Sometimes, you can read it from the face of hon. Kasaija. He thinks you can casually come here and say that you are sorry and go to another year. 

Therefore, the supplementary point I would like to make is that we need the Prime Minister to tell this Parliament whether the immediate supervisor is satisfied with what is taking place in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in that they cannot meet deadlines one after the other and that Members of Parliament have to be summoned from the recess. When they submitted their policy statement, it had problems and you all recall what we went through. The policy statement from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, had problems, yet they are the ones supposed to guide the others. 

Can the Prime Minister reassure this Parliament that he is satisfied with the performance of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? All that has come out rowdily from the junior minister is quarrelling that there is a group of mafias that want to finish her and hon. Kasaija is quiet as if things are okay. 

Mr Speaker, I will be glad to take the route, as you guide the House and take the apology provided the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, tells Parliament that he is satisfied. It appears that the standards you have set for yourselves are too low and the country cannot move. We have been just discussing about Ugandans who are being beaten in South Africa - I hold a different view and I am sentimental as the matter might be. Anyhow, until we have fixed our own economy and stop Ugandans from lining up at the embassies looking for visas to run away as economic refugees. I have the slightest believe that the way hon. Matia Kasaija is running that ministry - we can stop Ugandans from running away and being beaten wherever they are going and from being raped in Oman.

Can the Prime Minister assure us, if these are the standards, then we will know that this Government of hakuna mchezo has set such standards for itself or that elsewhere things are okay but it is only the good hon. Matia Kasaija and a set of many other ministers under him that are sleeping on the job and something is being done. Otherwise, to receive the same apology - we were summoned from recess to come and receive accompanying documents and as we were about to receive them, you brought a faulty policy statement. As we were dealing with that, you brought a schedule and a Bill far away from the deadlines. Can the Prime Minister assure us that he is satisfied or something is being done in that ministry?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think it is a fair request.

4.34
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr   Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, my good friend, hon. Ssemujju will always endeavour to bring in various issues to throw some mud to my distinguished colleagues. As the Prime Minister and supervisor, Government is doing everything possible to manage and implement this new finance law. So far, there have been some gaps but they are being dealt with. 

In my view, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, is doing his best in the circumstances. For that matter, as the supervisor, I am satisfied with the work that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is doing.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, I do not want to interfere with the work of Parliament but I have a very important point to raise. The provisions of the Constitution have been breached and so a mere apology cannot cure. The provisions of the Constitution are clear on the retrospective application. Will the apology retrospectively cure the breach of the Constitution? The law is very clear on the retrospective application of the law but we are saying that within that financial year that report has not been made.

Therefore, there should be a better procedure of handling this process. Otherwise, if we just rely on a mere apology and a citizen of this country goes to court, that apology will not help. We need to have a cure within the law. 

I would like to appeal that the Constitution being the Supreme law of the land, no other law or Acts of the Parliament can supersede it. Any law that is inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution is null and void. If the Public Finance Management Act is inconsistent with the spirit of Article 156 of the Constitution, then that provision is null and void to the extent that it is ultra vires to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I do submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no inconsistency; no provision of the Public Finance Management Act is inconsistent with any provision of the Constitution.

Secondly, you raised the issue of retrospectivity. I understand that Article 92 of the Constitution and I also understand the restrictions imposed in criminal matters where you may want to charge somebody with other offence, which was not at the offence at the time it was committed - that is prohibited by the Constitution. So, if you are referring to retrospectivity under Article 92, this is what it says: “Parliament shall not pass any law to alter the decision or judgement of any court as between the parties to the decision or judgement.” That is the extent to which that provision goes. 

Therefore, to import other things and assign them to the Constitution without an actual provision of the Constitution would be unconstitutional. (Laughter) 

The law does not talk about an apology but it wants to understand the explanation to the problem that has happened. An apology can be the concluding remarks but what happened?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What happened is that there were a number of demands, which were very crucial –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, what happened to cause this delay in bringing the Bill? Not the supplementary. We are talking about the period from 1 July 2018 to end of the financial year, which ended in 2019. What happened in 365 days, that you could not bring that Bill here? 

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to refer to the resolution that gave the ministry powers to bring the Bill. This resolution was passed on 19 June 2018. You can see, we even came for this late. The reason we came late is that they were very urgent, important and needed to be included in the supplementary. 

In order, to do this, we had to make wide consultations. That is the explanation why we came to Parliament to seek the power to produce this Bill and then go and bring the Bill. 

It is because there were certain expenses that we had not taken care of and we could only take care of them having consulted Bank of Uganda, the Cabinet and even the other sectors – not Parliament. I come here for the final authority. You give the final authority. That is what delayed the process. 

I must also add the pressure of work. It may not be a very laudable reason but the biggest problem is these consultations in the various sectors. That is what I can say.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And do you stand by your apology? 

MR KASAIJA: For this slippage and for accepting – (Interjections) – I will never tell a lie in my life.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are the one on record. Please proceed.

MR KASAIJA: For this slippage, Mr Speaker, I repeat what I have said before, it should never have happened and it will not happen again. Please accept my apologies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Matia Kasaija is only human and the ministries do not function on the basis of one person. 

You will also recall that around that time, actually, the honourable minister was unwell for a while. When we were fighting with some of these things, we had received notification of his state of being unwell. He has spoken about what happened and you have heard. He has given an apology and you have heard it.

The financial year closed a long time ago. We need to close the books so that the Auditor-General can audit how that money was spent and then we move forward with these matters. Can we go to a stage where we can take a decision on these matters given what we have gone through now? Can I put the question to go to Committee of Supply?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I think the spirit of this statement from the budget committee was, lawyers call it preliminary objection. The committee has not yet considered that whole supplementary because there was a legal problem. They could not continue with the legality. 

The only recommendation that can come from this Parliament, if you put a question, is to the effect that the Bill be read for second time. 

In the recommendations, we are saying that the Bill should not be read for the second time. If Parliament feels that the Bill should be read for the second time, then the committee will go ahead to process the report so that the Bill can be read for the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the little procedure I know is that we have been discussing the principles of this matter because the motion was moved and that is what we have been discussing. 

Therefore, if I put the question for the Bill to be read for the second time and it is approved, the next stage is not the budget committee, it would be the Committee of the Whole House. That is why I was asking if I can now put the question. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, it is at that point that we are requesting that procedurally, before the Committee of the Whole House looks at the Bill, the committee should be given at least a day or two to scrutinise the Bill. It will not take time because there could be some issues that Parliament needs to understand. 

The committee stumbled over the constitutional problems and did not scrutinise the Bill, so it is in our interest to know whether the Bill was presented in compliance with our requirements or not. 

Therefore, procedurally, we would want to request that the committee be given time to scrutinise it. It may take a few hours, but I would request for a day. If you want us to come back on Tuesday, that can be done. At least we would have had time to scrutinise on behalf of Parliament and make it easy for us to process the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I put the question to the motion for second reading of this Bill and then we see how to proceed with the rest of it? Then we will refer a particular issue to the committee and the committee comes back next week. We are not doing ambushes here. We want a procedure that is accepted by all the members. That gives it legitimacy. Let us accommodate all the interests. 

Usually, and technically, by the time – it is different from when you are dealing with an Appropriation Bill. An Appropriation Bill has no figure approved but a Supplementary Appropriation Bill all the figures have been approved by Parliament through the schedules. (Interjections) Yes. All the expenditures have already been approved by Parliament through the schedule. Those schedules are brought to Parliament and we discuss and approve them. There are constitutional timelines on how to deal with that as well. 

When the Supplementary Appropriation Bill comes, it ordinarily has those schedules which we have approved, unless somebody has tried to play some funny thing to put things that were not there. 

Due to those possibilities, that is why I am saying that we approve the motion for second reading but allow the committee to confirm that what we approved in the schedules is what is contained in the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. That is why I am going to allow this time. So, can I put the question? 

I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “Supplementary Appropriation Bill 2019” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As I said earlier, we will pause this here. We will not go to Committee of Supply. We refer this matter to harmonise the figures and other things and have the committee report on – Chair, how much time will you need to look at the figures? I am sure you have scanned through them. 


MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We can submit on Wednesday next week. We only have to reconcile the figures which were approved and the Bill. It can take us one meeting to get it done. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This matter is deferred to Wednesday next week. It is so decided. Thank you very much, Chair. Let us wait for this matter to come back. 

Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and thank you, honourable minister, for surviving again. (Laughter) You must be like a cat with many lives. However, let us try and play by the rules so that we save time. The time we have spent on this business should not have been spent this way. We should have been doing some other thing. 

Can we do Prime Minister’s Time, even if the time has passed? [MEMBER: “Rules are rules.”] No. I requested the Prime Minister that we extend the time so that we could finish with this business. It is the Prime Minister to raise the objection that: “No, the time has passed. I am not ready.” However, if members do not have the questions to ask the Prime Minister -

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, earlier I requested that we debate a statement and you rightly guided that rules are supposed to be followed the way they are. The Prime Minister’s Time ended 10 minutes ago. Until someone has moved that this rule be suspended, it is here with us. Of course maybe nobody will ask Parliament to apologise – like hon. Matia Kasaija has been asked – but I am uncomfortable that rules must be breached. If Parliament decides so, we can breach our rules, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not a breach of the rules. What we said is that there is this matter that we needed to conclude. I announced, “Prime Minister’s Time is supposed to start now but we have this matter to conclude. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do you agree for us to extend time and then you deal with it?” That discussion took place and the records are clear on this. Therefore, we all know what happened. 

However, if the honourable member for Kira Municipality does not have a question to ask the Prime Minister, he could just listen to the others’ questions. (Laughter) I think let us engage with the Prime Minister for a short time. There could be burning issues that members have.

Honourable members, this afternoon we have pupils and staff of Star Light Primary School from Lira District. They are represented by hon. James Akena and hon. Joy Atim Ongom; they are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

THE PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

4.54
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are keenly aware about the fraud in the banking institutions in the country. Many Ugandans are being cheated and I know of several cases. James Sitakange was cheated by having his money deducted. Money is being deducted off people’s accounts by several banks and when you raise complaints, the money is refunded; but many Ugandans are not raising the complaints.

Mr Prime minister, Ugandans are losing confidence in the banking institutions and this points to the regulations in the banking sector. I must say this with dismay that on the 21st four transactions were made on my salary account and my salary was deducted. On the 22nd –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Question?

MS NAKATE: Mr Speaker, I was giving a preamble that my money was deducted and when I contacted the banking institution – dfcu – they told me it would take me another 45 days for them to prove that it was not Nakate who had made the transaction and thereafter they would go into some other investigations. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when are you going to come up with clear banking regulations so that Ugandans can have confidence in the banking sector? Thank you.

4.56
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, the question raised by the honourable member is obviously a very serious matter and my view is that two ministries are handling this. First, this is a criminal matter and, therefore, the Ministry of Internal Affairs should already be pursuing the culprits. Secondly, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should also already be handling the matter because this brings lack of confidence in our banking institutions, as the honourable member has said. 

My position, therefore, is that working with the two ministries and other agencies concerned, we are going to ensure that these criminals are brought to book and we ensure that restoration of full confidence in the banking institutions is also worked on. Thirdly, Government will come up with a clear position on how this problem is being handled.

5.57
MS JACKLET ATUHAIRE (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, more than a year ago, this House passed a loan for bridging the gap in electricity distribution. The loan amounted to $212 million from EXIM Bank. An advance of this loan has already been disbursed but our local contractors that were supposed to benefit from the local content component are not seeing any work being extended to them. On top of that, the people we represent are also not seeing any activity to indicate that work is progressing. 

I would like to request for a detailed update to the House on the status of the contract by the Chinese company because the time period and item agreed by this House to pass this loan are not being honoured and the Government is about to start paying money for no work done. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true Government borrowed money from our Chinese friends to ensure that more Ugandans get access to power. It is also true the project is being implemented. If it has not visibly appeared in Bushenyi and a number of other areas, I think it is just a question of time. However, this is an important project that is going to increase the number of people, industries and businesses connected to power. If there is any delay in implementation, I will appreciate the information and we will deal with it so that the programme can be expedited because Ugandans need it implemented as quickly as possible.

5.00
MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, last year, my car got involved in an accident and I was asked to pay an inspection fee, which I did through URA – an authority I know is responsible for collecting Government revenue. However, when I presented the payment slip to the police they rejected it and informed me that that was not the authority I was supposed to pay the fee to. They got for me a payment slip designed by them and indicating an account owned by them. Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), the alleged wrong receiver, has refused to refund me what was said to have been misdirected to its account. I also found out that there were many Ugandans who have suffered the same.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I wonder why there are two authorities collecting Government revenue in this country and charging the same amount for the same purpose. Which of these is the right authority to collect Government revenue and how can Ugandans, who double paid due to this confusion, get a refund of their monies? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, fortunately, the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Internal Affairs are seated next to each other. Therefore, with your permission, because this is a very important point that has been raised, I request that the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gives clear guidance to the people of Uganda as to where they should pay. The issue of paying twice does not arise; the refund must be done. Ndugu Matia Kasaija, the Floor is yours.

5.03
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Yes, very humble! That is how I was brought up and that is how I have survived. 

Mr Speaker, there are about two or three agents that collect revenue. The first is Uganda Revenue Authority, which collects taxes and other fees, which we have agreed they collect. The agencies like Uganda Land Board, because of its complexity, we agreed should collect and eventually remit to the Consolidated Fund. For penalties, for example if one made a wrong turn on the road and the police got them, they will give them a ticket and they use it to pay directly in the bank. The police are not allowed to collect money because they have nowhere to safely keep it. So, the offender will straightaway pay it in the bank on the account of Uganda Revenue Authority, which will transfer it to the Consolidated Fund.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where one has paid the money twice, why shouldn’t they be refunded?
	
MR KASAIJA: If a person has paid twice, please put in a claim, bring all evidence and they will be refunded immediately.

MS ATYANG: Honourable minister, I filled a claim but URA told me that they cannot refund that money, and there other Ugandans who have also suffered in the same way. Uganda Revenue Authority said that police does not have the authority to collect the money. If they have to refund, police has to pay them in order for them to effect the refund. So, Ugandans are losing money that way. We want our money back.

MR KASAIJA: If URA said that they couldn’t refund the money because police collected it, then they are failing on their duty. If you have a claim, please write to me with all the evidence and I will ensure that you get your money back –(Interjections)- I was first answering her question, but now the general principle is that I am going to handle this with Uganda Revenue Authority. They will receive a directive telling them that if someone has paid twice for the same fee, he or she must be refunded, and it is within the law.

50.6
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, oil companies have been demanding for the tarmacking of the Masode-Nkoko-Kakumiro-Nkoko-Nalweyo Road. Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) carried out systematic designs and feasibility studies sometime back. This road is very vital for the transportation of equipment for the oil pipeline construction and UNRA demanded that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question now?

MR TWINAMASIKO: How far have you gone with the amendment of the Cabinet Memo to accommodate this road as an oil road since this is being demanded by oil companies? Thank you, very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Cabinet Memos are not amended the way hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko has suggested. If Cabinet has taken a position and there is need to revisit that subject matter, the minister responsible brings it back.

This is matter on oil roads is a matter where the Ministry of Works and Transport, working closely with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should harmonise. If there is a gap that has been left out, it will be closed.

Since you have raised this matter, I will formally bring it to the attention of the honourable Minister of Works and Transport as well as the honourable finance minister to address the matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.06
MR ROBERT MUSOKE (NRM, Budiope West County, Buyende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On 23 March this year, there was a hailstorm in Buyende in which 15 people died and 620 homesteads were affected. Still on 23 March, hon. Musa Ecweru came and offered Shs 500,000 as condolences to each affected family. He promised relief items in terms of iron sheets and cement to each affected homestead. 

Last month, a contingent of relief came with specific directives that those iron sheets should serve only 50 affected homesteads. When are the victims who were left out going to receive relief and which formula was used to select the 50 homesteads that were affected as directed? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Musa Ecweru meant business when he visited the affected people and pledged support. What has been provided, I believe, is what resources available could afford to secure. However, it does not mean the end of the matter. This matter will further be discussed with hon. Musa Ecweru and his team to see what concrete plans they have to ensure that the people in the affected areas are properly supported and settled.

5.11
MR AOGON SILAS (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Prime Minister, I am in possession of copies of letters authored by your office. The first one was written on 9 August 2019 and the second one was written on 19 August 2019. The letters are entitled, “East African Civil Aviation Academy, Soroti, houses and land for sale”. 

As the people of Teso and Uganda, we have been agitating for a city status for Soroti, and the flying school is a place we have been thinking of improving to an international airport. However, I have copies of the letters indicating that the houses and the land are up for sale. 

Mr Prime Minister, are you aware of this? Secondly, is it a new policy we are developing as a country, to sell away this property? Where are we going as a country if we are going to sell these assets?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is right; there has been discussion about the problems concerning Soroti Flying School. The main reason is that the institutional houses and the place where the airport is supposed to expand have been grabbed and houses are coming up there. We have decided to suspend all those activities to address the matter and soon after, a meaningful report will be given. It is a serious matter and that is why the Prime Minister convened that meeting. We expect that this matter will be concluded within a month.

On the question of sale, I would like to say that sales have been suspended. First, the matter has to be sorted out. After a month, when the matter has been resolved, the final position will be communicated. I would be interested in looking at copies of that communication, hon. Silas Aogon.

5.14
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have a very serious matter in my constituency. I represent a constituency that is partly in water. As a constituency, and a country, you remember that last year, we lost our dear ones who were sailing on Lake Victoria. People who sail on water bodies have serious challenges. During a tragedy, you can fail to rescue them.

If you search within the Government you head, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you will hardly find a policy that guides the search and rescue of people who use water bodies. When is Government coming up with a search and rescue policy for people who get problems on water bodies in this country? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the security and rescue on our water bodies have been discussed before by this august House. This became even more important when we had a problem on Lake Victoria. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport is working on this. I believe they will bring a report about their work to Parliament soon. 

5.16
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Prime Minister, there is no doubt you are aware that there is an outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) in Sironko and other parts of Bugisu Sub-region, which is threatening to wipe out entire herds of cattle in Bugisu. What measures is Government undertaking to stop the spread of this scourge?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, again, my honourable colleague may be aware that FMD is quite a problem not only in Sironko but even in western Uganda. Vaccines were imported by Government but they were found to be fake. Other measures are being taken to ensure that this time genuine vaccines are made available. (Laughter)

5.17
MS JASTINE AYEBAZIBWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, as you may recall, in this financial year, we allocated money for older persons under the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) programme. We went ahead to adjust the age bracket of the beneficiaries from 65 years to 80 years. Today, however, we are in the third month of the financial year and we have not seen any sign of this money in our districts. I would like you to inform this House on when we should expect this money in our districts. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, since the decision was taken by this august House and the money is in the budget, it is then a question of delays. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, however, is going to whip up all those concerns to make sure that those who qualify for the money actually get the money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.19
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, at the end of 2017, the work on the road from Pallisa to Kumi started and it is almost concluding. Out of the 582 households, which were assessed for compensation, 120 have not yet received any compensation as we talk. 

Secondly, as Members of Parliament, we wrote asking that the road be extended to the landing site where we have a ferry, from Kumi town, which is about 16 kilometres. As we talk now, work is going on and I am aware you know that Article 26 of our Constitution restricts your work before compensating the affected households.

Therefore, Mr Prime Minister, are you aware of those works? What plans do you have to compensate the households which are affected? Before you embark on your good public interest work of constructing the road, also compensate the 120 households.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am very happy about the progress on that road. It is really good to fulfil pledges and the manifesto. 

Secondly, it is only logical that the road being constructed, as much as possible should reach the ferry because it is part of the road network in a way. 

Thirdly, if there is any delay in compensation of the wananchi, it should be expedited. It is true that sometimes there have been issues of compensation. Sometimes people do not agree to the amounts and sometimes there are delays in funding. However, Government is going to push this so that the wananchi are not inconvenienced.

5.21
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, all known politicians and political activists opposed to the current regime who stand as sureties in courts of law are conditioned to deposit their national identity cards in court - I am actually a victim - until the case is finalised. This requirement is frustrating citizens because they cannot access services like banking.

My question to you is: Why is the Government abusing the system of national identity cards as we approach the 2021 general elections?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I will not make a judgment the way my dear brother is judging Government. This is a matter for the Judiciary to explain and we should let the Judiciary deal with this matter.

5.22
MS JANE NABULINDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, agricultural financing is one of the ways to promote and ensure sustainable agricultural productivity.

One, what measures and support system has Government put in place to ensure that farmers access affordable credit facilities to boost their agricultural potential? Two, are there plans by Government to revive the cooperative bank?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Very good question.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, with regard to the cooperative bank, this is a property of the co-operators and I think the co-operators of Uganda can revive and build a cooperative bank or any other form of bank. This is a private entity and Government would support efforts of the people of Uganda to build a financial institution.

Regarding agriculture, as you know, Government fully supports agriculture and has even been giving planting materials and other agricultural support facilities to farmers. Therefore, Government supports the farmers.

With credit, money is available under agricultural and other schemes. I have heard complaints about accessing this money because this money is acquired through traditional banking systems and sometimes, the interest rates are unmanageable. However, I know that Government has considered this matter and has even limited interest rates in certain sectors, especially agriculture.

The responsible ministers will, however, come to this august House because this is an important subject matter, so that the people of Uganda involved in agriculture can get to know how to access affordable funding to support agriculture.

5.25 
MR JAMES WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have been reading recently in the press that the President has got a priority list of people who call him directly, and that there are those who have been deleted without notice. (Laughter)

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the public would like to know: One, who are on the priority list and who determines who is to be deleted and when? Two, is there any policy to guide this communication in the highest office? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  To guide the deletions and the – (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am being educated about a phonebook somewhere by His Excellency the President, which I am not aware of. However, it is also true that each of us has a list of people you call frequently and the like. If such a thing happened, it would not shock or surprise me.

However, I would like to propose that we do not indulge or engage into private searching of various lists. It may cause confusion and break privacy.

5.27
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, may I know when Government of Uganda will ratify the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance that was signed in 2011 at the African Union headquarters in Addis Ababa?  Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I do not have any specific detailed information as to when. However, I see no problem, in principle, in signing a charter of that nature. Nevertheless, we will ask the minister responsible to inform this House on the details of ratification, and if there are hitches or problems to explain them to this august House.

5.28
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In 2014, parts of Pakwach were connected to the West Nile power grid and a number of people were affected, some of who were compensated last year. May I, therefore, know from the Prime Minister why about 30 per cent of the people who opened accounts as required by Government have not been compensated to date? I thank you.
  
DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there are quite a number of reasons why compensations delay or are not made. One reason is resources and another is delay in resolving disputes. We will be interested in getting the details and then we shall dig more to find out why there is a delay and inform the honourable member the way forward in resolving this matter.

5.29
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, last year I asked you a question concerning the rehabilitation of Busolwe Hospital in Butaleja District. You told me that as soon as the funds are available, it will be rehabilitated.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this Parliament appropriated money to that effect but when I went to the ministry, I was not given a proper answer. I even met with the minister herself, and she is here. Maybe, as the Leader of Government Business you can give an answer that I will take to the Bataleja on when this hospital will be rehabilitated. You know very well that whenever it rains heavily in Butaleja, we get outbreaks of cholera due to the fertile soils from the Elgon Sub-region. May we get an answer, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I delayed a bit because I was carrying out an intensive consultation - (Laughter)- with my sister, hon. Sarah Opendi, the Minister of State for Health, on Busolwe Hospital.

It is true Busolwe Hospital has got money from our Spanish friends. However, it is also true that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is still mobilising counterpart funding. That is why there is a bit of delay.

Nevertheless, this is a well-known old hospital and problem. We will work with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that the counterpart funding for Busolwe Hospital is mobilised. 

5.31
Ms angelline osegge (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are in 2019, counting down to 2021. I am aware that the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Government in its manifesto promised to construct silos in all the regions of this country. I had fears about the weather patterns in this country and finally yesterday, the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness confirmed my fears. He said that we should expect a lot of rain that may cause disaster in this country. 

With so much rain, you know that there is going to be destruction of crops, shortage of food and famine. May I know what Government is doing to, one, harness the water that is expected to come and two, prepare, protect and preserve the people of Uganda and prevent famine from taking away their lives?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we share the Member’s view on the importance of storage capacity in our country. Government would be very willing to invest in this sector. Nevertheless, resources are not as readily available. We have, however, encouraged the private sector to invest in this area. I am happy to say that the response of the private sector is good. 

Also, a substantial amount of storage capacity has already been constructed and is still being constructed. We expect that this will reduce the pressure for storage that my sister is talking about.

5.34
Ms Cecilia ogwal (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister to tell the House what his office has done because in the financial year 2017/2018, Parliament resolved that Government reviews the unit cost structure of roads in Uganda with the intention of ascertaining the cost of road construction. May we know what the unit cost of constructing national roads in Uganda is now?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is a subject that the country is very interested in, and it has been in the public domain. Government has taken a position - Cabinet has also discussed it - and agreed that Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) should carry out studies so that we know the estimated or indicative costs of upgrading specific roads, so that when we advertise we publish these costs in the media. 

When we say that we would like to do the Mbale-Soroti Road, for example, UNRA would already be having all indicative figures. Therefore, when 10 or 20 bidders put in their bids, their figures would be compared with our own indicative figures to guide the final decision. In a nutshell, a lot of work has been done and continues to be done on that matter with a view to saving the country’s resources on upgrading roads. 

5.36
Ms jacquiline amongin (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2014 the heads of state of 54 African countries adopted a protocol to ratify the Pan African Parliament into a fully legislative body and Uganda is among those that endorsed it. Also, the President of Uganda is one of those who committedly guided the African Union in ensuring that the issues in that protocol are put forward. However, despite the commitment from the President in terms of the speeches that he made to the African Parliament, Uganda has not ratified the said protocol, as amended.

I would like to know why we have had this delay, yet most of the countries are looking at Uganda as one of the role models in addressing issues of Pan Africanism and the unification of the continent.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Uganda is not going to lose her leadership role in promoting Pan Africanism because of the delay that my sister has talked about. We are going to look at this, as quickly as possible, and ensure that it is ratified.

When President Museveni spoke in support of this, he was not merely talking; he meant business and we are going to ratify it. There is no way Uganda would object to consolidating the Pan African Parliament.

5.38
Mr mbabaali muyanja (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, has the Government taken into consideration the cost of buying, maintaining and replacing ferries over time vis-à-vis constructing permanent bridges over short distances?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government believes in a multimodal transport system. In some areas yes, we need bridges but in other cases, we need ferries, boats, trains and even planes. Therefore, a multimodal transport system is what we support and we will implement it.

5.39
Mr Charles ngabirano (NRM, Rwampara County, Rwampara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, during the President of Uganda’s mobilisation tours on prosperity, he informed this country that there is a new model that has been adopted by Government to fight poverty. This model is through identification of enterprises and trade in this country.

Since the President’s visits, the country is very anxious and we are waiting for the details of that programme and its implementation. Can you tell us when the programme will begin and how it will be implemented so that we can address the poverty in our areas through the programme?  Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the zonal tours that the President carried out were very successful. A number of programmes were indeed announced and raised by His Excellency the President. HE also discussed with various people and various leaders. 

The line ministries are now embarking on implementation. My brother from Rwampara should work closely with Government to see the implementation of what the President talked about.

5.41
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my constituency is divided; it has both animals and people. (Laughter). My constituency covers almost 80 per cent of Queen Elizabeth National Park. There has been a human-animal conflict that Government has known about. 

Early this year, we lost 10 lions because of this conflict over the boundaries. I have written several letters and contacted the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to ensure that proper boundaries are created within the areas and the sanctuaries in the national park. Can I know from you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why it has taken long for Government to open up boundaries between the areas for animals and people?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable colleague will be glad to know that Queen Elizabeth National Park is actually one of those parks for which the ministry responsible for tourism has started erecting electric fencing, and the ministry is going on to ensure that is done.

Secondly, the issue of conflict between wananchi and animals is quite sharp in that area because as you know, within the national park there are some enclaves of people. A final solution will have to be found to make sure that this relationship is handled well. I do not see a permanent close relationship with those enclaves especially as the animals and the population of the people increase in numbers, the conflict is bound to increase. Nevertheless, the ministry responsible is taking measures to deal with the matter including electric fencing.

5.44
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In August 2018, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries through National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) and Operation Wealth Creation signed contracts with nursery seed producers to produce all the seeds that this country needed for distribution this year, for the first and second season. After the farmers produced these seeds, having borrowed a lot of money to do this, Operation Wealth Creation did not buy the seedlings and many seed farmers and nursery operators are stuck with these seedlings. It is actually worth Shs 98.166 billion. 

These farmers created jobs for our people and I think they deserve to be taken care of by being paid for what they produced. They cannot make use of what they have and NAADS is not buying. The interest rates have gone up and some farmers have actually committed suicide - (Interjection) - Yes, it is serious as that. It is a breach of contract, and the process of selecting these farmers was very well laid out.

I request that these farmers be taken care of and their seedlings be paid for so that they can take care of the big bank loans they took and pay their workers. I beg to submit. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is raising a serious point which affects quite a number of areas in the country. It is true there have been issues concerning contracts and who and how much of the seedlings should have been produced. When the Government announced, there was overwhelming response and it is true more seedlings were produced than could be absorbed. However, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Operation Wealth Creation and NAADS are addressing this matter to bring it to a conclusion.

5.46
MR FRED MUDUKOI (Independent, Butebo County, Butebo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for the last 30 years, there has been persistent inadequacy in the supply of drugs in most of our health facilities. In the case of Butebo District, we do not have a hospital but we have one health centre IV and three health centres III in different subcounties. However, within a short period, like a week, the drugs always get over and our voters keep on following us, Members of Parliament, asking what we are doing because they go to health facilities but do not get medicine. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you aware of the inadequate supply of medicines in our health centres? If you are aware, what is the solution the Government is planning to put in place to help our people? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is raising a legitimate point. It is true that sometimes drugs are not available in our health units and patients are advised to go and procure them. Of course, drugs are not cheap, so it is true that our people are spending substantial amounts of money on drugs.

As you may have already seen or heard, the Ministry of Health has brought for consideration of Cabinet and Parliament a Bill on national health insurance. It is now being considered by Cabinet and will be coming to this House. We believe that will be one way of assuring the population, by the population themselves participating in supporting the health sector instead of waiting until they are really sick and that is the time they must pay for drugs and to see the doctor.

However, if you already have insurance, then insurance will be able to look after you. We think the insurance system in healthcare will provide a solution to the problem you have raised.

5.49
MY TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government awarded the contract for the improvement of the surface of the road from Kawempe to Kafu. However, after reaching somewhere beyond Mijera, the construction work was abandoned, leaving one side of the road with a high surface and the other one is lower. Even the other side that has been done has started developing potholes and there is no road signage on the part where the works were abandoned.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, may we know why the contractor abandoned the work before reaching River Kafu and when they are going to resume the work to complete the section that has been abandoned midway for two years now?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, that is a very serious matter because that is a main national and regional road that should be done. If a contract had been signed, it means that there have been some conflicts. 

However, our duty is to make sure that these issues that delayed or that stopped the work from being done are resolved as quickly as possible, so that work can resume and the road construction is completed.

5.51
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in my district, Kiruhura, and in many other districts within the cattle corridor, there has been a problem of acaricides. Could you kindly tell this country how the Government is going to address this problem concerning acaricides? Could you also comment on the decreasing prices of milk in this country? Thank you very much. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the question of acaricides has been a problem for several years in our country. This has been partly brought about because of the private sector importing drugs in a less controlled manner, and some of which are counterfeit. 

Cabinet is now considering this matter. A Cabinet committee has been set up to examine the issue of acaricides and veterinary drugs in general, with a view of streamlining the importation, regulation and control of these drugs. We also hope to empower the veterinary sector to have tighter controls of veterinary drugs and acaricides. 

The prices of milk have been affected partly by increased and better production of milk by the people of Uganda, which is really a great plus -(Interjection)- and also a great achievement by the National Resistance Movement; thank you, Ndugu Fungaroo. Isn’t that great? Continue on that track. 

Mr Speaker, it is true milk production has shot up in our country and now we export milk and milk products worth about $150 million, which is a great thing. We expect this figure to even improve further. However, there has also been increased production of milk in other parts of the world, especially New Zealand, which appears to have impacted on the global milk supply.

5.53
MS BETTY ENGOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when is Government planning to set up an industrial park in Apac District? 

DR RUGUNDA: I am aware that Government announced the establishment of about 22 industrial parks, as a general guide to industrialisation of our country. I know the policy is to industrialise Uganda and in that process, Apac cannot be left out.

5.55
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have a very swift stream in the middle of Koboko Municipality called Sinyani and it is similar to a river. Every year, we put culverts but when the rains come, they are washed away and the place gets flooded. Currently, it is very difficult for people to cross from one side of the town to the other. It is even risky for children. 

The money for maintaining roads in the municipality and also the money allocated for opening up community roads cannot build a bridge. The engineer has also come out with a bill of about Shs 200 million to build a proper bridge so that the water can flow and people can cross. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can I know who can provide us with that Shs 200 million? I ask this because UNRA only works on national roads. We need this Shs 200 million so that we build that bridge. Can you tell me where we can get this money from and when we shall have it? The situation is now appalling; people cannot easily cross to Koboko Municipality. 

DR RUGUNDA: There are regulations concerning roadworks and maintenance. If culverts are not sufficient to deal with the water, as we have said, an appropriate bridge can be built. 

With regards to where the money will come from, Koboko happens to be one of the municipalities in Uganda and it is true that it is almost a gateway of Uganda to the rest of the region. I do expect that Government is going to get more money to support municipalities, and Koboko could be a beneficiary in the support of municipality works and roads. Nevertheless, we do not even have to wait for that; the Shs 200 million you are talking about is peanuts and the Ministry of Works and Transport can deal with this matter. 

5.57
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Rt Hon. Prime minister, the boundary opening of Mount Elgon National Park, as per the 1993 map, is long overdue. The line ministry, that is, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, made a commitment to give us, the leaders of the affected communities, progress reports. However, the ministry has gone mute. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that I raised this issue with you and you promised to prevail over the minister. However, up to now, there is nothing going on. What is happening? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there has been substantial controversy, some of it expressed in this very house and some of it on Mount Elgon itself. This controversy has even led to the loss of life of both Government workers and the wananchi. This is a situation that must not be countenanced. 

I propose that the Prime Minister will call a meeting involving the ministries responsible for lands and wildlife as well as the leaders of the communities affected, so that a final answer can be found. This meeting will be called by the Prime Minister within a month. 

5.59
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Ministry of Education and Sports is in the process of streamlining the records of teachers through online registration, using the teacher’s management information system. However, there has been a challenge as a number of teachers have failed to upload their documents. 

My question to you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is: What is Government doing to help teachers who are computer illiterate to successfully accomplish this registration? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, every challenge has a silver lining. I think that this may be an opportunity to accelerate computer literacy among teachers. Secondly, I believe that they can get technical support in uploading information. 

Therefore, I think that this is a matter for which the Ministry of Education and Sports should work closely with the affected teachers so that the extent of the problem is measured and an appropriate solution found to complete the process of updating the data.

6.01
MR MARK ANGEL DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we regularly interface with people in local governments as well as officials from the ministries. Why do we continue to have people in acting positions in those sensitive positions when those acting have the qualifications required? This is against the Public Service Standing Orders, so why do we continue to do it? Thank you.    

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the practice of acting positions should be discouraged as much as possible. Sometimes, they are kept on for a while in acting positions because resources are being awaited for substantive appointments. However, even if the positions are advertised, they may have the qualifications but lack other skills. 

Anyhow, let me not speculate; it will depend on the specific area we are talking about, so that we can deal with the matter more factually. As head of Government business, I am interested in getting more details about this matter so that we can handle it with the Minister of Public Service.

6.02
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to bring to the attention of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister the state of Lira-Kamdini Road. It is in a very sorry state and the road is very bad. As Government, what plans do you have to rehabilitate that road? There must be an urgent plan.
   
DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we are improving the road network in the country. In that improvement, we cannot allow a road, which is already good or was good, to deteriorate and become a problem. The road that Ndungu Okot-Ogong is talking about is in the category of roads that were good. Therefore, Government, through the Ministry of Transport and Works, will take urgent measures to ensure that that road does not deteriorate.

6.03
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a simple question for my very good Prime Minister concerning the dilapidated state of St Aloysius Core Primary Teachers College, which the President promised to renovate. From 2011 up to now, 2019, the college has been in a bad state.  The buildings are in a sorry state too. When is Government going to start the renovation of St Aloysius Core Primary Teachers College in Ngora District?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the renovation of the said Primary Teachers College (PTC) will depend on whether money is available in the budget this financial year. If the money is in the budget this financial year, it will definitely be done. If it is not, then we should focus so that money is in the budget for its repair in the following financial year. 

However, the details can be obtained from the Ministry of Education and Sports. With those details, you can go and authoritatively tell the wananchi what the plan for the repair of the core teachers college is.

6.05
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomasimbi North County, Bukomasimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, cancer is killing our people as a result of ionised radiation yet we have the National Atomic Energy Council. How is Government planning to empower this council to sensitise Ugandans on this issue?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is raising a very important point. It is true that we are faced with the problem of non-communicable diseases and cancer is a big burden. This morning, I opened the second national conference on cancer at Serena Hotel. 

The Government has put in place mechanisms to prevent cancer, because it is estimated that one-third of the cancers can be prevented and one-third can be successfully treated. It is also estimated that one-third of the people can get palliative care. In a nutshell, we need to do more education and sensitisation of the people, to tell them that cancer comes from the environment in many ways. Sometimes, it is as a result of viruses, sometimes radiation and sometimes it is from the foods that we eat and the drugs that we are associated with. Let all of us be ambassadors to spread information about cancer prevention and control, and assure people that cancer can be cured. 

I would like to tell friends that recently, there was public outcry because of the lack of radiotherapy facilities in Uganda. However, as I speak, Government has made resources available and even the Government of India has made facilities of radiation available – the Cobalt-60. Today, Uganda is standing out as the leading country in terms of having ultra-modern radiotherapy facilities in the continent. Therefore, Uganda is on the lead. Ndungu Fungaroo, Uganda is doing very well in the fight against cancer as well. 

6.09
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much. I thought I had been left out; that is why I switched position. 

I would like to appreciate Government for the residual spraying to prevent malaria in our communities. However, Mr Prime Minister, in Tororo, the success of this prevention has caused another problem of bedbugs that has made people not sleep in their houses. When will Government come up with a drug to manage both the mosquitoes as well as the bedbugs so that our people go back to their houses? Thank you. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is quite a difficult one. Well, Government is doing everything possible to fight against malaria because it is a killer disease that we should combat and defeat. 

With regard to bedbugs, I think this is a question of personal hygiene. Let me call on everybody to ensure that they are hygienic and they clean their environment; the bedbugs will disappear. 

6.10
MR GERSHOM SIZOMU (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is: What is Government doing to secure Ugandans in the face of violence in South Africa?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the incidents that appeared in the media about violence in urban South Africa are obviously regrettable. I also saw the same happening in Lagos as a reaction. These are not solutions. It merely complicates the situation. 

Fortunately, as expected, the leadership of South Africa is resolutely opposed to this type of conduct and is containing the situation. I think the solution is to ensure that not only South Africa but all our countries do all that is possible to –One, have proper upbringing of our youngsters so that they know that we are brothers and not their enemies; two, endeavour to absorb them in agricultural, industrial, and other work sectors so that they are occupied with work instead of loitering in the streets and looking for where to cause havoc and trouble.

It is a very regrettable situation and it is an attempt to bring bad blood amongst the African people and African countries. Fortunately, our relationships in Africa are too strong and too deep to be shaken by incidents of that nature. Let us deal with those incidents so that our peace, security and solidarity can remain. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the Leader of the Opposition now.

6.13
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for being here and ably answering some of the questions raised. 

There are a few comments I would like to make. The first one is about the difficulties in recovering money that is paid to Government.  Apart from the incident that has been raised by the MP for Moroto, I would like to bring to the attention of Government the difficulties in recovering bail money that is paid to court to secure temporary release of persons. This is a big problem. As it stands now, you can only access this money back when you travel to Kampala. 

I would like to advise Government to use its offices, especially the regional offices of the Attorney-General or the Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP), to be able to facilitate people who have been released by court to access their money. It is very difficult for somebody to come up to Kampala to process a refund of Shs 100,000 or Shs 200,000. Government could consider that once the courts have discharged someone, they give them an extract that can be presented to the office of the DPP, and you should be able to be paid at your level.

Secondly, I would like to marry that with the question by hon. Santa Alum on the validation of teachers. Teachers are travelling to Kampala. The services are not user friendly and as a result, there are long queues and they are being asked to pay money to be served quicker. Imagine how primary school teachers are suffering at the moment.

I would implore Government to take these services nearer to the teachers, either at the district level or at least have regional validation centres where teachers can come and be cleared at once.

On the question of the East African Civil Aviation Academy, known as Soroti Flying School, I think it is in the interest of Government to secure that facility now. With the revival of the national airline, you will need more pilot training and training of more technical staff.

The question of land grabbing at the Soroti Flying School has been around for some time. Government should move in and enforce - We want to see titles cancelled and buildings demolished because the boundaries are known. That way, we would know that Government is serious about people who are grabbing land.

The third issue is on the status of international treaties and protocols. These questions have come frequently - about two or three have been asked. I would advise that Government comes to this House to update us on the steps they are taking. If there are those you think you have reservations on, the House should be informed that Government no longer intends to pursue those ones. Inform us on the ones you have ratified and the mechanisms that are in place to ensure that they are fully domesticated. These should come here so that Members avoid asking these questions from time to time. 

On the issue of silos, you have stated that it has been left to the private sector. Well, Government had planned for it. If the private sector has taken it over, how many silos have they built and where are they located? Are they on track to achieve the target that Government had put in place? 

I would also like to comment on how contracts are managed in the country. The road from Kawempe to Kafu was mentioned. There is Tirinyi-Nakalama and now Lira-Kamdini. All these contracts have been awarded. Even Members of Parliament were invited to Soroti about six months ago to witness this. The contractor has, however, chosen to work on the Lira-Soroti section, which is okay. However, the one from Lira to Kamdini, which is very bad at the moment, has been left. If Government was more serious about better contract management and execution, we would not be in this situation with the roads.

On the issue of the state of Government institutions - primary teachers colleges have been mentioned but I would like to add universities. Many of us have gone through various universities. If you go to Makerere University now and you look at some of those halls of residence where we once were, it is terrible. You cannot even recognise the rooms you slept in. If you go to primary teachers’ colleges like Canon Lawrence PTC, the asbestos is still there. I know they have been writing to the Office of the Prime Minister about this. 

Government should be advised to take more concrete action to ensure that buildings that were left for us 40 or 50 years ago have their life prolonged by renovating them. 

Lastly, I would like to comment slightly differently from the submission from Ngora. It is true that the indoor residual spraying is good. It is not necessarily bedbugs but we have had reports that there are specific insects, even in Lira and Lango, that are new and alien and are invading homes. 

It would be advisable for Government to undertake the process of investigation to find out if it is actually true that there are these insects that are coming as a result of the sprays that are affecting the comfort of the households. If it is not, then this information could be put to the public. As it is, it is something that is very common and I think Government would be better placed to address that.

I would like to thank the Prime Minister –(Interjections)-  The bedbugs are in Tororo, I beg to correct. Thank you. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable Leader of the Opposition in Parliament for the points that he has raised. I will only make brief comments on them. 

I agree with him on the question of people having to travel to Kampala in order to get their refund from police bonds and the like. If that is the case, it should be quickly corrected. This matter will be dealt with by the minister responsible for internal affairs. It should be simplified. You do not have to travel from Koboko to Kampala for Shs 100,000. There should be better services to the people. This is the commitment of Government.

I had made some comments on the validation exercise for teachers. However, if it is such a serious problem and some people are milking teachers and getting money from them, this must be dealt with. We are going to take it up with the Minister of Education and Sports so that this problem can be dealt with.

On the East African Civil Aviation Academy in Soroti, as I had mentioned, this problem has been known. That is why about a week or two ago when we met with the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister of Works and Transport and others concerned, we suspended further transactions in terms of purchase of houses or land. This will give us time to deal with the matter, and the intention is to recover the land lost. (Applause) 

By the way, that is also an alternative international airport in case there are issues with Entebbe. Therefore, on that one, we are in complete agreement. We should not let a national asset just be grabbed by people building houses. Imagine an international airport being destroyed because of a few individuals building houses!

On the question of international treaties, I think it is a very fair comment that Government does not have to sign treaties if we have questions about them. It would be right for the minister responsible for foreign affairs to come and explain the position. I agree with you that this matter has been raised a number of times and there is no need for colleagues to continue raising this matter. We should deal with it and end it.

The other issue was on silos. I will not be able to give you the number of silos that have been built but without any doubt, I know of a significant number of silos that have been built and the trend is continuing. It is also good to encourage the private sector to invest in this area instead of expecting Government to do everything.

There was the issue of management of contracts, and you quoted the example of Soroti-Lira Road where instead of starting with the damaged part, they chose to start with the simpler part –(Interjection)- That is a new system I was not aware of. We are going to ask the Minister of Works and Transport to look into this matter so that they have tighter controls on the management of contracts and on which sections of the roads contractors should start with. There should be clear guidelines on how to manage contracts.

On the question of colleges and universities being destroyed and having asbestos, the Government must properly maintain its buildings. The policy of Government is to remove asbestos roofs from Government buildings in the country because of the carcinogenic nature of these materials. This point will be taken up. However, it is true that Government has not been a good maintainer of Government buildings, but this culture is going to change.

On indoor residual spraying, when you remove mosquitos and many other things, sometimes opportunistic issues take advantage. Let me, however, not speculate. I will request my sister, the minister in charge of health, to explain if there is truth in this speculation that bedbugs have increased because the mosquitos have gone. Were the mosquitos feeding on the bedbugs? (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, I thought the minister would require time but she has told me that she is more than ready. If that is the case, Mr Speaker, I think it would be good for Members to benefit from her knowledge, with your permission.

6.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Bedbugs existed even before we started indoor residual spraying. Therefore, it is not true that because of the indoor residual spraying, we now have bedbugs.

Mr Speaker, allow me to inform the House that during the last campaigns, one of my colleagues tried to use it against me – that I was the one who took bedbugs to Tororo. (Laughter) It, however, did not work. 

Just as the Prime Minister said, bedbugs are an issue of hygiene. If you maintain hygiene in your home – if you are clean and you have clean beddings – the bedbugs will actually –(Interjection)- Yes, they will be there but once you deal with them by ensuring that you wash your beddings and put out your beddings under the sun - You can even boil water and use it to wash your beddings. Bedbugs produce almost every night. For as long as the beddings are in a cold place, the bedbugs will continue multiplying. 

You cannot believe that we have had to deal with this. I have had to deal with them even in my home. This is because as you go to visit somebody, you come back with bedbugs. One time I took about two weeks without going home and when I went back, I did not sleep for the whole night and I had to put out everything in the sun. I had to boil water to wash the beddings. The eggs do not die that easily. We dealt with the eggs using paraffin and we do not have any bedbug in our house. Therefore, it is an issue of hygiene.

I would like to assure the Members that there is no relation between indoor residual spraying and bedbugs. Some people have actually resisted the spraying of their houses, saying we were taking them bedbugs. Let us know that this is an issue that can be dealt with if people in the home are clean. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Thank you very much, honourable members, for this interaction with the Prime Minister. I think it was beneficial despite the objection that had been raised previously. I think we have benefitted from this. We have narrowed down those concerns of Members and in one hour, we have dealt with very many of them.

This should be the way we do business – deal with issues that are active and alive with the people, for them to know that we are actually for them just like they are for us.

This House will now be adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.29 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 10 September 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
