

Wednesday, 14 September 2016

Parliament met at 2.56 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you all to this afternoon’s sitting. I apologise for starting slightly late. We had to vet the Judicial Service Commission because it has not been in place for over one year. We had planned the vetting for Monday but God decided that we go to the mosque that day. Therefore, we had to push a few things to today and that is why we are late. I hope that we shall still be able to do whatever we had planned to do.

Secondly, I would like to thank Members of Parliament and the committees, which have been busy with their work. I have been following you during your sojourns and I would like to thank you very much for the work on oversight and accountability that has been going on.  

I would like to adjust the Order Paper to defer Item No. 4(a) to tomorrow. However, I will also allow the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy to present a report, which has been outstanding for some time. 

Honourable members, in 2007, the United Nations General Assembly resolved to observe 15th September as the International Day of Democracy with the purpose of promoting and upholding the principles of democracy. That day gives us an opportunity to review the state of democracy in the world. Therefore, tomorrow, Thursday, 15 September 2016 is the International Day of Democracy and we arranged a number of activities. 

One, we had a talk show on Radio One, Spectrum Programme, on the topic, “Democracy and sustainable goals”. It was hosted on Radio One, and we had a number of panellists including hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire and the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum on Sustainable Development Goals. That has taken place. 

Two, there will be a panel discussion on democracy and Sustainable Development Goals organised by Parliament and the United Nations Development Programme. It will take place in the Parliamentary Conference Hall starting at 8.00 a.m. tomorrow and it should end by lunch time. It will attract participants from Parliament, civil society, academia, development partners, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the National Planning Authority. I invite Members to come in tomorrow morning for that.  In the afternoon, we shall have a motion for a resolution of Parliament to be followed by a debate on the role of Parliament in the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. 

You are invited to turn up so that the occasion receives the honour that is expected. We are expected to report to the Inter-Parliamentary Union about this activity towards the end of October; so it is something that we have to do in order to be able to file a report. 

Fourthly, honourable members, we have organised the Golden Jubilee Award Ceremony for Members of Parliament who served from the First Parliament to the Ninth Parliament. We have organised it together with the Presidential Awards Committee. It will take place on Monday, 26 September 2016 at the Kampala Serena Hotel starting at 8.00 a.m. 

I know that there are some Members, current and former, who already received Golden Jubilee Medals, therefore their names are not there. I am one of those and a few others. So if you do not see my name on the list, it is not because I have not been awarded but I already got mine. 

The awardees are informed to be seated before the President arrives because he is going to be the chief guest. Invitation cards and the programme will be provided separately by the Clerk’s Office. Among the list are very senior citizens, some of whom are still alive but others are dead; therefore, I would like to call upon Members who may know the families of those people to inform them so that they can come here and receive the medals posthumously.

This coming weekend, we shall host an IPU-IGAD meeting here in Uganda from 17-19 September. It is an association of Parliaments in the IGAD region, which includes South Sudan, Ethiopia, Djibouti, Eritrea, South Sudan, Kenya and Uganda. 

Honourable members, as I indicated this morning, we had the Appointments Committee meeting but there are some recurrent complaints that have been coming up over time. We had a petition from the Muslim community - probably the fourth or fifth petition - on the inequity in the nomination of members of the Judicial Service Commission, and this follows several other complaints. 

I would, therefore, like to direct the Committee on Equal Opportunities to study all the presidential appointees that require vetting by Parliament. Give us an update on the commissions and agencies and disaggregate the data according to district, ethnic group, religion, age and gender. This is because each time we vet appointments we have a lot of trouble convincing colleagues to move together with us when some communities are not represented. The Equal Opportunities Committee should, therefore, report back to Parliament before the end of September. We want this report filed before we go for recess. 

I also invite honourable members to note that on 8th October, we have the National Prayer Breakfast at Hotel Africana. We would like you to confirm your attendance by this Friday because we pay money for the chairs and the food; if you budget for 400 Members and only 100 turn up, you still have to pay. If Members are going to attend, they should confirm their availability with the Clerk. Our guest keynote speaker will be Jonathan Aitken, former Minister of Defence of the United Kingdom in Great Britain. The theme is, “We shall know them by their fruit.” 

Finally, tomorrow His Grace the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda will be coming to pray with you, honourable members. He will be here at 5 O’clock, so please be ready to come and talk to God through the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda. Thank you very much. 

Tomorrow, I will also give you a report about our visit to the Uganda North American Association (UNAA). I have not had time to complete it but I will do that tomorrow. 

We are also going to defer item No.5 as I just received a letter this morning saying that the Prime Minister is out of the country. If I had seen it yesterday, I would not have issued it on the Order Paper. We shall, therefore, not have question time but we shall do other business. Thank you very much, honourable members. 

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is that we have not received our iPads and yet some of our offices do not have operational computers. As a norm, I have always received the hard copy of the Order Paper so that I can follow the proceedings. I would like to therefore ask whether it is procedurally right to carry on with business without the Order Paper. 

THE SPEAKER: The Order Paper is a public document and it has been in the public domain for some days. However, I acknowledge that you need your iPads. I will give you an update later. I am going to check with the Clerk on what has happened, and how far. I know that they were already  imported and are in the country.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION ARISING FROM SAND MINING IN LWERA AND MAJOR WATER CATCHMENT AREAS IN KALUNGU AND MPIGI DISTRICTS

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Water and Environment was directed by your office and the Prime Minister to give a response on a matter that arose on the Floor of this House. 

Lwera wetland straddles from the district – (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The statement that is being given out is well documented on paper, but it seems that I am one of those who have not got a copy.

THE SPEAKER: The paper is around you. (Laughter) Listen carefully and then read.

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, that matter was previously referred to the Committee on Natural Resources by this House and it is under consideration. I am just wondering whether it is procedurally okay to continue with it when it is under consideration by a parliamentary committee.

THE SPEAKER: Didn’t we say that the minister brings the statement and then the committee takes it up?  I think that is what we said. We said that we needed answers from the minister and then the committee could proceed.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under our rules, a ministerial statement attracts debate. Therefore, after this statement has been read, debate will ensue and then the matter will be referred to the committee. The committee will then come up with a report and debate will ensue about the same subject. Are we not trying to do the same thing over and over again? 

Why don’t we refer this statement to the committee so that they study it comprehensively, bring a report and we debate it? As it is now, after the minister’s statement we shall have to debate this and yet the committee is actually considering the same matter and they will come up with a report, which we shall debate.

I would request, if it pleases the Rt Hon. Speaker, that the statement is referred to the committee so that the minister goes and meets the committee and the committee comes up with a report, which we shall debate finally and in one piece.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the statement anyway? (Laughter) Honourable members, there were policy issues raised when that matter first came up, but I think we needed some answers about whether this country has issued investment licences for export of sand. I think that was what we wanted to know; have we, as a country, licensed people to export sand? 

The other policy issues can go to the committee but we want to know if the Uganda Investment Authority has licensed sand to be exported from Uganda. Are they investors? Have they paid the statutory US$ 100,000 to us? That is what we want to know. Let us get those answers and then leave the rest to the committee. That is where our interest was.

Honourable members, from what I can see, the committee was instructed to go and check on whether mining is taking place. However, what we wanted to know from the Government is whether these are investors. Do they have an investment licence? Have they paid the US$ 100,000? That is what we want to know.

MS KITUTU: Madam Speaker, what I was going to present is the environmental aspect associated to this activity. I was also going to give information that sand is not a mineral and there are some shortfalls within the law. It is not yet a mineral, so there is no law that governs it. We only regulate its extraction. So you will find some of these shortfalls in the issues that will be raised.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We beg that you give us time up; to tomorrow and we will give you information regarding that investor, and the questions that you asked. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The matter is deferred to tomorrow. 

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, I rise in reference to rule 73(a), which reads, “A Member shall dress in a dignified manner that is to say- (a) a suit, a pair of long trousers, jacket, shirt and tie; a kanzu and jacket or a Safari Suit, for male Members.” 

Madam Speaker, hon. Kulayigye and another Member from Bududa, whose name I am yet to establish, are dressed differently from what is stipulated under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Are they in order to dress that way?

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Kulayigye? (Laughter) Isn’t that African attire? What rule did you mention? Honourable members, hon. Kulayigye is wearing decent traditional wear provided for under Rule 73(c). In addition, the other Member is wearing a Kaunda suit. So they are in order. (Laughter)

STATEMENT ON UGANDA’S POOR PERFORMANCE AT THE RIO OLYMPICS, 2016

3.17
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Madam Speaker, hon. Ssewanyana is away on committee duty and he has delegated me to present this statement.

Madam Speaker, as a Ugandan, a sportsman and a people’s representative, I present this statement with a heavy heart. Uganda, once again, accompanied other countries to the Rio de Janeiro Olympics, 2016 in Brazil. Uganda’s performance at the last Olympics Games in Rio de Janeiro was awful and regrettable.

Uganda was represented by a 21-man team of athletes but none of them -(Interruption)

MR SILWANY: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ssewanyana is the Shadow Minister for Sports. When someone is delegating in this Parliament, there is always evidence that there was delegation. I have the Order Paper here clearly stating hon. Ssewanyana, but I am surprised and shocked to see another person present the statement impersonating the Shadow Minister for Sports.

Is it, therefore, in order for this House to allow this honourable member to continue impersonating the Shadow Minister for Sports?

THE SPEAKER: Do you have a letter from hon. Ssewanyana?

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I hope that I will not be asked for a letter as well, but I have been delegated by the Leader of the Opposition to stand in for her today. By virtue of that delegation, I have also delegated hon. Moses Kasibante to represent the Opposition Shadow Minister for Education and Sports to deliver the statement.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.

MR KAFUUZI: I need the guidance of the Speaker. I know that it is a principle of law that a delegate does not delegate. How far shall we delegate? Can a delegate delegate to another delegate?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us look at it in this way: Is it a matter of concern to the people of Uganda? I think that is the important thing. Our failure in Rio is a matter of concern; whether it comes from a delegate who has been delegated is not important. Please, proceed.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to remind Members that our government is functional. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda’s performance at the just concluded Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro was awful and regrettable. Uganda was represented by a 21-man team of athletes and none of them got a single medal. Uganda’s sports is in limbo. In the last 50 years, Uganda has been able to win only two gold, two bronze and two silver medals in the Olympics.

As a country, we need to understand how the lack of funding, corruption and poor leadership has continued to have a negative impact on the performance of our athletes. Whereas in every athletics contest there is always a winner and a loser, it is painful when your loss is as a result of someone else not doing his or her part and expecting you, the participant, to perform miracles.

It is indeed important to note that it has become even more difficult for Ugandan athletes to excel. Uganda is a country with huge capabilities because of its talents exhibited through hard-earned performances even with the following challenges:

a)  Inadequate Funding

It is a known fact that Ugandan sportsmen and sportswomen are not well funded. The funding has been low and Government has not shown any interest in sports. 

The entire sports industry receives approximately Shs 12 billion every year. For the last four years, only Shs 400 million has been disbursed to the National Council of Sports for preparation of the Olympics Games.

Furthermore, Shs 200 million is disbursed to the National Council of Sports to facilitate more than 54 games and sports associations in the country. This means an average of Shs 3.7 million per association per year is available to be used to accommodate, train and provide per diem to various sportsmen and sports ladies who go to represent Uganda at various competitions, for example, at the All Africa Games and the Commonwealth Games.

Madam Speaker, in the just concluded Rio de Janeiro Olympics, some good participants had to be dropped as they had no air tickets. Some had no kits and some coaches were dropped, to the extent that a Ugandan team begged a Kenyan coach to stand in as a helper coach for one of our boxers, Mr Kennedy Katende, leading to his eventual knockout after one round. As a country, we need an ideal budget of around Shs 50 billion to facilitate our team.

b)  Lack of Training Facilities

Madam Speaker, as a country known to have facilities where our young talented youth can practice, those who endure intensive practice have to travel to Kenya’s high altitude training camps. 

It is imperative to note that if Uganda developed its facility at Teryet in Kapchorwa, it would provide a better altitude training venue. The Government of Uganda in 2012 excited us with news that they intended to fund the construction of Teryet training camp in Kapchorwa but to date, nothing is forthcoming.

c)  Degeneration of Sports Facilities

Madam Speaker, it is further important to note that most community sports facilities have degenerated. In some cases, land grabbers have encroached on land that had been reserved for sports and recreation purposes. This is a major threat to sports development in Uganda.

Throughout the entire country, there has been a major collapse of sports facilities and infrastructure. A number of stadia of municipalities are dilapidated; for instance, the stadia in Pece in Gulu, Masaka Recreation Grounds, Barifa in Arua, Akii-Bua in Lira, Mbale Municipal Stadium, Kakyeka in Mbarara and Bugembe in Jinja have been neglected. Nakivubo is being transformed into a shopping arcade while Namboole has no functional lights.

d)  Heavy Taxes 

If additional funding to sports is a little bit constrained, the alternative would be offering tax exemptions to sports. The 18 per cent VAT levied on sports equipment and kits should be waived. 

International sports federations and donors often provide national associations/federations with sports equipment in form of aid. However, the high taxes on such equipment at times makes our associations fail to pay taxes and we end up losing the aid. There is a need to waive taxes on sports equipment in order to promote sports.

e) Absence of Structures at Districts 

District sports councils were originally established to ensure grassroots identification and development of sportsmen and sports ladies from their districts. However, the district sports councils are no longer functional due to neglect by the ministry responsible.

f)  Poor Talent Identification Systems 

Madam Speaker, Government does not have any sports academy to identify and develop talents in the country. Parastatals and corporate companies, save for the few, no longer sponsor sports as part of their corporate social responsibility. Thus, this is one of the key challenges retarding the development of sports in Uganda.

I, therefore, ask Parliament to urgently exempt VAT on all sports equipment and task the Minister of Education and Sports to: 

1. 	Revive appropriate funding to district sports councils and sports academies; 
2. 	Resist any encroachment on various sports facilities; 
3. 	Increase sports funding to at least Shs 50 billion per year for a start.

 I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.29
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kasibante for presenting the statement from hon. Allan Ssewanyana, the Shadow Minister for Education and Sports.

Madam Speaker, this is rather a unique situation, which could be unprecedented, where a shadow minister is allowed to bring a statement concerning his or her docket. Therefore, I would like to request that I present this statement to the Minister of Education and Sports. This is because she did not get a copy and yet we normally give copies to our colleagues so that they can respond. It is on record that one time, a colleague from that side did not get a copy and extra time was awarded to him. 

I am not asking for much, Madam Speaker. I would like to request that you allow me to present this statement to the Minister of Education and Sports so that she gives her response because the statement has touched on many areas. I would like to thank you for having raised these concerns. Many issues have been raised including the budget, performance and the pledges that Government has made. I pray that we allow the minister to bring a statement explaining these issues and then we debate as it will do us good. This is my prayer, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this statement is majorly stating facts. Have we got more than two gold medals? No. If we have, then you say, “Yes we have got seven”. Do we have adequate funding? We have debated this in the House and said, no, we do not have adequate funding. Do we have stadia, which are working? No. Let us debate it because this does not require a policy response from the minister. The stadia are either there or not. Is Teryet ready or not? That is what we have to debate.

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a statement on Uganda’s poor performance in the Olympics by hon. Allan Ssewanyana, Shadow Minister for Education and Sports. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Members, let us use 30 minutes and each Member will take three minutes. Hon. Adeke, did you want to say something?

3.32
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative): I am most obliged, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for articulating the challenges in sports properly and I would like to add information regarding the identification facilities, specifically, in regard to the ones that we have in place.

Madam Speaker, our education system is supposed to help us identify talents and nurture them. However, with the increased privatisation of the education sector, many private schools are neglecting the development of sports talents among students. While the report is given to the Minister of Education and Sports, I think it is imperative to carefully note that we have lost our grip on the education sector, which is supposed to be one of the sectors that nurture sports talents. 

It is also important that our Government thinks twice about controlling the manner in which they educate our students, without paying regard to the development of talents. Thank you.

3.34
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank hon. Ssewanyana and the delegate who presented this statement. This statement comes in timely and offers us an opportunity to evaluate ourselves as a country in as far as these international games are concerned. 

First, I congratulate the athletes who represented Uganda. Ill prepared as they were, they did their best to represent their country. Secondly, I would like to congratulate Uganda Cranes for breaking the jinx after over 38 years to finally qualify for the Africa Cup of Nations.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, games and sports are one of the highest earning ventures in the current international economy. However, as a country, we are under-looking this. The questions that hon. Ssewanyana raises in his statement are very valid questions that we, as a country, must respond to. 

These countries that got medals in the recent Olympics have facilities that are close to the exact facilities that are used in these competitions. As a country, how many do we have? Sometimes we prepare our youth in facilities that are not anywhere close to Olympics standards. Therefore, the outcome is obvious. 

The call for budgetary support is rightly made on the Floor of this Parliament. This is where we allocate resources and this is where decisions are made. Therefore, one of my resolutions is for us, as a Parliament, not to shy away from our responsibilities of allocating resources where they deserve to be. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Katoto comes up, I heard unconfirmed rumours yesterday that the Uganda Cranes were promised US$ 10,000 after winning but they were given only US$ 1,000. Can somebody confirm this matter? I am really concerned.

3.37
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the shadow minister for bringing this statement because it concerns all of us. 

I will call this Government negligence because this Government does not care about sportsmen. Some time back, there were people who used to identify talents at the subcounty level. The reason as to why we lose is not because we do not have talents but because we lack someone to identify those talents, and develop them. There are many talented people in the villages that can do a lot to put this country where it is supposed to be. What has Government done? 

We are blamed as Members of Parliament, for taking a lot of money when we organise tournaments when we are actually conduits. 

Madam Speaker, I urge the Government to wake up. If it were a matter of development of talents, Uganda would be rich. If we had a footballer worth £39 million and someone is earning -(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. We have a boy who plays with Uganda Cranes called Oloya. When I started organising inter subcounty football tournaments, he played with us in Amuru and he was the one planning for the tournaments. Right now, he plays for Uganda Cranes. 

Further information I would like to give you is that when Kiprotich won the gold medal in 2012, the minister came to the Floor of this Parliament and committed himself to constructing the best training grounds in Kapchorwa. Up to now, I do not know where that commitment went. In Uganda, we are very good at making commitments but we do not fulfil them. Thank you.

MR KATOTO: Thank you very much for the information. Madam Speaker, that is the extent - I will give an example of one of our Members of Parliament who is seated here. He went to compete in the Olympics but he had to borrow a pair of shoes from a Kenyan. He is right there. Can you imagine borrowing shoes! (Laughter) I think we have to do a lot more. 

Madam Speaker, our stadiums, if not sold, are rotten. I implore the Government to investigate and find out if we still have Nakivubo. We were training there one day and it rained; I wish someone saw what happened there. There was sewage all over the place. Do we have stadiums or markets? (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I enjoy football. I know that Didier Drogba has built three hospitals in Ivory Coast. 

3.41
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ssewanyana for the report that he has laid on the Floor of Parliament. This is kisanja hakuna muchezo and I would like to thank the Minister of Education and Sports because she was there when the Uganda Cranes were playing.

Madam Speaker, I come from Butaleja and for the record, the person who scored the goal was called Miya and he is a Munyole. (Laughter) It is not a crime for a Munyole to come from Butaleja and move to another place.

Madam Speaker, in view of the identified challenges, I would like to propose that Government supplies sports items like netballs and footballs to every village; we shall see this country prospering. Thank you.

3.43
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As a country, we are “blind” and we cannot see where our gold is. We are privileged to travel beyond our borders and if you see how much sports people earn, it is something you will admire.

Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that we are talking about lack of funding for the sports department. Instead of complaining here, let it be one of our resolutions, after this debate, that we would like Government to come with an increased budget for sports.

Madam Speaker, the problem we have is the procedure of identifying talents in this country. Where there is money, people bring in their friends and in-laws and leave out deserving people. This House has been informed before that even when we have a team of sportspersons going out of the country, you find friends going instead of sportspeople. 

I organise the Mama Mabira Tournament in Kitgum and we fund it to make sure that those children come up. However, nobody goes there to identify them. Actually, they bypass Kampala to go and play in Nairobi.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, rather than talking too much, we would like concrete resolutions from Government. Let the minister come and give us –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you so much, hon. Anywar, for giving way. The information I would like to give in regard to the statement that has been presented is that, this whole aspect of promoting sports in Uganda cuts across parties. As we debate the status of sports in Uganda, it is the only thing that brings everyone together - tall, short, brown, NRM, UPC or DP. 

The status of sports in Uganda is still wanting and we should all stand united and come up with a keen way forward in terms of delivering. In Parliament here, we applaud the Speaker because we have initiated sports and there are serious football and netball clubs here. This means that if we set a standard in the House of Parliament -

THE SPEAKER: You are smuggling a contribution. 

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is, like hon. Anywar has mentioned, we must set a very good pace for sports and we have started in Parliament. 

Can we give better allocation to sports? I think that Government has the commitment because there is a Ministry of Education and Sports but how can we increase allocation to sports so that we make it a vibrant activity right from the primary schools? Thank you.

3.48
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I look at sports as a profession. Every year in this country, we produce doctors, lawyers and engineers. What happens to the sports persons? What happened to this country that it does not produce talents? Is there a problem or the problem is with organisation and leadership?

Sports is the best ambassador you can have. Today, the Rt Hon. Speaker is talking about Didier Drogba; I am sure that three quarters of the honourable Members of Parliament know about him. If you go to West Africa and ask them who Farouk Miya is, nobody knows him except the Member of Parliament from Bunyole, maybe. You just have to go to Europe and when you are talking about Africa, they will refer you to Nigeria, Senegal or Cameroon because of the sports accomplishments of those countries. 

Look at our sports budget; you cannot talk about Shs 200 million to provide to the sector. I even wonder what hon. Bakabulindi is doing in that ministry. Other than driving our car, he is doing nothing. When we were young, some of you who are our age know that every school had what we used to call a discus. How many of you go to your schools and find equipment for javelin, shot-put or discus provided by the ministry to the rural schools? Ugandans cannot even throw a javelin - that spear-like instrument - because we have not provided opportunity and leadership. We are not getting our priorities correct.

We must thank hon. Ssewanyana for providing suggestions. To develop talent, you need to look at young people in their schools and at youth sports projects. Where are they? Somebody sits in an office as a minister in charge of sports and every year he returns zero medals while moving around with a car and a flag. You also jump on a plane to Rio and you are going there as a tourist.

Madam Speaker, we need to get serious. As hon. Amongin said, you just need to see what happens when the Uganda Cranes play; all sorts of colours and manner of Ugandans sing one name - Uganda.  There is only one thing that unites this country today and that is sports. However, we just get Shs 200 million and give the sector; it is quite unfortunate.

I hope now that we have a unique Minister of Education and Sports, I would like to repeat - (Member timed out.)

3.51
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute on this matter. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to start by congratulating and thanking you for being a good example to other institutions in this country. Here in Parliament, you are promoting sports and we have many Members here who are participating. The benefit of sports cannot be underestimated.

Madam Speaker, in spite of your busy schedule and everything that you have to do, you are still our centre girl and that is a very important example to all the young people of this country. The young people can benefit enormously from sports - the health benefits, the earnings and the benefit of advertising our country worldwide. 

I would like to talk about absence of sports structures, right from the district level up to the national level. Madam Speaker, if you had time to go to schools around the country, you would find that there are football pitches without goalposts, there are no netball rings in all these Government schools. It is not only the private schools - 

THE SPEAKER: Let me remind honourable members to continue mentioning your names and constituencies for the Hansard.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: I would like to thank hon. Alum for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that when you look at the major Government development plans from the National Development Plan, the PRDP and the rest, you do not see the intention to develop sports in this country. It is not reflected anywhere. That shows a big problem with our planning in this country. 

I even tried to look for the meaning of this phrase, “Hakuna mchezo” - this is not the time for playing. That summarised how we neglect sports because sports is about playing. (Laughter) Now if you start saying, hakuna mchezo, it means that all along we have been -(Laughter)

MS ALUM: Thank you, honourable member, for giving us that practical example. Madam Speaker, I am very upset that we are discussing this very important matter and we do not have the minister in charge of education present - (Interruption)

COL KULAYIGYE: Madam Speaker, I stand to inform the honourable member that “hakuna muchezo” means that there is no joke, not playing. Playing is a different matter altogether. (Laughter)

4.56
MR JULUIS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very tough motion and I feel like shedding tears when we are talking about sports. 

I would like to share this: In 1989, I ran 72 kilometres from Otuke to Lira because I wanted to achieve a scholarship and to make my life good. I won three races the next day and I was granted a scholarship to Makerere College School. 

In 1994, I was the only Ugandan long-distance runner chosen to represent the country at the World Junior Athletics Championships. I flew to Portugal without shoes. Uganda could not afford to give me shoes. I borrowed shoes from a Kenyan friend and I won a gold medal in the 1,500 metres –(Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is very important. 

MR ACON: When I won the gold medal, I came back and I was still not honoured. However, the United States gave me a scholarship. I won the gold medal without my own shoes, but today as I speak, the Nike Company gave me sponsorship for life and they pay me for life. I saved that money for 12 years and in the year 2012, I built a health centre III in Otuke, the second health centre III. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I ask this House to rise up for our country. I competed in two Olympics Games but we would get only US$ 100 for four years. When you train, you get only US$ 100 as a salary. 

I am saying this with a lot of emotion but I am glad that I made it to Parliament. I want to make everybody wake up for the good of our sportspeople who are representing this country. We should not wait for someone to win a medal to be recognised, and then within 24 hours, they are forgotten.

As sportsmen, we live a deplorable life after we win and make the country proud; we are forgotten. Davis Kamoga, for example, won a medal in the 1996 Olympics; he was the third. In the 1997 World Championships, he was the second. Today, he has been forgotten and is walking on the streets. Dorcus Inzikuru won a gold medal for Uganda in 2007 but today, she can barely afford to eat one meal in a day. 

There are very many sportsmen at the grassroots. We need to bring back those institutions, which used to give scholarships to athletes, such as Makerere College School, Lango College –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, use two more minutes.

MR ACON: I thank everybody for supporting this motion, and I especially thank the shadow minister who brought up this topic. I would like to suggest that a real sportsperson be placed in that ministry because we have been allocated to a different sector, and they often forget us. There are about 1,000 sportsmen in this country that can run and win gold medals, but they often end up taking officials in their place. Officials are normally more than the sportsmen. (Applause)

In the recently concluded Olympics, there were 25 officials and only 20 sportspeople. Whereas each of them was given only US$ 200, the officials received over US$ 3,000.

Madam Speaker, I would like to prepare so that next time, I can present an official motion. I would like to conclude by saying, for God and my country; I will stand to fight for other people. Thank you. (Applause)

4.00
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono South County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Having heard from a sportsman, I am here to ask what the appointing authority has done for Uganda. This is because when you look at the Minister of State for Sports, he is becoming perennial. Sports needs innovation. If that minister cannot perform, let us get another minister, instead of putting a minister in a sector where he is not bothered at all about anything, apart from travelling.

The sports sector needs innovation. Even if our budget is small, we can still get money from business people and from other people who are interested. Look at Namboole; if you ask how much was collected from the recent Uganda Cranes game, you will not get the figures because the minister is not bothered. Hon. Bakabulindi has overstayed in that ministry and something must be done by the appointing authority. (Laughter)

4.02
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we discuss this contentious issue, I want to thank hon. Kasibante for bringing it up. As everybody else has stated, sports unites all of us, as Ugandans. 

I would like to say that I have personally visited some stadia. I have been to Pece Stadium in Gulu as well as Bugembe Stadium. However, they are in a sorry state and Government needs to rehabilitate them.

Uganda cannot organise international sports tournaments because we do not have facilities. We have only one facility - Namboole Stadium - which is at international level. I would like to urge Government to come on board so that we have more facilities like Namboole, and also organise international sports tournaments and games.

Madam Speaker, since this matter has come up, it would have been better to have the Minister of Education and Sports here. Unfortunately, she is not here. However, like hon. Muyanja has said, if someone overstays in a particular ministry and is not performing, something can, and must be done. (Laughter) Thank you. 

4.04
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I will start by thanking the honourable member who brought this motion. 

Honourable members, when our athletes were in Rio, we expected our national anthem to be sung as it was the case last time, but we waited in vain. I know that the major problem we have is the problem of funds. As we were debating last time, if we do not invest much, like is the case with any business, we cannot expect a lot of profit; so, bigger investment will result into bigger profits.

I want to give you information. I come from a region where the high altitude stadium is supposed to be constructed. For Members who may not know, I am the Woman MP for Kween District. When you see the work that is currently going on, we shall have to wait for very many years. As Members of Parliament, our responsibility is to budget; let us stand our ground and ensure that funds are actually allocated to this sector. Currently, very little money is allocated at a time. 

Honourable members, you will remember that when Kiprotich won a gold medal, Government promised to give athletes some allowance. They said that for every medal that was brought, the winners would be given an incentive so that they can use it for training in Kenya because our people train in Kenya. However, it is unfortunate that this money has not been coming regularly as expected. The last time they received it was in November 2015 and from that time up to today they have not been getting any money.

Honourable members, if we promise these athletes and then fail to fulfil our promise, that becomes –(Interruption)

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, I am a sportsman and I play No.2 in the Parliamentary Football Team. The information I would like to give is in regard to support to sportsmen and sportswomen. 

In Nwoya County, we have the memory of the first female athlete who won a gold medal in 1970. She was called Judith Ayaa. She died in a quarry as a result of being hit by stones. When her son tried to emulate his mother’s talent by building his sports career - he was practising and training in a harsh environment he was picked by the rebels and we never saw him again. To that family, sports is a curse and it has become a curse to so many sportsmen and women in this country. This is because they are neglected. 

The information I would like to give is, in Lira, we are able to get the likes of hon. Acon because there is a stadium that has been named after Akii-Bua. There are also so many roads that have been named after Akii-Bua. As I speak today, I have been to Kween and Bukwo and there is no single road that has been named after Stephen Kiprotich or Moses Kipsiro. Why don’t we honour such people by naming cities or roads after them? In Kampala here, there are certain roads named after Indians who have been known for selling pancakes. They have not promoted the country in any way apart from that small revenue. That is the piece of information I wanted to give. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from your neighbour from Kapchorwa as well. Your time is up; you gave it away.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are talking about a very important issue of sports and Members of Parliament are lamenting. We want action to be taken. Taking a look at the frontbench, we do not see any Minister of Education and Sports here. I do not know who we are talking to. 

Madam Speaker, is it, therefore, procedurally right for us to continue speaking to ourselves, yet nobody is listening to us to give a response? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the main issue here is funding. The minister in charge of money is here, so let us continue. 

4.10
MR KENNETH SOYEKWO (Independent, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Madam Speaker, I have supplementary information to share with the House. I come from Kapchorwa where most of the athletes also originate. I have been interacting with them and there are a number of problems that they face. One, they do not have a fulltime coach to help them train. I, therefore, suggest that we should get both a female and male fulltime coach to guide the athletes. This will yield good results in future. 

At one time, we had a Kenyan coach who tried to identify talent in Kapchorwa. He had a unique criterion of identifying talent. He would con the young girls, take them to his room and defile them. In his opinion, that was the first criteria for them to qualify as athletes. At the end of the day, most of these young girls were infected with HIV and we lost most of them. Therefore, I suggest that we look for both male and female full-time coaches.                

I also have information that most of our athletes that are performing well are being sold to other countries such as South Korea and USA. These other countries are benefiting at the expense of we, Ugandans, who are producing these people.   Therefore, if that issue could also be revisited, it would help us improve on the motion that has been presented today. 

These athletes are also poorly facilitated; they have no accommodation and food. I actually cater for some of them in Kampala. With the little money I get from Parliament, I provide for some of them as most of them come from upcountry, and we need to care for these people for the good of our country. 

In addition, these athletes do not train early enough. So, in the end, they are not ready to compete on the international scene. Their coaches train them for only two weeks before a competition. Two weeks is not enough for an athlete to compete and win medals for the country. 

We need to look at this and put into consideration the fact that these athletes need more time to prepare themselves. Those who have been qualifying have been training themselves outside Uganda. They have been sponsoring themselves to go to Kenya using their own money. However, we still have others who can do even better than these ones. I wish Government could put some effort into this for better results.

Finally -(Member timed out.) 

4.13
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Madam Speaker, this is a wonderful statement. Honourable members, as we condemn and raise hands, some of us have been in the sports fraternity and have lived it. I have not heard of a single nation where the foster mother for sports is the Government. Government only opens up the surroundings and makes them favourable by inviting the private sector to invest in sports. 

By the way, what happened in Britain recently was that the Government totally refused to invest anymore, for example in stadia. Government should give tax leverage to those companies that are ready to invest in sports. If you encourage Government parastatals to compete with private individuals, sports will collapse.

I was running a football club and I was competing against Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA). Kampala City Council Authority had a budget of Shs 7 billion and it was competing against us with a budget of Shs 300 million or Shs 200 million per annum. There is also URA. These are sports clubs that do not have as many followers as you may think. Sports is supported by people who come out to fill stadia. 

Secondly, Government at times contributes some funds to sports associations but those running these sports associations are letting this country down. Like the honourable from Otuke said, the money is swindled by officials. Madam Speaker, you said that you heard that they had been promised US$ 10,000 but they might have received US$ 1000. No sportsman can come out to say that because of fear of reprimand, that they might not be put on the team that will be taken to Gabon for the Africa Cup of Nations. 

Therefore, there is a lot swimming below sports than we are yet to hear. This issue emanated from the Rio Olympics. How many disciplines were competed for and how many disciplines were we, as a country, able to present? Do I need Government to help me in promoting the throwing of the javelin? In Kenya, the current gold medallist that went for javelin did not even train. Therefore, let us encourage it from here through legislation and –(Member timed out.)

4.17
MR OGWANG PETER (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the sportsmen of this country and I would like to make this statement – I wish the Government Chief Whip was here: When we talk about sports, it does not know political parties. 

I am happy that the motion specifically identifies critical areas where we, Members of Parliament, can put our weight. We have talked enough. I remember that there were critical issues regarding the budget for the Ministry of Health in the Ninth Parliament and we put ourselves at the forefront. We were able to raise Shs 49.3 billion because we told Government that we were not going to pass the budget unless this money was identified.

I would like to take this opportunity to urge and request my colleagues who are here; we cannot continue speaking and letting our country down. We can no longer wait; we want results. My brother, hon. Acon, has talked about sports personalities. Let us talk about the heroes of 1978 - the Uganda Cranes players. How many of us have even bothered to identify them? I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, because the Parliamentary Football Club is the only club that still employs one of those gallant heroes who participated in the finals of 1978. I really would like to implore you to take time off and meet those personalities who are still alive.

Look at the family of the late Majid Musisi. I grew up as a soccer fan and I remember that Majid Musisi was my dream player. Every young football player in Uganda would love to be like him. Where is he now? Where is his family? Is there anybody looking after these people? Look at Paul Hasule from Bunyole; he was one of the former players of Uganda Cranes in 1978.

I would like to conclude by saying that hon. Nsereko has made a point but I would like – (Interruption) - Can I just make this point and then I give you a chance? The only thing I would like to tell Government and the Minister of Education and Sports, Maama Janet Museveni, concerns the point made by hon. Ebaju. We have very many private schools today without sports facilities; why are they given licences to operate? (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute, honourable commissioner.

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I remember a case that was cited about molesting our children in schools. We put our feet down here, Government acted and some of these schools, to my knowledge, have been closed. 

I, therefore, would like to request the same Government that I support on the issue of sports facilities for our children, for the young people of this country - Sports can solve the problem of unemployment of the young people of this country. Can we begin closing up schools, which do not have facilities for sports in the country? I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Kaberuka comes, I want to say that hon. Ogwang is right. We have not done much for the very senior sportsmen. However, I would like to inform you that when Parliament was celebrating our golden jubilee, we invited them, played football with them and had dinner with them. However, I admit that after that, we have not done much. We should look out for them.

4.22
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi West County, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you very much for allowing this motion to be presented. I saw the Leader of the Opposition struggling to get it presented, but you have seen that it is a national matter and not a party issue. When we talk about national issues, we do not talk about parties. We mobilise in politics but it is now about national development. 

I would like to say that the other day I saw a debate on television where the Government was represented by the Minister of Education and Sports. She clearly said that the issue of the golf course is not under her docket. What is under your docket as the Minister of Education and Sports? If we continue in self-denial as a Government, where are we heading? 

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, because when there are many issues, we think that they are party issues but we have seen that this one is touching us all at the end of the day. These people who have made it have done so on their own. The Government does not entirely support this aspect of sports right from childhood. Can we commit Government to ensure that district sports councils are revamped? That way, we can get competition from all over the country as a policy of Government.

The National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) is giving Members of Parliament seeds. Can we also have Members of Parliament participate in sports and also get footballs and go down to the grassroots? We need to get facilitation from Government to promote sports and have it as a national agreeable commitment. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.25
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to congratulate and thank hon. Nakiwala Kiyingi for bankrolling Express FC. Thank you very much. Secondly, I would like to also thank and pay tribute to hon. Bernard Atiku, who is bankrolling Onduparaka FC. Thank you very much.

My dear colleagues, Nelson Mandela, one of our great statesmen one time said that, sports has got the capacity to unite nations, unite people and also make people become nationalistic and patriotic. He went ahead to say that sports develops hard work, it reconciles people and it also has the capacity to unite everybody in a given country. 

I would also like to congratulate the Uganda Parliament. From 2011 up to 2015, Parliament has been getting trophies from the inter-parliamentary East African Community Games. Thank you very much, Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

My recommendations are as follows: One, selections to national teams for athletics and football should strictly be on merit; two, as alluded to by somebody, there should be no sexual harassment when our girls are being trained in these camps; three, all promises by Government to athletes or footballers who have excelled should be fulfilled. This will gives impetus and encourage these members to excel more.

Notwithstanding that, Madam Speaker, we should also continue giving rewards to those who excel as alluded to by -(Interruption)

MS AMULE: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that when we were asking the Government Chief Whip if this issue can be discussed today, you alluded to the points that were written down and they were about seven, and all of us agree that they are true. I think what is best for the House to discuss now is the urgent need for funding. If there is lack of funding, what can we now do?

We appreciate the fact that all other sectors in Government need funding, yet funds are not enough. Now that we do not have enough money, is it necessary for us to levy high taxes on the department of sports? How do we attract foreign investors or any other investors? How best do we identify - I think it is all about prioritising the sector, and Government should decide on what it can do first, so that we begin from step one as we climb the ladder. Thank you.

4.28
MR CLEMENT OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by giving information to reinforce hon. Peter Ogwang’s point about the gallant heroes of 1978. 

From that team which played for Uganda and nearly won the Africa Cup of Nations in 1978, only three of them are alive today; the average age of the rest at the time of their death was 51.9. This tells you that even after playing for Uganda to that level, these men came back and lived ordinary lives. There was no recognition from the Government for what these people had done for our country. Apart from a few like Obua, most of them died and walked away quietly into the night without any recognition. 

This is a big indictment on our sports curriculum. It starts right from nurturing this talent. Our curriculum is not designed to nurture talent. It is designed to identify natural talent. This is why sports’ competitions in our schools will run for only a period of two weeks and they are over. You cannot nurture talent in two weeks; you only identify natural talent. The Julius Acons, who are gifted, can be identified in two weeks

Right now as the Premier League is going on from August to May, there are leagues going on in schools, which run for nine months. These give students time to develop until they become athletes representing their country. Some of the athletes you saw in Rio de Janeiro were high school students, especially those from the USA and UK. 

While we are talking of funding, we should also talk about how we identify and nurture talent. I am not a very good athlete but I want to give you an example of myself. One of my coaches in the USA made me run 400 metres. For the first time, I ran it in 52 seconds; after nine months, I was able to run the 400 metres in 48 seconds. I cut off four seconds - (Member timed out.)

4.31
MS SARAH KITYO (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise. We have talent and we all know that. However, we need to go an extra mile. Let us not look at sports only but all talents. We have very many young people who can sing but have no money to go to studios to record their music. If Government can only partner with those studios that are already there and pay them little money, I think these talents can be nurtured. Alternatively, we can set up a regional studio, which I think is cheaper.

Concerning sports, we already have academies in the country but they are very expensive for those talented people. If Government could partner with those academies, those talented young people would be helped. Thank you very much.

4.33
DR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have previously had an opportunity to manage a football club in the UK. I saw what it takes to achieve success in the West. I have also had the opportunity of seeing what is happening here. Sport is something that unites us all. It brings together the young and the old, women and men and even the people with disability. Therefore, in talking about this, I think we should do it as something beyond political parties.

I would like to appeal that this should not be seen as a criticism of Government or the Ministry of Education and Sports. I take courage because from the kisanja hakuna mchezo, we are seeing some early fruits. At least, we have seen the Uganda Cranes succeeding. Recently, I was in Kapchorwa as part of the Committee on Natural Resources to see the work being done on the high altitude centre in Kapchorwa. This is something that is very encouraging and very soon coming on board.

However, we have made serious mistakes in the past. We have waited until somebody has brought himself up and then after seeing that success, it has awakened us from some deep slumber and we have said, “This is the support we are giving you now”.

We need to nurture this talent. That brings in the question: How are we nurturing talents in this country? How are we identifying them? How are we harnessing them?

There is also the question which I think is coming up more and more often - What are the resources being invested in this? However, it is very important to recognise that the issue is not just about the resources that are being invested in this, but also about the whole culture around sports and how we are committed to seeing people succeeding. There is also the issue of how we are looking at performance. 

Lastly, what is our culture around the innovativeness in this area? Madam Speaker, this is a rare opportunity that we have as Parliament. We now have the opportunity to talk about this after a big failure, which I think is a rude awakening to all of us. Why are we failing? Let it go on record that after the failure in Rio, Parliament of Uganda awakened to the reality of what is happening around sports and set up a select committee to inquire in the matters of sports in this country and came up with clear recommendations. I get a sense of willingness on the part of Government to ensure that action is taken somehow to raise the sports flag in this country. Thank you.

4.34
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank hon. Ssewanyana for coming up with this statement. 

I think Government was a bit embarrassed and that is why they did not come to make a statement on the Floor of Parliament. We were here in the Ninth Parliament when Kiprotich sat up there and we were all very excited. Even the President organised a dinner for him and gave him a car. They promised that they are going to work on the training grounds in Kapchorwa. Our neighbours complained that Kiprotich was able to win and snatch the gold from them because he had trained in Kenya, with people like Kipchoge, Kipsiro and many others.

If this Government had put money into sports, definitely we would not have been embarrassed. We would have come with something from Rio. It is very embarrassing when you hear the figures that are put in sports, and even more so, for a country like Uganda where we even send more officials than sportsmen. If I were the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the Prime Minister, I would not have approved that money. Imagine you send more sports officials than the number of sportsmen and sportswomen. What are they going to do? They just fight for allowances, which is very embarrassing to this country.

Madam Speaker, if this Government was interested in sports - Look at Lugogo and you will see Forest Mall, Shoprite and Game; that is the place where we used to play. All those places are gone. Look at Shimoni; it had a playground but it is gone. Our Government is not interested in sports at all.

When you look at small countries like Togo, which have got famous players - when these players come back, they do something in their countries. Why can’t our Government see this for once and do something for Ugandans?  When the Uganda Cranes won their game last time - what is surprising is that Micho has not been paid and even our players. The son of the late Obua spoke the truth and said, “Mr President, we have not been paid allowances.”.He was thrown out of the team simply because he spoke the truth. The man was a very good scorer; his left leg was very strong but they threw him out of the team because he spoke the truth.

Madam Speaker, sports brings all of us together regardless of our parties. It promotes the name of Uganda. It is the best ambassador all over the world. Look at Usain Bolt from Jamaica, a small country, but -(Member timed out.)

4.40
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ssewanyana although he is not here. 

Madam Speaker, sometime back, a whole Prime Minister moved a motion to recognise Kiprotich when he won. The Bible says you must give thanks in good and bad times alike. In the bad times, when we did not perform very well, Government chickened out and kept quiet. Actually, this would be the best time that Government would bring us a motion so that we audit ourselves and see what has gone wrong. 

A gentleman sang a song and said, “I can feel the spirit of the nation; I can feel my wings over the wind” –(Laughter)– Why? It is because sports can make you feel the spirit of the nation, the spirit of this very country that we are living in. When I was at Namboole, I shed tears profusely for almost 30 minutes and I did not know that lights were going off in Namboole. I was just clapping my hands and my tears were flowing. Why? These are gentlemen who are underfunded and very disorganised. 

However, I need to appreciate the work Mr Salim Saleh did by putting these guys in the best place where they would have discipline, train well, and even go to the pitch. We were about to lose it because Mr Magogo comes and says, “You are going to get $10,000” and someone says, “No, you are going to get US$ 1,000.” The team was almost divided the day before the match. That is how we have always been losing it. One, we lost to Kenya because Obua asked, “How much are you going to give us; what is the deal here?” They said “there is no money; we will talk later.” Madam Speaker, just like you have mentioned, where is the US$ 10,000? Micho has never been paid.

Madam Speaker, Kanu Nwankwo is an ambassador of heart disease; why? It is because of sports. George Weah from Liberia, for all the years he was playing in Europe one day sponsored and funded all the players of the country. That is the importance of sports. 

Now, back to Uganda, the question I would like to ask is not even about the funding; do we have any comprehensive policy on talent identification, development and nurturing? We do not have any policy. We were very good in acrobatics and gymnastics at the time of President Amin; what has happened? Don’t we have the waists to wiggle or to do the things we used to do? We have them but simply because it is sports in Uganda, we are only demanding for a little - we are asking for football, netball, athletics, rugby which is limping. This is what we are asking from Government. However, we can –(Interruption).

MS JACQUELINE AOL: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is just information. I also feel like crying alongside hon. Acon. For our information, I think the people who have been reading newspapers and other colleagues who are saying we need to have coaches down at the grassroots know this. The only coach we have for Uganda Cranes was thrown out because of rent. What about the ones at that level? We really need to do something about this, as Parliament. Thank you. 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, to conclude, I would like to ask that we invite the coach, Micho, and the Uganda Cranes to be recognised. They must come here and we recognise them. That is not the end of the road. They must go well motivated to represent us after 38 years -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that, there is a substantive motion already in the Speaker’s Office to pay tribute to the Uganda Cranes and the entire entourage. We are just waiting as Parliamentary Football Club to be listed on the Order Paper.

The second piece of information that I would like to give is that I was also in Namboole and at the time the Uganda Cranes scored, I was overwhelmed. I do not know how I beat security but I found I was even shaking hands and jumping together with the First Lady. (Laughter)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, in conclusion - (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I actually did not want to speak but hon. Odonga Otto has forced me to raise a point of order. The last bit of his communication was done in sign language? Is it in order for him to hug the First Lady? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, what did you do with the First Lady?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Can he withdraw with an apology, Madam Speaker?

MR ODONGA OTTO: For the record, Madam Speaker, when the goal was scored, I was there with hon. Karooro Okurut and hon. Bakabulindi; we held our hands, jumped and rejoiced together. There were even photographs taken. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: We have spent more time on this matter than we had allocated.

4.47
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Since the sports sector has been neglected, it has impacted on us as Members of Parliament. When we go to our constituencies, everybody is asking for uniforms or balls. To solve that problem once and for all, we need to ensure that more money is given to the sector so that the impact on us is sorted out.

The other day, the RDC of Buhweju and the Chairperson LCV called me and said “our team is going to Kapchorwa for mountain running and the district has no money”. So, I had to fund the team from Buhweju to Kapchorwa and back. You can imagine what you have to go through as a Member of Parliament to fund a team, given the meagre resources –(Interruption)

MS ADOA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add to what the honourable member has just said. As some Members have said, sports is all about MPs and other politicians down there. For Serere, you cannot see any uniform or ball. Hon. Okupa has been the only person giving uniforms and balls and sincerely, it has become the work of a Member of Parliament.

Therefore, I propose that Parliament makes sure the Ministry of Education and Sports puts some special budget for sports. This budget should help in identifying the talented young footballers and other talents. Thank you.

MR MWIJUKYE: Madam Speaker, to do away with the pressure we get from constituencies when people ask us for balls and uniforms or to sponsor tournaments, we need to ensure that the Ministry of Education and Sports comes out with better ways of funding the sector so that this problem can be resolved once and for all.

The other day, I saw team managers and players running to the President of the Republic of Uganda asking him to bail them out. If the President was not around, what would have happened? They either run to the Members of Parliament or the President for bailout. This must be sorted out once and for all. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.51
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Many colleagues have talked about some of the gallant sons and daughters who have excelled in different sports in this country. Do we know where they are? Why can’t we sit down and come up with an inventory of where these people are? 

I suggest we group them in associations; we have footballers, athletes and other sportspersons, for example, Catherine Webombesa from Mbale and Inzikuru, among others. I wish we could group these people in associations. Let the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development collaborate with the Ministry of Education and Sports to find some form of micro-financing for these groups so that they earn a decent living as veterans who have contributed to this country.

Madam Speaker, the other issue is talent search, which colleagues have talked about. I suggest that the Minister of Education and Sports comes up with a clear and deliberate programme of talent search, such that -(Interruption)

MR MUTEBI: Madam Speaker, many of the colleagues have talked about talent search and identification. However, I would like to inform this House that there was an identification system in this country that would start right from primary schools and regional competitions. For your information, the 1978 heroes were all identified from the regional competitions. Therefore, unless we come up with a very serious comprehensive sports development policy - we cannot deal with this in an ad hoc manner as it has been happening.

MR WOBOYA: Madam Speaker, to conclude, the Ministry of Education and Sports should come up with a document on the strategies they are going to use in talent search, so that we are able to reach all these areas in the country and select real talents for Uganda.

4.54
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ssewanyana for coming out with this sensitive statement. Over the weekend, I was in Sigulu Islands, which is in hon. Ouma Abott’s county. When we reached there, we found a match being played in Sigulu Primary School, but there were no goalposts. When I went to one of the primary schools in my county, they had the same problem. 

The schools have failed to improvise goalposts for these young people, whose talents we would like to develop, and yet talent development should begin from schools. There were no goalposts even in Government-aided schools. I was sharing with one Member of Parliament from Kenya who had also attended the match; he told me that as Members of Parliament from Kenya, they have a budget of Shs 10 million in each financial year to cater for sports in their constituencies. It means that they can run sports activities within their constituencies with the funding from the Government. (Interruption) 

MR BAKUBALWAYO: Thank you, hon. Walyomu, for giving way. The information I would like to give my colleague is that besides the lack of goalposts, many playgrounds in many Government-aided primary schools have been turned into grazing grounds for domestic animals. Some neighbours have even started encroaching on the grounds as cultivation land. 

I would also like to give further information. The honourable member suggested here that Government should take action on private institutions without playgrounds. I would like to equally give information that even public schools, which have failed to do much with the playgrounds, should come up with a proper amount of money to protect these grounds, for example by fencing, so that both private and Government schools protect whatever we have. Thank you very much.

MR WALYOMU: Madam Speaker, on my way here, I received a call from one of the pastors in my constituency, informing me that he has two boys who are good footballers. Therefore, if we went to the grassroots or rural areas, we would easily identify these parents –(Interruption)

MS MWINE: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give as a member of the Committee on Education and Sports of this Parliament is that, we had looked into some of these things and actually, we are concerned. However, it is important to note - I have worked with local government – that there is no money from the central Government towards sports in the local governments.

Secondly, I would like to challenge Members to find out from the various districts they represent whether they have sports officers. On the issue of recruitment of human resources, there is a slot but many districts have not recruited any sports officers nor do they have a budget line; therefore, sports is suffering right from the grassroots.

Thirdly, our National Council of Sports is challenged. Their mandate is to promote and manage sports and sports facilities in this country. However, we have discovered that they are challenged by lack of funding, corruption and many other vices. As honourable members of this House, it is important that we put our efforts together and give support. With a new minister who is known to have a record of good performance, we should give her time to go and work things out. Thank you.  

MR WALYOMU: Thank you, honourable member, for that information. In conclusion, as we invite FUFA or Micho and his team to come here, we should inform them that they should not look at urban areas only, but also go to rural areas so that they can easily identify talent across the country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to confirm that I have received notice of that motion; therefore, we will have it on Tuesday. We shall bring the Uganda Cranes here on Tuesday. 

Before the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development speaks, I have got a massage here; the sportsmen and sportswomen who have been winning international medals were supposed to get a monthly allowance from the President, and now for six months, they have not received it. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -(Laughter)– They can read the Hansard; it is available. The Minister of the Education and Sports can read the Hansard and we shall also give them the date to come.

 5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much. Before I speak on issues of funding, I would like to thank hon. Ssewanyana for the presentation of a bi-partisan motion. Indeed, it has shown that the Tenth Parliament is focusing on issues that unite us and transcend our political divide. 

There is no doubt that sports throughout the ages has been a source of unity. We have seen sports unite and try to heal the deeper racial wounds in the United States. We have seen sports put a smile on young people in the now bombarded countries like Syria and Iraq. We have also seen sports bring a lot of excitement and unity in Uganda including the recent one by hon. Odonga Otto.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the debate has raised a number of issues that include management of sports, development of talent of young people, funding for sports, promotion of sports, rewarding heroes, and clearing and settling our commitments as Government to the sportsmen and sportswomen in this country. As a way forward, the Ministry of Finance will sit down with the Ministry of Education and Sports to come up with a plan to address these issues that have been raised during this debate. 

On our part as Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we commit that we will come here with new proposals to increase funding for sports in this country. (Applause) I would like to appeal to Members that when we come with these proposals, the spirit and the momentum you have shown here in this House should not end here, but we should stand firm to make sports a priority during our budgeting process. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause) 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the honourable minister and in terms of a way forward, he is saying that the finance and education ministries will sit and work out a way forward. However, we have a motion and the mover of the motion in his last paragraph ended with a prayer of concrete requests. I see the minister touching on the last one by saying, they shall increase funding.

My proposal is that, Parliament should adopt hon. Ssewanyana’s requests, so that they become concrete resolutions of Parliament. The first one is exemption of VAT on all sports equipment. I would like to propose an amendment that Government should give a tax waiver on all sports equipment and revenue from games. (Interjections) Colleagues, you can amend it, I am just making my proposal so that this motion does not end in vain.We need to move away from here with concrete resolutions. 

The second proposal by hon. Ssewanyana is reviving appropriate funding for the district sports councils -(Interruption)

MS NYAKECHO: I would like to comment on the first point you raised on the tax waiver. Aside from those who really want to grow sports in Uganda, we have businessmen like Asiatic Sports and Katumwa Sports Centre; if you generalize, then Government will lose some revenue. Therefore, I propose that you specify - I do not know how you will do it - to capture sports equipment going through FUFA, schools and Government institutions, such that we know that we are catering for sports in particular. Thank you.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, hon. Nyakecho, for the proposal; in other words, you are proposing an amendment to my amendment. Let me go through it. 

The second one is with respect to district sports councils. Members have talked about this and I thought I would amend it to read as follows: “Government should take necessary steps to revive district sports councils and sports in schools.”

The third one was left hanging by the movers as “sports academies”. I think we could adopt it to read as follows: “Government should initiate and support sports academies and complete the construction of the Teryet High Altitude Training Centre.”

The fourth one is, “Desist from any encroachment on various sports facilities.” I wanted to amend it to say, “Government should stop encroachment on all public sports stadia and facilities”.

The last one is, “Sports funding be increased to Shs 50 billion”. I thought that we would adopt the proposal by the honourable minister and say, “Government should consider increasing funding for sports”.

I thought that we would also add a last one, No.6, to read, “Government should investigate the performance of sports federations and associations”.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move so that these are adopted from prayers to resolutions of Parliament for this motion to take effect. Thank you.

5.07
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the point of construction of stadia, I would like to propose that Parliament makes it a policy and maybe law that every Government unit, from the village level to the national level, must have a place designated as a sports centre.

Construction and development notwithstanding, we are putting emphasis on schools in some villages, yet children who have interest in sports have nowhere to play from. So, if we make it a policy that every subcounty must find a place designated as such, then people will slowly evolve from there.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether I remember clearly or I am just dreaming, but I thought at some point there was a proposal to have a new sports Act, where we could build on some of these. Chief Whip, I do not know whether it is among those that you people are going to bring, because it was talked about sometime back – sports to be compulsory for everybody in the country; very many things were talked about. I do not know where it is now. Let us hear from the Shadow Attorney-General.

5.09
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa East County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, you may realise that we are dealing with a unique situation. This was a debate, which I want to thank you very much for supporting - which arose from a shadow minister’s statement. Unfortunately, no Member raised a motion during the course of the debate for us to pronounce ourselves in terms of resolutions arising from a motion. 

In my view, to do things smartly, I would implore you, Madam Speaker, to guide us on whether it would not be good for the Committee on Education and Sports to capture today’s debate, which has been recorded in the Hansard, together with the statement from the shadow minister and make further inquiries. They can then come up with a comprehensive report for presentation to Parliament, and we can adopt recommendations based on that report, which will have the contents of today’s debate, the statement and other issues. That is the guidance and procedure I am seeking from you - to enable us to move in a systematic manner.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Of course, I have listened very well to hon. Magyezi on the issues of the taxes and whatever. However, I would like to support the argument advanced by hon. Niwagaba. 

First of all, there are implications if we say that right now, as we are implementing the budget, VAT should be waived. This is because it was already projected. Secondly, there are some exemptions that we passed on facilities and equipment for sports. Therefore, I would agree with hon. Niwagaba’s position that the Minister of Education and Sports should come up with areas where we need to intervene in general. They need to do a comprehensive study vis-à-vis this motion and its prayers.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think our committee should do that, if Members do not mind. 

5.12
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I listened very attentively to your guidance at the beginning of the debate. I said that the minister should be given time to respond, but you guided well that we should debate since the issues are clear in the report. Therefore, I think we should proceed by requiring a response. You even said that the record is on the Hansard. So, the Minister of Education and Sports will read it and come to respond to the issues that have been raised in the report. 

The report is calling for the waiving of VAT, but the minister may say that it cannot be done in the middle of the budget implementation, but in the next budget. We shall do a, b, c or d. I thought that we were going to move in that manner and we adopt the report. We have to pronounce ourselves on hon. Kasibante’s statement and that will guide the Minister of Education and Sports. She will bring a statement on what she plans to do regarding the debate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course we cannot conclude; my worry was the issue of taxation. I do not think that we can take a decision now, yet, we took a decision last time and we are in the middle of the year. This affects the income. I would like to give time to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to look at it and give us proposals for the future, especially on the issue of exemption.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I agree with you that, it is important that when we are debating and discussing issues of taxation as a source of revenue, we should always give it time, so that we look at different options. This is because on one hand, we need money and on the other we are saying that we should cut off the source of money. Therefore, I agree with your guidance that you should give us time to study it so we can see what to do in terms of incentives for the development of sports in this country.

THE SPEAKER: Are you looking at incentives in the next Finance Bill?

MR BAHATI: Certainly, the appropriate time would be to study this and come up with some proposals next financial year. In the middle of the current financial year, it would be very difficult, given what we approved. We cannot finance it if we start cutting it in the middle of the year.

THE SPEAKER: In terms of time, I think that we should be able to inform the next budget. So, if you and the Minister of Education could come back and we conclude this debate, we can then see what we can build into the Finance Bill for the next financial year. So we are giving you two weeks.

MR BAHATI: Okay, Madam Speaker.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, you had already made an inquiry about the money that was promised to our footballers, the Uganda Cranes, the US$ 10,000. The US$ 10,000 was promised to them but we have heard that it is actually US$ 1,000. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for someone to come up and give this House an explanation to that effect, as you had directed?

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Minister of Education and Sports, who is in charge of that sector, to tell us who promised; if it is Government, they must produce that money, but if it is just supporters, we shall know. (Laughter)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is about the minister’s commitment to come and make a statement here to enable us conclude this debate.

About three weeks ago, an issue arose here concerning the money lending business by MTN at a rate of 108 per cent per annum. We asked the minister to come and explain to us whether Bank of Uganda authorised MTN to carry out money lending. We also asked him to come and explain to us the legal regime under which they conducted this kind of business. 

The minister said that he would get back in two weeks to address this House, but he has not yet come back. I wonder whether he will come back to address the House on this issue also. Can we demand that the minister comes tomorrow and gives us an elaborate statement on the other issue? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, this brings me to the issue of how this House operates. When I was the Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances, it was our duty to help the President fulfil his pledges. It was not like debt collection. We provided all the pledges made and then asked every minister where they were found in the budget. 

Therefore, if a minister, by way of guidance, makes an assurance to the House, I think we have a whole Committee on Government Assurances in this House that must tight-mark and fast track this process so that they do not say words and walk away. 

I thought of raising this on the Floor of the House as the chairperson of a committee that profiled presidential pledges to a tune of Shs 11.6 trillion. I am glad that in every district the President went to, he moved with a list because they were listed district by district. 

Madam Speaker, I think our committees should help this House, especially those that are guided by the Opposition, so that we push these people to fulfil their pledges and we make budgetary provisions. Otherwise, we shall be talking to ourselves without getting desired results. 

THE SPEAKER: We should conclude. We have other work. 

5.19
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Just like hon. Anywar has said, as a way of motivation you said that these medallists were supposed to be given a monthly allowance, which we are not seeing. At an appropriate time, when the Minister of Education and Sports comes to this House, she should inform this House how far the ministry has gone with giving medallists their monthly allowances. Her report should be dated way back to Uganda’s first gold medallist, John Akii-Bua, of 1972. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we are also talking of nurturing the talent of music in our people right from the children in schools. I feel like the Ministry of Education and Sports should come and tell us about this. As much as we are concentrating on sports, the musical talent of our children has not been explored. What do they have to say about that? 

Lastly, we also want a comprehensive report from the Ministry of Education and Sports on the construction and rehabilitation of stadia in the country - the Gulu Stadium, Akii-Bua Stadium, the Mbale and Arua stadia. Not all footballers can come to play with the Uganda Cranes, but they can play from their respective areas and even go abroad. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the mover had included all those stadia. He wanted work done on them; so I hope when the minister comes, she will address that. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I will check with the Hansard and the office of the Clerk on the MTN lending issue. From my recollection, on that day we seemed to have concluded that issue because we said Bank of Uganda is in charge of supervising the operations and MTN is partnering with them. If we have not- 

THE SPEAKER: I think we did. I think that is the answer you gave. 

MR BAHATI: Yes, that is the answer I gave. However, I will check with the Office of the Clerk as well as the Hansard. If there are any pending issues from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we will seek some space on the Order Paper so that we can clear them. This is because we are now on record that we are responding to issues of Members of Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

5.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a request from Government to borrow up to $ 100 million from the International Development Association to finance the grid expansion and reinforcement project. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent it to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.  

5. 23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the economic and fiscal updates for our economy in relation to the Public Finance Management Act. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent it to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back. 

MR OKIN: Madam Speaker, the work of Parliament is to make laws and ensure that those laws are followed. The Public Finance Management Act, 2015, section 5, states, “(1) The Minister shall, not later than three months after the first sitting of Parliament after a general election, submit to Parliament for approval–  

(a) 	a Charter of Fiscal Responsibility which shall provide-

(i)	 a statement indicating the measurable objectives for the fiscal policy for a period of not less than the next three financial years, which are consistent with the principles set out in section 4;
 
(ii)	 an explanation of the methodology to be used to measure the performance of Government against the fiscal policy objectives required in subsection (1)(a)(i);

(iii)	a list of the sources of data to be used to report developments against the fiscal objectives required in subsection (1)(a)(i); and
 
(iv) a demonstration of how the fiscal objectives set out under subsection (1)(a)(i) are consistent with principles set out in section 4 using the macroeconomic and fiscal data, assumptions, and projections provided in the economic and fiscal update referred to in subsection (1)(b); and 

(b) an economic and fiscal update which shall be in accordance with the requirements of this section.”

I do not want to go on, but it is on a procedural point that I seek your guidance. This fiscal economic update should have been laid before Parliament together with the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility three months from the date of commencement. Getting back to our records, the first sitting of this Parliament was on 19th May, so the period expired on 19th of August and today is 14 September 2016. 

Madam Speaker, subsection (6) states, “The Minister shall, within one week after approval by Parliament, publish the updated Charter for Fiscal Responsibility.” Even if you take that into consideration, 19th August is way back, almost one month back. The Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development is laying on the Table the economic fiscal update in total disregard to the legal provisions of the Public Finance Management Act. 

I thought that it would be procedurally right for you to guide us on whether we can go against the law and do things to suit our interests or we stick to the law. I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, equity assists the vigilant. You were here when the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility was being laid on the Table; you did not complain. You were here. Now that the economic and fiscal update has come, they will be considered together with the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility.

MR OKIN: Madam Speaker, on that very note, I did not complain because there is a provision which gives the privilege to the minister to come in after one week. So, we waited for that one week to expire. It is now actually three months and some good days now and the minister is coming to lay on the Table the economic fiscal update.

What remedies are going to be put in place to address this kind of situation, where we do things in total disregard of the legal provisions under the Public Finance Management Act?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we have tried as a ministry to comply with the law. It is true that we sent to the Clerk to Parliament the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the economic and fiscal update in time, according to the law. However, at that time, it was erroneous; we did not lay the economic and fiscal update on the Table. So, when this matter reached the committee, they requested the Clerk to require us to formally lay it on the Table. 

It is already with the Committee on Finance. It came on the same day with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. Hon. Okin, if you were here, or if you read the Hansard and the communication from the chairperson of the committee and the shadow minister, you would have got all the updates and information. If you also consulted the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, he would actually update you on this matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a new Act, let us move slowly but be vigilant as well in future. If you see something that requires attention, attend to it quickly. It will be sent to the committee and they should go together with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. Since it is urgent, committee, please consider it very quickly and give us a report.

LAYING OF PAPERS

5.30
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Electoral Commission on the 2016 general elections. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the 18th Annual Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, 2015. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Human Rights for perusal and report back.

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Inspectorate of Government to Parliament for July- December 2015. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Equal Opportunities Commission on redressing imbalances and promoting equal opportunities for all. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Equal Opportunities for perusal and report back. 

5.33
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (NRM, Busongora North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Parliamentary delegation to the 14th Afro-Arab Parliamentary Union Conference held on 3rd to 6 May 2016 in Abidjan, Ivory Coast. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Members, there shall be a date appointed for its debate.

5.35
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the report on the 8th Annual Conference of African Speakers of Parliament, held in August 2016 in Midrand, South Africa.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It will be circulated and a date shall be appointed for the debate.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, while you were away late last month, one of the members of this Parliament came here with a motion, seeking leave – 

THE SPEAKER: Is that item No.8?

MR SILWANY: No, I rose on a procedural matter. He came to this House very late in the evening. On that day, we discussed and asked the Speaker to bring this matter early, when the sugar levels of members of Parliament were still high – 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are following the Order Paper but the next item is being floated and yet it has not yet been presented. Secondly, Parliament of Uganda sits when the Speaker is in the Chair. The time is from 2.00 p.m. to a time the Speaker chooses, at his or her discretion, to close it or suspend it for that matter. 

Is the honourable colleague in order to allude, in anticipation, that the person who brought the motion came very late in the evening and yet Parliament of Uganda sits as long as the Speaker is in the Chair? His insinuation is that the Member came late, outside the time of the sitting of Parliament. Is the honourable member in order to wrongly anticipate how the Parliament works? Is it also in order to anticipate that, it happened because the Speaker was not in charge? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Speaker is in charge of the Order Paper; the item being brought by the Member is not yet before this House. Let us go to item No. 8.

PRESENTATION AND CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SDR 106,400,000 EQUIVALENT TO $150 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO SUPPORT THE AGRICULTURE CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

5.57
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to SDR 106,400,000, equivalent to $150 million, from the IDA of the World Bank to support the Agriculture Cluster Development Project.

Madam Speaker, before I proceed with my presentation, I wish to lay on the Table the following documents:

    i) A signed report. 

    ii) Signed minutes.

    iii) Minister’s brief on the proposal.

    iv) The project appraisal documents.

    v) Draft aide-memoires.

    vi) Agreed minutes of negotiations.

    vii) Draft loan financing agreement.

    viii) Agricultural strategic plan.

    ix) Memorandum of understanding between the Government of Uganda and Busowa Traders and Farmers’ Co-operative Society Ltd.

    x) A plan for zonal agricultural production for Uganda.

    xi) Memorandum of understanding between the Government of Uganda and Tilda (U) Ltd for the development of the rice project in Uganda.

    xii) A document on the end of phase 1 evaluation of the East African Agriculture Productivity Programme.

    xiii) The proposed plan to operationalize the non-attached component of the agricultural sector development strategy and investment plan.

The Members have also been demanding for the status of loans approved by the Ninth Parliament. I would like to lay that on the Table.

I also have a letter from the National Planning Authority confirming that the loan request complies with the National Development Plan II. I beg to lay it on the Table.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is the report of the committee on the proposed borrowing of US$ 150 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the Agriculture Cluster Development Project- (Interruption)

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have just asked and been told that the copies of the report are not there. I am wondering how we are going follow up. I would request that enough copies be availed for all the Members.

THE SPEAKER: How many Members do not have copies?

MS BBUMBA: I was told that the report was uploaded. (Interjections) The proposal was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and was accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration under rule 166(2)(b) and under Article 159(2) of the Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: Hold on a bit, hon. Bbumba; we are trying to establish whether Members actually have copies. You know the new Members do not have iPads, so, very few would access copies even if they were uploaded.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, this is a very important loan and we have no intentions whatsoever to put obstacles. However, we need to follow each step on why we are borrowing US$ 150 million.

I think it is also good to be on record because the public is very good at blaming Parliament that we just want iPads. Now you look at a situation where over 100 Members cannot have copies of a printed document, but they make a lot of noise like they have started again.

In the circumstances, Madam Speaker, we want to follow this loan request. We do not want to commit our constituencies in a hurry. Therefore, we request that we are availed copies so that we follow the loan request and give it our best. I seek your indulgence. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the bad situation we are in, aware that most Members do not have the information, wouldn’t it be procedurally right, that the chairperson of the committee presents the document and we sleep over it until the copies are available for discussion tomorrow? This is so that we do not dilly-dally here.

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, in the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, which we are going to discuss and approve, approving loans is not just a matter of listening. This is a serious matter. It is not that we are going to refuse but we want to follow and be sure of what the Member is presenting to us. I do not know why the committee chairperson is panicking about it. She said that it is uploaded on our iPads. Even those of us with iPads do not see it. 

In addition, you know the new Members do not have iPads yet. I think let us be fair to the Members. You want us to commit Government to borrow certain money and you just want us to sit and listen for about 10 to 20 minutes at 6 o’clock. I beg that we first get the copies.

THE SPEAKER: Let me direct the Clerk to produce more copies, because the bulk of the Members do not have them and they do not even have iPads. So, they cannot follow. This is the first loan request of the Tenth Parliament; I think it is important that Members be at home on it before we take a decision. Therefore, I defer it to tomorrow. The Clerk should produce the necessary documentation. Thank you.

In the Public Gallery, we have pupils and teachers of St. Gracious Nursery and Primary School, Lira Municipality. They are represented by hon. Akena and hon. Joy Ongom. Please, stand up.
 
MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL

5.45	
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On 25 August 2016, I moved a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2016.

The object of the Bill is to amend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in accordance with Articles 259 and 262 of the Constitution. This will in effect remove the limits on the tenure of members of the Electoral Commission and increase the period of adjudication of presidential -(Interruption) 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, the matter before us touches a very important document in our jurisdiction called the Constitution.  

Aware of the sanctity of the Constitution and aware of the Supreme Court’s recommendations to Government in Election Petition No.1 of 2016, before Parliament begins to consider Private Member’s Bills in piecemeal on particular clauses of the Constitution, we would want to know the position of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs on two aspects - one - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are jumping the gun. He had not yet finished moving.

MR NIWAGABA: He moved last time, Madam Speaker. Actually, what is supposed to start today is the debate. He moved the motion and today debate is supposed to start.

THE SPEAKER: Did he give justification?

MR KAFEERO: Madam Speaker, I did not justify and my seconder did not speak to the motion. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was in the House when hon. Kafeero moved the motion; he justified his motion. It was even seconded –(Interjections)– Yes, it was. What was left was for the Members to debate the unpopular Kafeero motion. So, is he in order?

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, because of that - and the Hansard can bear us witness - would it not be prudent that we first hear from the Government, particularly the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs? We would like to hear the position of Government on:

1. 	Constituting a constitutional review commission to consider all aspects related to the amendment of the Constitution;

2. 	Government’s commitment to comply with the recommendations of the Supreme Court;

3. 	Whether each and every Member of this House who so wishes, can come up with a Private Member’s Bill to amend any clause in the Constitution; and

4. 	If that is done, whether we shall still have a Constitution to call a Constitution.

MR STEPHEN MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, this is the Tenth Parliament and when we are beginning the Tenth Parliament, we should save the image of both the Parliament and Government.

At the end of the last Parliament, hardly a year from now, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs pronounced itself on this matter. They recommended that Government institutes a constitutional review commission. (Applause) Hardly a year after, the same matter, against our rules – 

Parliament should not bring a matter, which Parliament pronounced itself on. Cabinet and the President have also pronounced themselves on performance contracts. However, here we are with someone coming up with an archaic, permanent and pensionable agenda. Is Government still going for performance contracts, because if you have performance contracts, what he is moving is actually irreverent? (Applause)

Further, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we are people’s representatives. I remember the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs told this House that they are in the process of constituting a constitutional review commission. Why are we allowing Government to be very disorderly as if we have no government? It is as if there is no communication between Parliament, Government and our committees that now we are beginning to entertain piecemeal constitutional amendments. 

Madam Speaker, are we proceeding in the right direction when we fail to heed to what we agreed on in the last Parliament, that Government, and not an individual, is going to constitute a constitutional review commission to handle such amendments comprehensively and not piecemeal?  

THE SPEAKER: I will listen to hon. Mugoya. Hon. William Nzoghu, you have to stand up when you are speaking. (Laughter)

5.54
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, this Parliament was established by law. Under Article 79(3), we are all enjoined to protect this Constitution. I would like to draw the attention of honourable members, regardless of our political affiliations, to Article 144(1)(c). This provision clearly says, “…in each case, subject to Article 128(7) of this Constitution, on attaining such other age as may be prescribed by Parliament by law.” The position is very clear. This motion is incurably defective. (Applause)

I would like to quote the judgment of the Supreme Court, Constitutional Appeal No.7 of 2005, where the Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda filed a matter of four judicial officers, and two of them are currently Judges of the High Court - Justice Masalu Musene Wilson, Justice Keitirima John, Justice Sekagya Ronald and Justice Muhiirwa Araali. In that judgement, the Supreme Court ruled that where the law clearly says, “subject to”, before one proceeds with any amendment they must satisfy this august House that they have fulfilled the provisions of Article 128 (7). 

The Supreme Court ruled thus: “We have carefully considered all the submissions of counsel…” - and I am now counsel on the Floor – (Laughter) - “…We agree that Article 128(7) is meant to be a pillar for the independence of the Judiciary; the need for judicial officers to be guarded against any manipulation.” 

They further argued and submitted thus:  “This is an elementary safeguard to be found in developed legal systems, where it took many historic struggles to establish on a firm footing as the most fundamental of all safeguards of judicial officers’ security of tenure. When this safeguard is destroyed by whittling away the provisions of Article 128(7) and judicial officers are put at the sufferance of the Executive or at the whims of the Legislature, the independence of the Judiciary is the first victim.” (Applause)

In short, we cannot therefore, proceed with something, which is not only prima facie defective but when even the Constitution does not recognise it. 

I also would like to add – by the way, as a member of the NRM -that what the Attorney-General of the Opposition has submitted is the correct position. Are we, therefore, abdicating our responsibility as Parliament not to recommend and not to submit to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court? Therefore, I would like to say that we are wasting time to debate and/or even listen to a submission seeking leave on something that the Constitution does not recognise at all. (Applause)

5.58
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Each one of us here swore to uphold the Constitution. I would like to see any Member of Parliament who swore to tear it down and make it a cheap document.

Madam Speaker, we are not talking about any law. I have the Public Finance Management Act, but the Constitution is the supreme law of this country. As a Member of Parliament, I too have areas where I would like to propose amendments. Under the local government system, I would like to propose amendments including the role of the Auditor-General and so on. 

I would like to find out, honourable colleagues, whether in your conscience, you believe that I can bring a Private Member’s Bill to amend the Constitution today, hon. Kafeero brings another one tomorrow and hon. Oyet also brings his next week to deal with the Constitution of this country. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I was in the Ninth Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR MAGYEZI: There is no doubt that a number of Ugandans and Members of Parliament would like to see certain Articles of the Constitution amended. However, the point is: how do we move to amend the Constitution of the country? Do you just come with a proposal today and another one the next day? Surely, Magyezi, who swore to uphold the Constitution! 

Why can’t we request you, Madam Speaker, as our chairperson and leader in Parliament, to use your position and discretion to now require Government to bring a comprehensive list of reforms needed in the Constitution? (Applause) We are here and going nowhere. (Applause)

6.01
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. Indeed last year, while we were debating constitutional amendments, we made an undertaking that we would appoint a constitutional review commission to look at all aspects of the Constitution - now that it has run for over two decades - to see where it has been plausible and where there have been difficulties and make recommendations.

I recognise that the Constitution is the supreme law of the land and as such, and also as the steward of constitutional affairs, I cannot pronounce myself on this motion before I have consulted my Cabinet colleagues. This is because we are collectively responsible for what we submit here to Parliament and what we put out to the country. 

Nonetheless, our Rules of Procedure allow you to bring –(Interjections)– Please, let me finish. I do not want to shoot down hon. Kafeero’s motion. It is you, Members, who made these rules, which are not part of the Constitution, to say “yes” or “no”. For us as Government, we shall submit to the rules of Parliament. You are free to debate and what you decide is what I will take to Cabinet. Cabinet will pronounce itself thereafter. Otherwise, as far as we are concerned, we are still committed to our earlier position. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, I am coming to you. Don’t worry. (Laughter)

6.03
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to both my elder brother, Raphael Magyezi, and Counsel Mugoya who has spoken eloquently, just like a lawyer trying to confuse a judge. 

When you look at Article 128(7) – (Interjections)- I am speaking like a lawyer because he spoke like a lawyer. I would like us to revisit his words and read Article 128(7) word for word. That Article does not refer to the term limits of judicial officers and that is what we are dealing with here. It only refers to privileges and working conditions. Therefore, I would like us to tell the difference. Let us not confuse the House. 

Hon. Kafeero’s motion is specifically referring to the tenure and not the working conditions. We are not talking about the privileges, salaries and whatever. I invite you all to look at that clause. We are going to miss the point if we allow ourselves to be confused and convinced without thoroughly reading that Article of the Constitution.

6.06
MS ANN NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true the mover of the motion had presented it last time; the dilemma we have is that we are trying to amend the Constitution, but should we do it piecemeal when there are very many areas that pertain to tenure, which very many people may have issues with?

Secondly, I still need to be guided on what the urgency is with the Judiciary. Personally, if this was about the consultants in hospitals, where we are losing people every day, I would see the urgency. What would be the procedure? That is the guidance we need from you, Madam Speaker. Government should pronounce itself on this matter. We need to be guided by Government because this is even wastage of resources. If he brings a Bill today, I bring a Bill tomorrow and the other person brings a Bill the other day, where shall we end? 

I am limited because I cannot bring up my issues, which are not connected to the objectives of his Bill. Therefore, we are praying for your guidance, Madam Speaker, because we are touching on the fundamentals of the Constitution.

6.07
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thanks you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to address my mind, also as a lawyer, to the position of the law because I see two of my learned colleagues disagreeing without professional courtesy – (Laughter) - on the Floor of the House. 

My understanding of the honourable Counsel Mugoya’s interpretation of Article 128 (1), which is his opinion, is that – Article 128 (1) says, “In the exercise of judicial power, the courts shall be independent and shall not be subject to the control or direction of any person or authority.” His legal opinion, which he buttressed with the Supreme Court ruling, is that the moment the term of a judge is about to expire, like some are remaining with three months, and Parliament moves to amend the Constitution to extend their term, his interpretation is that the judicial officers are now being subject to control of Parliament. That is his thinking. 

Needless to say, the seconder of the motion has an appeal case before the same court -(Applause) – and that is his opinion –(Interruption) 

MR KAFEERO: Madam Speaker, I have heard my honourable colleague, hon. Odonga Otto, insinuating that I have an appeal case –

THE SPEAKER: No, he said the seconder of the motion.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR KAFUUZI: I heard my brother, hon. Odonga-Otto, referring to the seconder of the motion as having an appeal case. Yes, he has an appeal but he does not cease to be a Member of Parliament and does not cease to carry out the functions of a member of Parliament. Moving motions and seconding them is one of those functions. Unless court pronounces itself to the effect that once you have an appeal, you stay out, he remains here and performs his duties.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I was just responding to the argument of my learned friend; I was yet to respond to your argument. Your argument is that nothing stops Parliament from amending the Constitution at any time, if I heard you right, which also is a right legal argument. 

However, the opinion of the House seems to be that there are many other amendments that this House needs to move on. I have even heard some Members of Parliament saying they would like to amend the provision on the age limit itself. However, can they bring all their amendments in this Private Member’s Bill of hon. Kafeero? 

I also have amendments. I would like to bring an amendment that the President should not appoint judicial officers; it should be the Judicial Service Commission because the President has so much power. Therefore, I should be advised; will I also bring it during this hon. Kafeero’s constitutional amendment? (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, our rules on the code of conduct - Appendix F, No. 4 – say something about public interest. It states thus: “Members shall base their conduct on full consideration of the public interest, avoid conflict between personal interest and public interest…” (Applause) 

Now let us look at this situation; I am handling election petitions for some Members of this House. If the seconder of this motion, hon. Amoru Paul, appears in court next week, will the person with whom they are in court over that election petition feel fairness? Is this really neat? 

Therefore, my honest opinion is that nothing stops hon. Kafeero or me from bringing an amendment but what we are saying - and we need to pronounce ourselves on this in one way or another because this debate has over run in the media; every day on zungululu, there is footage of someone saying they weigh heavier than the other person. (Laughter) So, without victimising hon. Kafeero, because everyone is painting him black but even the devil has some white spots, can we come out neat by having all the amendments we would like to effect in the Constitution so that we dispose of these issues once and for all. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

6.13
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Precedents are well-grounded principles that guide the running of institutions. When precedents are created, we can appreciate the predictable manner an institution like Parliament may be run. 

A few months ago or about last year, quite a number of us who were in the Ninth Parliament had amendments to the Constitution that we wanted to move. We were well guided by this Parliament, and we were well guided by your wise leadership of the House, that we bring them together before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

I was one of those who had a very particular and pertinent amendment on the presidential term limits. However, we all agreed - in the spirit of ensuring that our Constitution does not become a playground or a mere piece of paper - to go to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs where we tabled our ideas, amendments and views. That helped the Ninth Parliament not to amend the Constitution every year. 

Personally, I nursed this idea in my first year in 2011. So, you can imagine if there were amendments to the Constitution in 2011, 2012 and 2013, by now how many amendments would we have? However, because we were well guided to appreciate that this is  the grand norm, that this is the most important document that constitutes our country, we all appreciated and in the spirit of nationalism, we moved together to ensure that we amend the Constitution at once and not in piecemeal. (Applause) 

Hon. Kafeero, there is tomorrow and we are still here. Our Parliament is about six months old - we have not even covered 10 months. I would like to persuade you to humbly withdraw this motion. At an opportune moment, you can come back when there are other comprehensive amendments and present your amendments so that you are not misunderstood to have some personal interests in this matter. That is because there are other more urgent and indeed pressing issues in our country.

Madam Speaker, it is my prayer, and this is not just for our Parliament but even for those who will read the Hansard and those who will come during the Eleventh, Twelfth and subsequent Parliaments, that there will be a precedent to study, just like we are currently referring to the Ninth Parliament. I see hon. Kafeero removing the paper from the Table - (Laughter) - I do not know whether he has –(Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit that our colleague finds it important that this Constitution should be respected and amended at once and not just piecemeal.

6.13
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you read the introductory part of hon. Kafeero’s motion, there is ambiguity that is reflected. He ends the first paragraph by saying, “The object of the Bill is to amend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in accordance with Articles 259 and 262 of the Constitution to remove the limits on the tenure of the members of the Electoral Commission; to increase the period for the adjudication of presidential election petitions but also to increase the retirement age for judges and related matters.” (Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I think we should not allow Members to flout the procedure of this House. Once the motion is laid on the Table and is read, it must be justified. I remember that time we were here in this House, the ruling of the Speaker was, “Let us allow the Member to read the motion and lay it on the Table. Next time when we come back here, he will justify and we debate the motion.” (Interjection) Yes! He said that he would justify because we had denied him- Should we give him leave or not? 

I do not mind shooting down his motion but the procedure of this House – how we lay motions on the Table- must be in accordance with the practice of this House. We cannot start debating a motion which is not yet justified by the mover of the motion, because the mover of the motion was seeking for permission from this House. I do not mind anyone shooting down his motion, but he must be allowed to justify it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am at a bit of a disadvantage here; I was not here when this motion was moved and that is why I was asking if it was justified. No one has told me what happened and I have not seen the Hansard. I have not had the benefit of even a report from the presiding officer then; he has not given a report on what happened about this matter.

6.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, I was here and it was late in the evening. After arguments and points of procedure, finally the presiding officer allowed the Member to seek leave. Hon. Kafeero came here and introduced the motion amidst heckling and complaints from the House. So he introduced the motion and the presiding officer asked if it was seconded; a Member who was seated on that side said that yes, the motion was seconded.

The introduction of the motion does not mean that the mover was given a chance to speak to the motion neither was the seconder given a chance to verbally second. The presiding officer ruled that next time the matter will be tabled so that the seconder speaks to it and then the House debates -(Interjections)- The Hansard is there and we can consult it; it will bail us out. However, that was my recollection. Hon. Paul Amoru is not on record for having seconded by speaking to the motion. Nobody is on record for having spoken to the motion, and that is the position.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is really no problem because this House is for speaking. Let us allow hon. Kafeero; if you did not justify your motion, go ahead and justify it and then Members will respond to you. You justify and then they will answer.

6.23
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a responsible citizen, I am under obligation to uphold and protect the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Therefore, I would like to continue by saying that, on 25th of August, I moved a motion introducing a Private Member’s Bill seeking leave –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is signing out at a time this country needs him most. Is he in order to flee from this controversial motion of hon. Kafeero? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, he has gone to sort out a few things. (Laughter)

MR KAFEERO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. The object of the Bill is to amend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in accordance with Articles 259 and 262 of the Constitution. In effect, we shall have to remove the limits on the tenure of the members of the Electoral Commission, also to increase the period for the adjudication of presidential election petitions, and also increase the retirement age for the justices and judges among other related matters.

Madam Speaker, the security of tenure of judges is very important because it promotes the independence of the Judiciary. The Judiciary, being the third arm of Government, is as crucial as the first and indeed the second arms of Government. It is a practice in very many Commonwealth countries that judges retire at a very old age; some retire at 100 while some at over 75 –(Interjections)- Yes, it is on record.

Madam Speaker, Lord Denning, one of the best in the Commonwealth countries, retired at the age of 102 and all this time he was still writing judgments. I can see hon. Otto nodding in the affirmative, being a learned friend, a lawyer, he knows these things.

Madam Speaker, in the USA – one of the most democratic countries that we know – justices of the Supreme Court do not retire; they just die or resign –(Interjections)– Yes, that is truth. As you know, we want to benchmark the USA all the time because it is one of the best. If they do not retire their judges, then why should we? I am not saying that our judges should die at work, but let us optimise their time of service in office. 

Madam Speaker, jurisprudence and the law provide that the older one is, the more experienced and better they are. Let us, therefore, allow those people to serve so that we can get the best out of them. 

Madam Speaker, Ghana is one of the most democratic countries we know in Africa. Records show that Ghana’s electoral commissioners serve for life, unless the President chooses to change some of them – (Interjections) - It is the truth; you can as well go and find out. Therefore, I think we are missing a point if we are benchmarking Ghana, which we think is one of the best democracies, but also saying that our electoral commissioners should retire after two terms because by that time they are not eligible to serve another term in office.

Institutional memory is another big factor to reckon with. If you just retire everybody –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We seem to be making a big mistake here. What is on the Floor is a motion for you to seek leave. What hon. Robert Kafeero is justifying is the substance of the Bill. Those arguments can only come when he has been given leave. What he should be arguing to us is why he needs our leave, not the substance of the Bill. 

When we grant him leave - assuming we do - then he will raise those arguments. Thereafter, we shall go into the merits on whether it is correct for judges to retire at some age or die in office. For now, speak to the motion for seeking leave. 

MR KAFEERO: Thank you, my elder colleague -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, hon. Abdu Katuntu is right. Tell us why you want the leave of this House. That is what you should explain. 

MR KAFEERO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Although I gave a lengthy preamble, indeed that is what I was going to speak about. Now that the House seems to be interested in the subject matter, I will go straight to it.

Madam Speaker, it has been a practice in this House for constitutional amendments to be brought towards the end of a political term, mainly nearing election time. This time round, I have chosen to come and seek leave to amend parts of the Constitution in order to avoid the misinterpretation Ugandans have always had that we normally bring issues to the Floor of this House towards elections and at times they are misconceived. 

Right now, we have enough time to debate, discuss or even consult on the subject matter. That is why I need it now –(Interjections)– Can I complete? Doing it now is the best way rather than waiting for the time towards elections.

Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Hassan Fungaroo, why are you disrupting the –

MR FUNGAROO: He has allowed me to seek clarification. Hon. Kafeero is my friend.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Fungaroo, please allow him to finish his justification and then you can speak. 

MR KAFEERO: Madam Speaker, thank you so much for the wise ruling. We have heard opinions from so many stakeholders and elders in this country, and also the Supreme Court, making outcries that at one point we need to consider reviewing Article 104 of the Constitution to give leeway to people to introduce enough evidence in court, for example when somebody is pursuing an illegitimately elected president. Therefore, if we wait to do this towards elections, it may be disadvantageous. 

Now that we have just concluded the electoral process and we have the ruling of the Supreme Court, if we do this early enough, it will give us enough time to concentrate, look at all the avenues and take the correct decision for the good of the Republic of Uganda. It should therefore be in the interest of this country and this House to allow this motion to be carried forward. I also reiterate my earlier prayer that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill to that effect. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the seconder? I do not see the seconder. 

MR KAFEERO: Madam Speaker, the seconder, hon. Paul Amoru, is out of the country on parliamentary engagements with the permission of the Speaker. However, he delegated hon. Annet Nyakecho, who is present in the House. 

THE SPEAKER: You should have given me notice; anyway, if you are the seconder, hon. Annet Nyakecho - Please, honourable members, let us finish moving the motion and then you will debate.

6.34
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion that hon. Robert Kafeero be given leave by this House to go prepare and present a Private Member’s Bill. 

Madam Speaker, I base this secondment on the Rules of Procedure of this House. It is only fair that this House grants a Member leave because it is our constitutional right as Members of Parliament to stand to seek leave of Parliament. I refer my argument to Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure -(Interruption) 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we need to respect the rules of this House. One of the issues highlighted in hon. Robert Kafeero’s motion is the tenure of judges. 

As far as I know, hon. Annet Nyakecho was taken to court by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya and she was defeated. She then later appealed to a higher court. However, she is the same person seconding a motion that is actually proposing to increase the tenure of the judges, who will be ruling in her case and therefore move in that direction. Is the member in order to second the motion yet she knows she has an appeal case in court? Doesn’t she have conflict of interest?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, although we are all Members of Parliament, I think that there is a situation where if you have conflict of interest, you declare it before you second a motion. (Applause) Can you find another seconder who has no petition?

MR KAFEERO: Madam Speaker, hon. Jackson Kafuuzi is ready to second my motion.

THE SPEAKER: Order, members! What we are trying to do is to get the formalities out of the way. That is what we are doing.

6.38
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Madam Speaker, I am called Jackson Kafuuzi, Member of Parliament, Kyaka South Constituency.

THE SPEAKER: Members, let us have order.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, as a lawyer, I know that the law grows and also that the Constitution is made for generations. It is made for generations because it is able to grow with the generations – 

THE SPEAKER: Let us have a point of order from hon. Amoding.

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, the Member standing to make a contribution on the Floor of Parliament to second the motion is practicing with Rwakafuzi and Company Advocates, which firm has clients that we know are in this House. (Laughter) So, he needs to declare - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you handling briefs on behalf of Members who have got petitions in the court?

MR KAFUUZI: It is unfortunate that some Members are saying “yes” on my behalf. Has any of you instructed me? In law, you prove instructions by showing a receipt. Madam Speaker, I do not have instructions from anyone here. 

THE SPEAKER: You, as an individual, or your firm? 

MR KAFUUZI: As an individual, I am not representing anyone within here. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I am inquiring about your firm.

MR KAFUUZI: I cannot speak for the firm. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to the debate. He has mainly presented his reasons; you can speak for or against them. Let us move and finish this matter and each will contribute for three minutes. Calm down, you are better off here. 

6.41
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank this august House for the debate we are undertaking. Before I say something, there was a fundamental procedural matter, which was raised by hon. Mukitale. I think this august House needs to go on record, particularly on matters which have been discussed and decisions have been taken by this august House. (Applause)

Why am I saying this? I have the parliamentary Hansard here of the Ninth Parliament and I would like to read some of the statements which were presented before this august House, particularly the views of the various stakeholders in line with the amendments hon. Kafeero is presenting before us. However, I would also like to request you and this august House to make a decision in line with these proceedings for the future of Members of this august House. 

Madam Speaker, the committee invited various stakeholders and among which was the Uganda Law Reform Commission. This commission was against the position of amending the Constitution.

Two, we had political parties invited to the committee. The Opposition political parties - Forum for Democratic Change, DP, JEEMA, CP and Federal Alliance – were invited and they supported the current amendment being proposed by the hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko. It is on the Hansard and I would like to read it verbatim so that we get to know what we are when we are in this august House. (Applause) I would like to read it verbatim.

Madam Speaker, in the Hansard it says, “The Opposition believes that this is a specialised skill that takes long to develop and propose that in both benches, the retirement age should be set at 75 years.” That was the position of the Opposition in the Ninth Parliament. I want anyone here to stand up and challenge me on this position moved by the Opposition.

Madam Speaker, why am I bringing this up? Members should not victimise hon. Kafeero as a Member with ultra motives in line with the specific Article that we are talking about here – (Interjection) - Madam Speaker, I beg to be protected. I have been listening carefully to the submissions of various Members. I have listened to Members who have appeared in the press and some are even beginning to say that some people are being given money. One of the colleagues made a statement in the press that some of them received money.

Madam Speaker, I would like to go on record and say that the position of Uganda Law Development Centre – I am looking at the stakeholders’ views, which appear - 

THE SPEAKER: Members, let us have order. 

MR NSAMBA OSHABE: Madam Speaker, we are discussing the motion in which hon. Ssekitoleko Kafeero is asking for leave; we have not reached a time of debating whether this is justified. So, is - 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, what you are debating now is whether he has satisfied us that we should give him leave. That is the stage where we are.

MR NSAMBA OSHABE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker 

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I was still giving positions of various stakeholders in this matter. Why am I bringing this up? I would like to request this august House, and particularly you as the Chair, to help us on this specific subject. We are in a situation where we made a decision and personally, as a Member of the Ninth Parliament, I took a decision and I agreed with the committee.

In this Tenth Parliament, I would like to also say - and I would like to appeal to honourable colleagues - in line with what other Members have stated here, it is a right for any Member to move a Private Member’s Bill; it is a constitutional right. However, I have listened carefully to most of the Members’ submissions and I would like to beg Government - This matter keeps coming here and the question is: what if we granted hon. Kafeero leave, can he get the required number of Members of Parliament to pass this Bill? (Member timed out_)  

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute, please. There are many people who want to speak.

MR PETER OGWANG: It is my personal appeal; if we grant him leave, shall we get the required number of Members of Parliament? Therefore, I would like to beg hon. Kafeero and Members of this august House that we let this matter be taken over by Government so that they come up with a holistic Bill for us all to handle as a country for the betterment of the people of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Order! We are debating the request for leave.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking for procedural guidance with intention of preliminary objection. I would like Parliament and Government to, as much as possible, reduce the damage we are currently doing to our public relations.

The matter being presented here was processed by a committee of this Parliament. In the intellectual world, we would call this plagiarism. This matter was processed by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. For those who are trying to give an impression that Government does not exist, it did own this position. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire, has come on the Floor and said that Government is actually about to bring an omnibus Bill.

What is the intention of killing what Parliament has already processed or a matter that Government has said they are in charge of? We are here using taxpayers’ time, trying to portray that Government does not exist and also to show that committees of Parliament do not work, and somebody is trying to push for an individual. Even I, who has nine proposed constitutional amendments, have been waiting and I have not presented them. Madam Speaker, if you open Pandora’s Box today, tomorrow I will come to seek leave to present a Private Member’s Bill with nine constitutional amendments. 

During the first Prime Minister’s Question Time, I asked a question to the Prime Minister, Dr Rugunda, regarding these issues and he answered in the affirmative that the constitutional review commission is being formed. The Minister has confirmed that too. Why are you tempting us to bring individual amendments? 

Madam Speaker, can I request that you help and guide this House, since Government has confirmed what was agreed on in the committee before Christmas. It is not even a year! It is already a matter that was agreed upon and Government is processing it. Can we save the image of Parliament and respect the committees? Our rules do not allow somebody to reintroduce what a committee has already decided on. Madam Speaker, I request that you save the image of Parliament and Government by not giving this business leave. 

I would like to move a motion that this debate on hon. Kafeero’s motion should stop and he should not be granted leave because Government and Parliament have already agreed to process this matter. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, after listening to the mover, other than expediency I have not seen the urgency. (Applause)  I am also questioning the urgency of this amendment and the non-urgency of the others that were deferred by the Government.

Less than a year ago, the Government said these are not urgent, and this was one of them, and that we shall look at them some other time. The danger we stand, if we allow this motion, is that I will not have any reason not to allow other amendment motions on any part of the Constitution.

One, I think Parliament is not a football field where you just kick balls. It is a serious House and we should treat ourselves with respect. We should also remind ourselves of the oaths we took. We took two oaths just on the staircase of Parliament outside and it was during the day. In the Oath of Member of Parliament, each of us said, “I swear in the name of the Almighty God that I will give faithful service to this Parliament and support and uphold the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as by law established; so help me God.” In the Oath of Allegiance, each of us said, “I swear in the name of the Almighty God that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Republic of Uganda and that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution.”

Honourable members, I am now addressing the Government. Many proposals for amendment were made but because you acted late for your own reasons, many of those amendments could not be considered, including those that Parliament wanted. Therefore, what we demand from you is that you bring a comprehensive proposal so that all can be addressed. 

I will not be able to stop other Members from bringing other amendments. It will not be possible because I will have set a precedent. This is a House of repute; it is a serious House. So, let us defer the matter for a comprehensive -

MR KAFEERO: Madam Speaker, I am so happy with the guidance that you are giving to this august House; it is indeed deserving. As I stated earlier on, as a responsible citizen of the Republic of Uganda I am under obligation to protect and preserve the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

However, I have two prayers, as I concede to your guidance, Madam Speaker. The first prayer is that as Government brings that comprehensive package of Articles to be amended, the content of my motion be considered in that comprehensive package.

My second prayer is that we agree or get a Government assurance on an agreeable period upon which they have to present this in the House. Otherwise, they may take forever. If this is agreeable, Madam Speaker, I will accept the matter to be deferred to the bigger and comprehensive package of amendments. 

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we conclude this, today we had a workshop at Sheraton Hotel and the Judges, led by Judge Kakuru, were against this amendment; I heard from their own mouths. They are not interested in their age limit being lifted. We should, therefore, put this to rest.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, ideally after the Speaker makes a ruling, you do not continue. Therefore, we defer this matter indefinitely. (Applause) Honourable members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.57 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 September 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)
