Thursday, 15 September 2016
	
Parliament met at 3.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I am particularly happy to see the Rt Hon. Gen. Moses Ali, who has been away for some time. (Applause) We are really happy to see you back and we wish you a speedy recovery.

Honourable members, there are a number of issues I would like to raise today. Therehas been some confusion about the Bills, which were revived by our motion. I would like to clarify that the Bills will not have to be read for the first time again; they were already before this House. All that is required is that the parent ministry prints new Bills and hands them over to the Clerk. The 45 days will begin to run from the time the Clerk writes to the committee, passing on the Bills. So, there will be no first reading for those Bills which had been read for the first time already. 

The second issue has to do with the inaccurate and imbalanced reporting from the media.Honourable members, you must have noted with concern that the press has carried many stories and reports that are not factual, not even balanced. These stories seem to have been deliberately designed to portray a bad image of the institution of Parliament and of the Members of Parliament in the eyes of the public. (Applause)

The articles are especially in the Observer newspaper, the Red Pepper tabloid and also the DailyMonitor. Yesterday, there was a screaming headline,“Speaker gives medal to Besigye and Winnie Byanyima”. Honourable members, we are giving medals to over 2000 former Members of Parliament, starting from the Independence Parliament, but that was the headline - two people! That is a newspaper, which claims to report the truth.

Today, there is another headline –“Shs 68million to be spent on every dead legislator.” I think this is really obscene!People do die but it is not true that we have budgeted for everybody. It is not a nice thing, but we normally budget for about seven. By the time the five years end, at least seven Members will have died -(Interjections)- Yes, it is a fact. That is why we budget for it. Although it is not very nice, we have to do it. We have to budget for it, so that we are not taken unaware.

I would also like to inform the public that the Members of Parliament are officers of Government and they are entitled to an official burial. (Applause) It is not because Rebecca Kadaga is the Speaker; it is because it is a tradition of Parliament that has been there throughout time. However, they want to portray an image that the Speaker is over spending money. No, that is not true. Legislators are officers of Government and they are entitled to an official burial. We must budget for it; otherwise, it will be irresponsible to pretend that nothing will happen.

The other issue has to do again with more irresponsible reporting, that we went to the United States with 78 Members of Parliament. You know, sometimes it beats my understanding how the thinking of the editors of these newspapers is; 78 Members is three committees of this House! Honourable members, there were only 26 Members of Parliament at the Ugandan North American Association (UNAA) meeting; six of them were ministers sponsored by the Office of the Prime Minister, there were five Members who sponsored themselves and the others were sponsored by Parliament and the committees. It is not that we just go to wander around; I will be reading the communiqué of what we discussed later on. However, I was just talking to you about the irresponsible reporting. 

Citizens of this countryenjoy freedom of expression guaranteed by the Constitution, but this freedom is not absolute; it comes with responsibilities and ends where another person’sfreedom and rights begin. It is important to know that the freedom of expression exercised or enjoyed by journalists through, for example, taking part in governance discussion programmes on radios, in newspapers, does not expect to bring the Members of this House into deliberate ridicule and disrepute.

This morning, I was listening to Radio One and they were talking about a Bill on abortion and they said that we are wizards and nightdancers; we, Members of Parliament. First of all, I have not seen any such Bill in this House; no one has discussed it, but Radio Onewas saying that we, Members of Parliament, are wizards and night dancers. It is out there in the public. I heard it this morning. So, the country now believes that these wizards are planning for abortion. This is irresponsible journalism and it is intended to bring us into disrepute and ridicule. You could even hear the presenters really laughing about the issue. 

It is a breach of privilege and contempt of this House to make speeches or to print or publish libels reflecting on the character or proceedings of the House or its committees or on any Member of the House, or relating to conduct or character of any Member of Parliament.These speeches and writings reflecting on the House or its committees or its Members are punished by the House as contempt on the principle that such acts obstruct the House in the performance of their function by diminishing the respect due to them.

The courts in Uganda have not hadan opportunity to handle this issue but in Canada, this is what the courts said on that issue of slanderous reporting in the case of New Brunswick Broadcasting Company v. Nova Scotia, represented by the Speaker of the National Assembly: “‘Privilege’ in this context denotes the legal exemption from some duty, burden, attendance or liability to which others are subject. It has long been accepted that in order to perform their functions, legislative bodiesrequire certain privileges relating to the conduct of their business. It has also long been accepted that these privileges must be held absolutely and constitutionally if they are to be effective; the legislative branch of our Government must enjoy a certain autonomy which even the Crownand the courts cannot touch.”

The Parliament is a forum for debate for the nation and Government. It is also a law making body. If Members are continuously hounded, their participation could be impeded because they will be expecting sanctions from outside. The privilege we have to speak in this House is like a shield. That is why Members cannot be sued for defamation in respect of proceedings of the Parliament because matters here in Parliament are completely privileged. However, it does not apply to the journalists. 

Honourable members, I am, therefore, giving notice to the journalists that if this continues, we are going to issue sanctions and the editors will be called here to explain. (Applause) We shall send them to the disciplinary committee and they will be called here to explain what theyhave written in their papers. They will have to apologise to the country and to this House.I am cautioning you, you people of the press; donot abuse the privileges of being in this House. 

Honourable members, as I indicated, we attended the 28th Ugandan North American Association meeting. That is an annual meeting where the Ugandan Diaspora meet. I would like to assure you that there are difficult meetings, sometimes hostile, and that is why we have to go there and speak for our country.Part of the time, the people in the Diaspora are busy badmouthing Government, speaking against the country, trying to prevent us from getting support, stopping tourists from coming to this country. That is why we have to go and speak for the country and for the people.

This time we discussed issues of manufacturing in Uganda, how to encourage innovation, lowering the cost of labour and materials and improving supplier networks. We resolved that Government should setup a digital portal to harness development ideas from the Diaspora.There is already somebody from Design without Borders who has a portal. I am going to be interesting the Government to see whether they can transfer that portal to Uganda to be able to market our country.

We agreed to develop exchange programmes where Ugandans can go to the United States to benchmark these digital technology practices.
We agreed to develop a system to enable entrepreneurs to connect with service providers like hospitals and schools so that they can develop some critical and relevant productive solutions. In this regard, honourable members, this October I will be handing over a donation of full hospital equipment first to Kamuli Hospital then to Rakia Health Centre IV and Kalangala Hospital, donated by Medi-Share and paid for by Coca Cola. Coca Cola International of Atlanta transported those goods to Uganda; they are here. This is part of the fruits of going to those meetings. (Applause) That one is on-going. 

We agreed to develop a system to encourage Ugandans in the Diaspora with innovation ideas and capital to partner with Ugandans at home. Honourable members, when people are out there, I think they concentrate on other things and forget about their country. Some of them are sitting there with their money and do not know what to do with it. They have ideas but do not know where to put them.

In that regard, I want to call upon the Government - One of the things they are demanding for is a one-stop centre where they can get information of what to do, where to go; when they come back, where do they report in case they want to come back to this country? If they want employment, where do they go? These are some of the things they want us to handle. 

We talked about reducing the energy gap in Uganda.We agreed that we are going to work with the Minister for Science, Technology and Innovation to link up with our people to make sure that we benefit from their knowledge. There is a Ugandan called Marvin Apira who presented a solution that would reduce the cost of fuel. If we were to use 100 litres to go to Mbarara, the gadget he presented to us would reduce the cost by 50 per cent. He wanted us to take an interest in that and see whether Ugandans can adopt it to cut costs in our work.

We had good meetings with the Ugandan bankers who came there. I am planning to bring a number of banks here to talk to the Members about the opportunities for themselves and for the population.They told us about services that are available and the people of Uganda can use.

On tourism, we were told that we do not have a brand as a country. So, they asked us to work on brand, which would be marketed for Uganda. They said that we are talking about many things about Uganda but they do not know which particular one represents Uganda.They want us to put more effort in the tourism sector, and I have already talked to the Minister of State for Tourism about that.

I reported to them that we now have a new Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, which will address part of these problems. We told them that we have a labour force, which has some training because of the number of graduates that we have in our country. We talked about the laws we have made to facilitate things like local content. Remember we made those laws. We told them about the improvement in the electricity supply in the country and the things that are going on. We also talked about improvement in infrastructure - the Entebbe-Kampala Express Highway which is under construction; the Jinja-Kampala Expressway; the roads constructed throughout Uganda to ease movement of people throughout the country.

We also agreed that at each meeting, we shall have a communiqué and we shall be reporting on what we have done during the year to one another, from both their side and our side. We were also advised by the Government of Massachusetts - Uganda has about 200,000 people in the state of Massachusetts alone. We were told that it is important to open up a Uganda office so that the Government of Massachusetts can work on programmes to support the Ugandans there and those in this country. Massachusetts is a major centre of technology in the USA and they told us to take advantage of those opportunities and create linkages between our universities, technology bodies and those in the State of Massachusetts. 

That is what I had to say, honourable members, so that the country should not be deceived; no one can take 78 people from Parliament. It is not possible. It is just sickness of the - 

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think you have omitted one thing about the meeting with the chairperson of the group that is going to build a hospital in Soroti for the treatment of fistula, a problem that affects women.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were many linkages made. Let us continue to engage for our country. Thank you very much.

3.19
MR GUTOMOI ABACONON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue of medals for former MPs. Hon. Tonny Otoa was a former Member of Parliament in the Sixth Parliament and UPDF representative but his name is missing. I do not know how we are going to access some of these Members because according to the Daily Monitornewspaper, some Members’ names are missing. How are they going to be informed or how will the concerned committee communicate to those who were Members in those parliaments?

THE SPEAKER: Yesterday, in my communication, I had said that if there are Members who know those people or their families, they should let us know so that we can contact them. However, the Clerk is informed that hon. Otoa’s name has been omitted. I also got hon. Ziritwawula; he said his name is not there. Therefore, if there is any other, please give us the names quickly so that we can make room for them. Is there any reaction to what I have communicated?

3.20
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on the reporting by the media, particularly on the issue of the send-off of fallen colleagues.

Madam Speaker, you know that if somebody was to ask who wanted that money here, the answer would be nobody because no one wants to die and partake of that money. Nobody wants it.If we do not spend it, it is even better because nobody really wants to enjoy it. 

However, my concern is on the imported caskets for burial of the fallen Members of Parliament.I think this needs to be looked at and discouraged. I think we have sufficient timber here, which can make very important and good caskets. It would be unfortunate for a colleague who is departed to depart in a foreign casket. I think we should encourage the use of our locally made caskets. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.22
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that we are discussing a very difficult matter, a very sad reminder. In a book called Betrayal in the City, the author said that they found one character pulling out grey hair. He did not want anyone to know that he had grey hair, but one time he was found and they asked him what he was doing; he said,“Grey hair signifies wisdom but it is a sad reminder of you getting old”. 

The sad reminder of death found its space on the front page of the Daily Monitor, and it reminds us that one of us is likely to die. I am wondering about the corporate policy of the Daily Monitor or other agencies. I wonder whether they do not have that as a contingency in their own planning.

Madam Speaker, we joined Parliament and we thought we could offer services to our people. We should interest ourselves in investigating who is demonising Parliament. What wrong have we done? We are spending time – This country needs to get to a middle-income status but you can imagine we are discussing how much is going to be spent on the death of a Member of Parliament; we are spending time on how much is being spent on a Member’s vehicle. I wish we could help ourselves. Someone wrote in the book of Galatians and said, “Who has bewitched you, you Galatians”. I think, if that author was present today, he would say “Who has bewitched Ugandans that what does not matter, matters and we leave things which matter at the periphery.”

I was wondering about the way forward, Madam Speaker.We need the media and the media needs us. How can we strike a balance so that apart from inciting and exciting, the reporting could be informative and instructive? (Member timed out.)

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN PLANNING (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Today, one journalist called me and said, “Can you come and appear on a talk show and discuss how your funeral will cost lots of millions?” I asked, “How can I discuss my funeral when I am alive?”

Madam Speaker, Parliament is an institution, which should be respected. Even when our friends, the media practitioners, come here, they should follow rules. While they have independence to write, most often they vulgarise their work by just ridiculing Parliament and presenting things which do not put the image of Parliament in the right perspective.

Just the other day when the earthquake hit Uganda, I was in the office and journalists from the New Vision were interviewing me and they got scared. I told them,“No, remain here; I am a Mukiga man, I cannot run because of an earthquake” and we continued the interview. What did they write the following day? They said I took off from the building. (Laughter)  When I told them that I did not even move from my chair, they said, “No, we just wanted to create humour that you got scared yet you are the minister in charge of housing”. I told them there are certain things which they should not just write.

Madam Speaker, I think the Parliamentary Commission needs to write guidelines. I know they are there but they should strengthen them to guide the journalists who cover Parliament. I know there are accredited officials from the media who come here. However, the Parliamentary Commission should have strong guidelines which they should follow. 

Madam Speaker, also, if resources permit, maybe you could budget for capacity building for some of these media practitioners so that they understand how Parliament works. This is because Parliament is a specialised institution and they should be taken through some of the basics. I would appeal that the Parliamentary Commission also builds their capacity and trains them. Most often, they cover committees where we discuss very serious policy matters but what do they write – “Members of Parliament are taking tea and Mandazi”, when actually there are very serious issues which are being discussed in the committees.

They could be writing this maybe out of malice but maybe some of them out of capacity issues. The Parliamentary Commission shouldfirst build their capacity and then also sensitise them so that they can understand the work of Parliament.If they do not know –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Put strict guidelines which they should be able to follow so that they do not turn Parliament into a market place where they just come and write anything that puts our image in bad shape. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I am more inclined to think it is a campaign of malice. It is not the lack of capacity. It is a pattern; it is a campaign; it is organised and probably funded. 

Before hon. Ogwang comes up, please join me in welcoming the pupils and teachers of Ngora Day and Boarding Primary School. They are represented by hon. Abala and hon. Jacqueline Amongin. Please, stand up –(Mr Abala rose.)

3.29
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, first of all, I would like to thank you – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. The procedural issue I am raising is: did you ask Members of Parliament to stand up or the children to stand up because I saw a colleague standing up. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: That Member represents those children. He was just greeting them.

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you for highlighting a few challenges which we are beginning to face with our friends in the media, the fourth estate.

I think looking at the world over, freedom of press, in my opinion, is more abused in Uganda. It is only in Uganda where you can write anything which is even unfounded and it makes a very big headline both in national newspapers and other print media, Facebook, Twitter, among others.

Look at the current situation of the Parliament of Uganda - The worst is what the Speaker stated earlier onabout the 78 Members of Parliament who supposedly went to the USA. Who wrote that story? It was one of the journalists accredited to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. What do you expect us to do to such a journalist?

Look at the issues which are coming up – cars!“Commissioner, come and discuss an issue on the television programme regarding a car.” How do I go and discuss a car given to a Member of Parliament? With due respect, why do you want me to go and discuss my entitlement; is that news? 

I would like to ask our friends, the journalists who are before us here, “what is the motive of this campaign?” The high attrition rate of Members of Parliament is only attributed to the bad press about Members of Parliament. We must join hands. I think time is up and we should begin looking at how to handle some of the laws which exist in the country because we have the power. It is becoming too much and if we do not look at the future, we might get a country blownup one day because of bad press.

Madam Speaker, this is my humble appeal to the journalists: Be nationalistic. Today, you are here thinking of destroying Kadaga, destroying Members of Parliament but you are destroying your own country. Look at the issue of funerals of Members of Parliament; they talk about funerals but who would wish to die? How many of these very journalists are planned for at their own places of work? Instead of working hard and thinking that if they died also, they should be given a decent burial within their work places, they are here talking about us. Instead of working with us on how to improve the image of their working places, they are just here on us –(Member timed out.)

3.32
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When some of us had just come to Parliament, we went to Kyankwanzi and the leaders of media houses came too. They told us that every piece of information written is well researched and it is the right information. That is what they said when we were in Kyankwanzi. 

When our team went to UNAA, the media organisations were running information that every MP who went to UNAAwas coming back with more than Shs 21 million as balance. One time, I was forced to respond to one of the media houses in my area. I asked them to get a calculator and we began calculatingbecause per diem for an MP is now a public secret. I asked them to tell me the rate at which they pay for all those other stories. At times, I wonder; we work with journalists and they are our friends but constituencies have become very hostile because everybody is aware MPs just swim in money. People believe that when you are here, you have all the money. This is all caused by the media houses.

We have our Commission, a department of communications, and various media houses even have an office here; I request that all our departments that are concerned with this hold a meeting with some of these people and come to a compromise with them. We need to strike a balance and push this country where we all wish it to go. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.35
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thankyou, Madam Speaker. When Parliament lost its powers to appoint commissioners, it started lamenting. Today, when we have a deliberate effort to tarnish the image of Parliament and we are again lamenting. I would like the Members who are sitting here today to find a solution because there is a hand somewhere trying to tarnish the image of Parliament intentionally.I would like the Members to find a solution today. 

We may blame the journalists but then we know there is a certain hand behind ensuring that the image of Parliament is tarnished. I will give you an example, Madam Speaker. I heard an honourable Member of Parliament saying on a radio station programme that we had more than 60 Members of Parliament attending UNAA. I asked him to reveal the source and he said he read it in Kamunyenewspaper. I then asked him how he could depend on Kamunyenewspaper when he is a Member of Parliament. 

At the same time, there is an effort today where almost all papers have to make headlines hitting at Parliament - Parliament is demanding Shs 200 million for vehicles; Parliament went to UNAA and spent our money; Parliament wants Shs 10,000 for lunch; Parliament wants money for their burials, and many other things. They know that the moment this Parliament’s image is damaged, the people out there will lose trust in us. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.36
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Interruption)

MS AMODING: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a procedural matter. I believe the issue we are discussing is fundamental and very important. I appreciate, Madam Speaker, it is from your communication that these comments are arising. However, would it not be proper if we brought this through a formal motion through which we make resolutions and take action? If we keep talking and lamenting about it without making a formal resolution of Parliament, it may not be- I need to be guided on that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the right to move a motion is yours. When your opportunity comes, you can propose. However, let us hear Members’ views first for the Hansard.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. First of all, I would like to tell my colleagues that death is a sure deal. (Laughter) As you walk, know that at any time, you will die. For me, I still pray to God that none of you dies within the five years. 

When you die, there are three things the mourners come to see at your home: are you dead, do you have a home and food to eat.However, there are those who genuinely come to mourn. Yesterday, I went for a burial of a colleague in Forum for Democratic Change (FDC). When the time came for food, I could not believe the queues. I discovered that even at funerals, people want to eat. (Laughter) 

I would like to tell Members of Parliament that the issue we are raising is not just about Members of Parliament only. I would like you to get that big book; it has everything. Even when a civil servant dies, it is there. What people have decided to do is to read about Parliament only, and the people who are directing them to read about Parliament are most likely our colleagues in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

If you go and read that book, you will also discover that when a PS dies, they do X, Y and Z. I also urge you to publish that after reading the book. It is because that is the job of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. That book has all the information. For me, budgeting for five MPs per year is very dangerous; those are too many. You make me even worried. (Laughter) One day, of course, an earthquake can happen here and we all will go at once. 

I also wanted to support my colleague, hon. Lubogo. When you are dead, you are dead. That is why I like Muslims. With Shs 13,000 for a piece of cloth, they will bury you. It is because you came withoutanything and you will go back without anything. Even if they put your open hands out, you cannot carry anything. Why are we investing money to import coffins? The Government of Uganda should ban the importation of coffins. That should be the first thing to look at. You are talking about a Member of Parliament, even me now- (Member timed out.)

3.41
COL FELIX KULAYIGE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Death is inevitable whether you plan for it or not. However, I would like to talk about two issues. First of all, this information, I have been told,is coming from some of us in this House. The second source are staff of Parliament.

Parliament was gracious enough to establish an office of communications to deal with the media. If there is any debate to be done in a media house about an issue in Parliament, that office is sufficient. If they wanta Member of Parliament, then the issues should be particular to a committee of Parliament, the issues we have discussed or what we are handling. About the administration of Parliament, it falls under your jurisdiction, Madam Speaker, and your staff. That is my observation. Thank you.

3.42
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a journalist by profession and as hon. Kibalya said, we always write facts from a source. On this matter, I am very worried that some of the staff of Parliament are the ones who giving out most of this information to the media. 

I do not want us to be seen as an institution suppressing the freedom of expression but I have some information about how all this goes to the media. I can be consulted privately to give out all these details. (Interjections)- Yes, some of the staff here, whom I know, give out information to the media to make it be seen as if we are taking everything, as if we have –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, come and give me the information.

3.43
MR TONY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. We thank you for raising this issue. If we keep quiet, you will find that over time, out of the three arms of Government it is Parliament that is going to be isolated and it is the institution of Parliament that people are going to be incited against, and it is going to destroy all of us.

It is important for us to understand the reason why journalists have persistently made it a point that today in Uganda if there is no news coming from Parliament in the print media, then there is no news; however, if there is anything concerning Parliament, then there is news. We need to understand why the trend has taken that kind of direction to negatively report against Parliament.I was surprised when the issue of providing meals here became a very serious concern, to the extent of those in villages calling Members of Parliament all sorts of names and yet in all these organisations, they provide meals for their staff in order to motivate and support them to do their work.

Therefore, let us find out who is inciting journalists and Ugandans against Parliament. It is true there is poverty and the economy is not doing very well but nobody is asking Government to deliver. When there is corruption in the Judiciary, nobody is asking the Judiciary to deliver –(Member timed out.)

3.46
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro South, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The problem of the profession is larger than them trying to make us look bad vis-à-vis burial privileges, for example. 

I am a member of the Committee onICT and recentlywe got a chance to visit the Media Council.One of the questions we asked them was why the media was allowed to be as crazy as it is in Uganda - the media with the exception of Super FM because you know we are disciplined there. The answer they gave us, which I think will take care of what we are dealing with, is that the Media Act and the Press and Journalists Act are toothless. We, as a nation, do not have the capacity, in those laws, to be able to discipline people who are in the business of sensationalising anything they can run into in order to sell newspapers.

Therefore, I would like to take this opportunity to implore this House -We are working now with the Media Council to amend the Bill and give it some real teeth made out of metal and titanium; so I implore this House to please support us when we bring that Bill into this House to make sure that we can finally put the press into a position of discipline. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

3.48
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I see that this issue of money for burial is becoming a burden. This morning, when I woke up, I found a gentleman witha newspaper and when he first saw the headline, “Shs 68 million for MPs burial”, he opened his mouth very wide wondering how Shs 68 million will be meant to bury a Member of Parliament. This money is a kind of curse on us once we publish it. I think it would be very wise if we kept this kind of thing a secret.

It also makes these people start cursing us. Those who go to church and even those who go to the witchdoctors are praying that Members of Parliament should die so that this money is released and they buy meat so they can come and eat. It was very unfortunate this morning when I went for my morning run, people were proudly saying Shs 68 million is for burying us. We should be very careful in whatever is being published in this House. Thank you very much.

3.49
MR GEORGE OUMA ABBOT (NRM, Bukooli Islands, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Bible says “Many are called and few are chosen.” We are here purposely to represent Ugandans and this is the most dignified House. I am very happy that you have been defending this House, Madam Speaker. 

Asto what my colleagues have said, the problem is not the media alone but it is us. Rule 211 is about contempt of Parliament. When I go to the media and say that we went to such a place and we were bribed this, who is causing problems? It is we. We must check clearly who is bringing this House into disrepute. I am saying that we must check ourselves before we go to the media and begin blaming them. 

However, the media should help us because what they are doing to this House- It is my right to be buried, by the way, and decently. Even my people from Bukooli Islands need me to be buried. I should have a vehicle and all that is required. It is we to defend ourselves and tell the media that what they are doing is not right for the people of Uganda. Thank you very much.

3.50
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Mr Chris Obore, who has tried his best to give a picture about what Parliament does and also comment on some of these issues. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of cars has not gone down well with our people but I am glad one time you tried to clarify that there are three arms of Government - the Executive, Judiciary and Parliament. The Judiciary and Executive and even RDCs are given vehicles.

THE SPEAKER: Even NRM district chairpersons have vehicles now.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: They have vehicles, but the third arm of Government, which is Parliament, is being given junk –second-hand vehicles, which are polluting the atmosphere and environment in this country. One time I was asking my colleagues here why Parliament cannot provide new vehicles for Members of Parliament because we are the third arm of Government, instead of people shouting and saying we are getting vehicles, Shs 200 million, 100 million, 130 million, and so forth. The Members of Parliament are the third arm of Government and they help to run this Government. 

The media would probably convey the right message to the public. You need Members of Parliament. We want people to know what is going on in the House and you can help us do that. However, if you twist things around – of course when you say Shs 68 million, I will say,“no” because Parliament cannot put aside Shs 68 million for the burial of a person. I think that money can be useful somewhere but it is not Shs 68 million; that is not the true picture.

Madam Speaker, in the last Parliament, members of the press went to court and they were defeated. I think some of those who were defeated are the ones running around –(Member timed out.)

3.53
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a problem; why are we shying away and yet we need the money and the vehicles? The only problem I see is that the Muslims were left out since they included money for a casket. For me as a Member of Parliament, I looked at the breakdown but I did not see where I am catered for. Honourable colleagues, all of us are going to die; now we should be reassured and do our work knowing that whatever happens, there is a way we shall be given a send-off with respect.

Madam Speaker, the other day I was reading some newspapers and they had published pictures of vehicles which they called “DMCs of some Members of Parliament”. I said to myself, “okay, that means they are saying the quicker we get these vehicles, the better”. The other day, they were showing houses of some Members of Parliament and they were saying, “This is not fit for an MP”. In actual fact, we need even better houses. When we have DMC cars, they come and make fun of Members of Parliament but when the Speaker and the Government decide to raise the welfare of the Members of Parliament to suit their status, then they complain.

They are even talking about the food in our canteen. It is not that we cannot afford to buy our own food but it is part of the welfare given to us. The other time, Madam Speaker, you were here; do you know why these media are not in this House? Instead of focusing on the issues in this august House, they were just taking photographs of ladies’ legs and you asked them to stop it and at least we are now at peace. (Laughter)

MS BINTU: Thank you, hon. Kawooya. Madam Speaker, the information, which I want to give my honourable colleague and this august House is that during the NRC, Members of Parliament were given brand new cars; you were not expected to drive an old car. A brand new car today costs between Shs 400 million to Shs 500 million. 

Madam Speaker, you remember that we lost many Members of Parliament in the previous parliaments because of these DMCs. Actually, Government should come out and buy brand new cars for Members or give us the Shs 500 million. That way, our lives will be secure. 

The lives of members of the other arms of Government are secure but for us, the little money they are talking about can only buy for a Member a DMC car and then all of a sudden, the engine chokes and the Member gets an accident and we shall come here paying tribute. No, no, no, this is an arm of Government which even appropriates money. I support my colleague who says that we do not need to shy away; this is our right. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, on that note, I want to say that if there is this privilege in the offing, we, the Muslims and the rest of the Members, need more money because they have not even put a package that caters for my children when I go. What will happen to the welfare of those I have left behind like my husband and children? So, I am not among those who are shying away; I say, thank you very much but consider us by giving us money and food and we shall do our work. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to end here. I challenge the media to publish the cost of new cars for the ministers, permanent secretaries, commissioners, undersecretaries, principal secretaries and directors in Government; publish also those for the Judiciary and then we can talk about Parliament.So, how do we conclude, honourable members? How do we close this matter? How do we move?

3.58
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (Independent, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a Member of the ICT committee and part of our role is to make sure that broadcasting, in terms of local content, is within qualitative standards. We have been touring Government institutions that regulate the media and as far as our observation is concerned, the issue is all about having a strong legal framework.

Madam Speaker, it is based on this background and considering the reactions from Members of Parliament that I take this opportunity to move a motion to amend the laws governing local content and the media institutions, so that Parliament and other stakeholders can make the journalists accountable under oath. Madam Speaker, I beg to move the motion.

4.00
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will pick up from what hon. Peter Sematimba stated. If the committee is working on that, can they expedite the process such that by the time they bring those proposals for the amendment of the Act, then we can deal with these issues? (Interjections) No, it is because we have to amend the law in order to enforce some of these things. I think regarding that aspect, let us take that approach; let the committee expedite the process, bring the proposed amendments here and then we deal with that.

Members are raising issues here regarding our entitlement; it is our entitlement. Hon. Nandala has just talked about the standing orders; these are our entitlements. Government does not buy second-hand cars; why should Government violate her own laws by buying second-hand cars? I think the rules are very clear. Let us go by the rules that Government uses when it is procuring vehicles.

4.01
MR ABACANON GUTOMOI	(FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a professional news headline editor. I think what is happening is simple; these people are using MPs and Parliament as a means of selling their newspapers. I askone question: Is it not criminal? Once it is in this form now, which is belittling the Members of Parliament and the institution, why can’t we take the electronic media to court so that they answer for it? This is because it is too much for us now and we cannot watch while they are committing a crime against this institution. 

I understand they are selling like hot cakes when they write about this. Right now, we are discussing about it, Madam Speaker; you wait and see the headlines tomorrow. They are going to put a very hot one which can sell like hot cakes in order for them to earn money. So, these people must be taken to court. Thank you very much.

4.02
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we conclude this topic, I would just like to make a simple suggestion; whether we like it or not, the media houses are still going to target us because we are celebrities of some sort. As we wait for hon. Peter Sematimba and his group to come up with something concrete, let us also take up these journalists at their own game. They are thriving on the ignorance of the public. We, as Members of Parliament, can also go to those very media houses and defend ourselves so that the public has two sides of the coin. (Interjections) I still believe it will work. 

If we just keep quiet and the public is fed on only one source of information, that means we are going to lose out. My suggestion is that we also go out to those media houses, talk to the people and then they make informed decisions. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us close with hon. Nyakecho. 

4.03
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A majority of us in this House have suffered at the hands of the media. If you have not, then your portion is coming very soon. This is meant to tarnish our image before the public. I would, therefore, like to propose, as hon. Peter Sematimba had suggested, that this House gives the Committee on Information and Communication Technology a timeframe, probably two weeks, for the chairperson to come here and give us their position so that we move and amend the Act as soon as we can. 

Madam Speaker, every other day you will find something negative in the media about a Member of Parliament. They will never publish anything positive about any Member of Parliament or this House, and yet this House has done a lot for this country. Parliament has the potential to cause a revolution and to strengthen and make things right in the country. 

Due to the fact that some invisible hands are afraid of the powers of Parliament, they will go very fast and pay journalists to write false articles about it. At times, these journalists are paid little money to do what they are doing. The journalists then go and run stories that discredit Parliament in the public eye; even if you stand up and want to say something sensible, they will claim that you have been bribed. 

We also have Members in this House who are going out and tarnishing their colleagues’ names. It is probably because most of us are still new in the process but we need guidelines on who, how, when and what we should say when we go out to speak to the media. It is very wrong and dirty, sorry to use that word, for a fellow colleague to go out and start damaging the names of other colleagues. In this way, the person contributes towards what we are already crying about. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I beg that we put the committee on- (Member timed out.)

4.06
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kaabule County, Lyantonde): Madam Speaker, all that has been said is true but what is important is the invisible hand- that person putting in an effort for Members of Parliament to lose public trust.

We should focus on the last conclusion, even if we do not go into details. Madam Speaker, some of us voted for you because you have been defending this institution- the image of Parliament as an institution and the way the public looks at us. We are most likely to have another revolution like in Gabon, where they burnt the institution of Parliament- 

THE SPEAKER: It was Burkina Faso.

MR KAKOOZA: Burkina Faso. If Members of Parliament lose integrity and public trust, then there will be no business done here. You will go to a funeral, they will mock you and you will say nothing. A law will be passed here and they will question it. 

It is better for our committee, if we have one, to deal with the nitty-gritty of who is behind this. We could probably get a comprehensive report from them and then make a law. President Kagame has dealt with this; you cannot take tabloids to Rwanda. If you look at what happened in Tanzania recently, you cannot import that nonsense to that country, even Ethiopia. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude. 

MR KAKOOZA: It is Members of Parliament that have the authority to legislate any law against anything which can damage this country. What are we waiting for? It is high time we woke up. Let us bring a private Members’ Bill to this House and state that anybody reporting un-factual things should go to hell!

You see what they are writing about you; they are not writing about you as a person, but they are damaging the institution of Parliament. This institution has been here and we shall leave it here. However, it is we, Members, to shape the future of this institution. It is high time our committee woke up and looked for a private Members’Bill to bring here and state that anybody reporting un-factual information should go to hell, as simple as that. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us conclude with hon. OdongaOtto and then we take a position. 

4.09
MR SAMUEL ODONGAOTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. If we add all our votes and get the average, it looks like the percentage of the losers is more than that of the winners. This is because some people got 80 per cent, others 30 and others 20. That means the people out there against this Parliament seem to be more than those who voted for us to come here. 

That notwithstanding, I was in Tanzania recently; the popular President John Magufuli came out with regulations such as no live coverage of Parliament –(Interjections)– No, I am just giving an example of the extremes other countries go to. In Tanzania, in case one needs information, one has to go to the media centre in Parliament and you get it. 

Yesterday, we did a great thing in this Parliament. I expected praises but I was so disturbed with the headline I saw today. It focussed on burials of Members of Parliament with a picture of a coffin. Even if they are spending Shs 68 million to bury a Member of Parliament, the dead Member of Parliament does not benefit from it; it is the living who benefit from it -the coffin maker, the police, the transporter as well as the mourners. (Laughter) Therefore, what is the problem? 

Madam Speaker, this plan is a ploy is to fight the institution, especially the Speaker of Parliament. Last week, I won a court case. I was the lawyer representing the Speaker of Parliament and the court awarded Shs 120 million for exemplary damages and all costs we prayed for because of writing a defamatory article about the Speaker. Last year, I was also paid Shs 25 million by the Red Pepper for writing a defamatory article. 

I, therefore, think the public relations office of Parliament should not sleep. We should go to court for any wrong article published. Let them lose money. Some people believe that the media will finish you if you talk. Madam Speaker, I would insist this House stands strong. The journalists should be accredited. The other time you proposed- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my brother, hon. Odonga Otto. The clarification I would like to seek is whether there is defamation of a group or an institution? If it is there, are they going to pay us? Who gets the money, so that we get interested? (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The law of defamation is in persona; hon. Oboth, you are a senior attorney- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute to conclude.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you. The law of defamation is to an individual. However, we should not make them relax. Do not give them space; any article you see in the newspaper, which affects the individual, do not give them space. When I went to court, they came running to me saying “we shall finish you” and I told them, “I am already naked, there is nothing to cover, you go ahead and finish me.” (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that we respect you. I am a member of the Opposition but I hold you in high esteem. You have helped this House at the most turbulent times. (Applause) You are making personal sacrifices even at the risk of being misunderstood. When we destroy the institution, we will have destroyed all of us.

Now, let me also warn some of our colleagues. I have seen our colleagues talking in the media. When our colleagues were representing Uganda in international conferences, I saw them spitting fire. Ugandans should participate in all international summits. You are a Member of Parliament and you are ridiculing colleagues who are representing youat another function and you join the media to make news!

In Uganda, news is bad news. If it was good news, instead the news should have been that the Speaker of Parliament led a delegation of Ugandans to attract investors from the USA, but here it is the other side of the news. So, we need to send some of these Members to the disciplinary committee. (Applause)

Lastly, in the Eighth Parliament, Rt Hon. Speaker Edward Ssekandi ruled, when he was ruling hon. Lukyamuzi out of order, that you have a right to be reckless but with yourself, not with the institution. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first of all, I want agree with hon. Otto that if we hit these people financially, they will end up like Uganda Confidential. They used to tell stories about us and they were sued until they collapsed. By the time he went to court, he was finished. So, let us take them to court as many times as possible, until they become sensible.

Secondly, honourable members, stop talking about everything. New people talk about things they do not know. Honourable members, stop talking just anyhow. (Applause) You also contributed to this kind of thing. Stop talking anyhow about anything. I think we should not handle this with kids’ gloves. I would like to instruct the rules committee to examine this publication and charge these people with contempt of Parliament – the press people. (Applause) We are giving you two weeks to do that, Chairman of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and your colleagues. Let us take action. Thank you

CONSTITUTION OF COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since 13 July 2016, we have been designating Members to standing and sectoral committees. We made a resolution on 9 August 2016 to vary the number of Members in committees and after that resolution, which designated and re-designated Members to committees, we approved them. However, some of the committees do not conform to the Rules of Procedure. Some three standing committees and three sectoral committees are still over-subscribed.

There are 18 Members who are designated to more than one standing committee; so, we would like the whips to look at that situation again. I want to name the Members who are on more than one committee:

    1. Hon. Sabiiti - designated to both the Human Rights and Science and Technology committees;
    2. Hon.Lufafa - on both the Human Rights and HIV/AIDS committees;
    3. Hon. Michael Ayepa - on both the Human Rights and National Economy committees;
    4. Hon. Samson Lokeris - on both the Human Rights and National Economy committees;
    5. Hon. Richard Muhumuza - on both the Rules and Privileges and Science And Technology committees;
    6. Hon. Onegiu Biyika is - on both the Rules and Privileges and Science And Technology committees;
    7. Hon. Aston Kajara - on both the Rules and National Economy committees;
    8. Hon. Andrew Martial -is on both the Rules and Privileges and National Economy committees;
    9. Hon. John Baptist Lokii - on both the Rules and Privileges and the Public Accounts committees;
    10. Hon. Julius Acon - on both the Local Government and HIV/AIDS committees;
    11. Hon. Stephen Kisa - both the Government Assurances and the Public Accounts committees;
    12. Hon. Godfrey Onzima – on both government assurances and local government accounts committees;
    13. Hon. Mark Dulu - on both the government assurances and local government committees;
    14. Hon. Stephen Mayende - on both the Government Assurances and COSASE;
    15. Hon. Francis Zaake - on both Government Assurances and Equal Opportunities committees;
    16. Hon. Francis Mukula - on both the Local Government and Equal Opportunities committees. We shall ask our coordinator, hon. Aja Baryayanga, to sort that one out.
    17. Hon. Gerald Karuhanga – both Local Government and Equal Opportunities committees;
    18. Hon. Nsereko Wakayima – both Government Assurances and HIV/AIDS committees.

On the sectoral committees, we have the following:
    a) Hon. Jovrine Kaliisa is on both the Committee on Public Service and Local Government and the Committee of the East African Community;
    b) Hon. ElijahOkupa is on both the natural resources and physical infrastructure committees.

I would like to ask that the whips attend to that situation.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That was corrected.The one where they had put me on natural resources and physical infrastructurewas corrected. I was moved back to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. The other one where there is a problem now is what they have submitted, where I am under COSASE but it was captured as rules and privileges. I would like that to be corrected for me so that it remains COSASE.

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the whips to formalise the corrections because I do not think that I will be in position to handle each one of you. Let us formalise all the corrections through the whips.

The committees which are oversubscribed are as follows:
    a) The Committee on National Economy: TheNRMhas 25 and they need to reduce by one; the Opposition has four Members and they have one vacant slot; Independents have six Members and we need to reduce by one.

    b) Public Accounts Committee: the NRM are okay with 24 Members; Opposition needs to reduce by two because they have seven Members; Independents need to reduce by two because they have seven Members.

    c) COSASE: NRM have 23 and they have one slot vacant; Opposition have five and they are okay; Independents are nine, we need to reduce by four.

    d) Committee on Finance, NRM has 20 Members which is okay; Opposition has five Members, they need to reduce by one; Independents are five, which is okay

    e) Committee on Natural Resources, NRM has 20 which is okay; Opposition has five, they need to reduce by one; Independents have six, they need to reduce by one.

    f) Committee on Physical Infrastructure, NRM has 20; Opposition has seven, they need to reduce by three; Independents are five and those are okay.

There are Members who are not yet designated anywhere:
    a) Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi, DP
    b) Hon. Nabilah Naggayi, FDC
    c) Hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho, FDC
    d) Hon. Latif Ssebaggala – I thought he was on foreign affairs.
    e) Hon. William Nokrach, Independent
    f) Hon. Isma Mafabi – not yet allocated.

Let me ask the coordinators and whips to review that situation. 

Honourable members, today is Thursday; I know that we took some time on the other matter but it was very important. Therefore, I would like to allow a few Members to raise some small matters.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is that the rules we are using are for the Ninth Parliament. A few minutes ago, I heard Members saying that we need to make our own rules so that we are able to choose our commissioners, for example. When are we having our rules amended because some of those that applied to the Ninth Parliament, for example the number of MPs on committees, may not apply to this one? The procedural issue I am raising, therefore, is: when are we debating the amended version of our rules?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we amended the numbers for the committees so that Members could start work from somewhere. We did not touch the rules. We had asked the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to complete the proposals and I think hon. Obote will be briefing us on how far they have gone. So, it is ongoing.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If it is ongoing, Madam Speaker, then when are they inviting us to present our proposals? 

THE SPEAKER: You are the ones who want the rules amended; if they asked you to present your proposals, what is the problem? How will they know what you want if you do not take your proposals there?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, we were all invited in writing and by SMS to take our views to the committee. I think my honourable colleague could have been abroad but those are the latest events, which have passed. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, take your proposals as requested by the committee.

4.24
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to raise an issue of national importance.

Madam Speaker, there is a conflict between National Forestry Authority (NFA) and Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom over a central forest reserve called Bugoma. The memorandum of understanding between Government and the Bunyoro Kingdom, drawn during the return of properties to the traditional leaders under the Traditional Rulers (Restitution of Assets and Property) Statute, 1993, did not include the natural resources therein. 

As we speak, the Omukama of the Bunyoro Kingdom has got a freehold title of land measuring 5,779 hectares on block 2, plot 216 at Kyangwali, which is within a central forest reserve. This part of the land was gazetted under Legal Statute Notice No. 87 of 1932 and re-gazetted under Legal Notice No. 41 of 1948. As such, it is under the management of National Forestry Authority.

Madam Speaker, this title was acquired by the Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom under the Omukama of Bunyoro Kitara on 1 August 2016 as a freehold title. Thereafter, it was leased to Hoima Sugar Company. All the transfers of the title were done in three days.
As we speak, even the locals have so far cleared 11,000 hectares trying to acquire land in the forest reserve –(Interruption)

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, this case is before the courts of law. Is it procedurally right for this august House to start anticipating the ruling, which is going to come from court?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was not aware that it was in court, but if it is in court then we should not be discussing it.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, there was a case in court and it was concluded. As we speak, even the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, who is in this House, has already ordered for the cancellation of that illegal land title. I am even surprised that the honourable colleague - (Interruption)

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, even yesterday there were court proceedings in Masindi court. So, is the honourable member in order to misinform this august House? I actually represent Masindi District and the information, which we got yesterday, is that all of us were actually expected to be in Masindi. Is she in order to misguide this House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if the matter is still in court, it is sub judice.

4.29
MR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to invite honourable members to come to Kisoro, in case they are not aware that Kisoro exists. It is beautiful place, with fantastic scenic beauty. I would, therefore, wish to encourage you to come over.

Madam Speaker, the reason I have stood is to bring up a matter, which is of great concern to many Ugandans. The first thing I should say is that a few years ago when Ms Jennifer Musisi was appointed the Executive Director of Kampala City Council Authority, within a short time there was huge amount of change, qualitatively speaking. This is particularly with regard to the issue of street children and their mothers who were a nuisance to the motorists and passengers.

Before she came in, at every stage we had that problem that was really an embarrassment to the nation, in my view. When we began to see change, there was hope that Kampala City would clearly enter the ranks of modern cities that would bring pride to all of us as Ugandans.

Some time ago, Madam Speaker, that change suddenly disappeared. What you see today is a matter that should concern every decent Ugandan, everyone who must take pride in this nation and who wants to see good governance obtaining everywhere including on our streets. Today you see hordes of children, poorly dressed and with their mothers sometimes, giving a hard time to passengers and motorists. I think this is not something we should support. 

I, therefore, want to bring this matter before the House. I also ask Government to come out and save this nation from the indignity of seeing some of our children like this. They clearly would have a great future if they were supported to get off our streets. I can imagine that some of these street children could one time become speakers of this august House, but we are losing the resources God has given this nation simply because we are careless.

Madam Speaker, if we are to be the nation we desire to be, if we are to be considered nationals of integrity who desire to join ranks of others elsewhere that deserve respect, we need to do away with this problem of street children as it is today. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

4.32
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of urgent national importance with regard to our medical interns, specifically the medical doctors, nurses, pharmacists and dentists. The last time this group attempted to strike, there was paralysis in all Government health centres. This brought out the fact that they take on the biggest piece of work in the health centres.

Madam Speaker, there has been a paradigm shift on the side of Government, specifically the Ministry of Health. Initially, internships were coordinated by Mulago Hospital but recently, they have been pushed back to the Ministry of Health. The Ministry of Health set up a committee to coordinate internships and the committee has set about three guidelines that are affecting the interns. One, they have removed the allowances for the interns; two, there is compulsory labour or bonding of the interns; and three, the ministry wants to administer pre-entry exams for these interns before they do their internship.

A further probe into this problem has enlisted two other issues affecting the health sector. There are those we call the senior house officers - the medical students doing their Master’s degrees. They are not paid but they do a lot of work for the ministry. Secondly, there is segregation among our children in the health sector. There is segregation between those who were previously Government sponsored, those who were previously self-sponsored and also those who went out of the country on scholarship. 

Madam Speaker, with regard to –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. Once the two minutes expire, it goes off; you should use your two minutes profitably by being very quick.

MR AGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The ministry had refused to offer allowances to the interns. However, when they engaged them in detail, the ministry changed their position. They are now willing to offer some allowances to interns whom they will bond. I think it is not fair to force the interns to be bonded just because the ministry will give them some allowances to do their internship.

Madam Speaker, regarding the exams, I think it is irregular and illegal because by the time they are interns, they have qualified as medical doctors and/or nurses. The ministry does not even have the legal or academic mandate to administer such an exam, and they are doing this under the guise of promoting quality.

Madam Speaker, my prayers are as follows: 
1. 	The ministry should do away with this exam because they are simply hiding under it without necessarily telling the public what exactly they want to do. 

2. 	The ministry should deploy the interns in hospitals because currently, there is a lot of work. The so called senior house officers are threatening to demonstrate simply because the interns are not in hospitals and the workload is too much. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to give notice to this House that I intend to bring a motion at an appropriate time –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we have got the notice. Please, use two minutes, hon. Centenary.

4.36
MR FRANCO CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the physical infrastructure of Kasese Municipality. We have a big problem with drainage. As you are all aware, Kasese is a trough town; there is a lot of water that runs down from the mountains and floods the town. Recently, people lost a lot of property because of these floods. 

We have a programme called Urban Support for Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) and Hoima Municipality was incorporated in this project as an oil municipality. I would like to request that Government puts Kasese Municipality under consideration to redeem it. Kasese Municipality is now a disaster, so I pray that it is incorporated in the next phase of USMID in order to benefit from the funding that helps the other 14 municipalities in the design of drainage masterplans and construction of their drainage infrastructure. That is my prayer.

4.48
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I am going to talk briefly about the state of prisons in the eastern region.

Madam Speaker, two weeks ago, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs carried out an oversight activity in the eastern region. One pertinent issue that came out clearly was the issue of shortage of water in Maluku Prison in Mbale and Morukatipe Central Government Prison in Tororo – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let her contribute. I know what you are going to say. Just wait. It is important.

MS NABAKOOBA: Madam Speaker, I beg for your protection - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is your procedural issue?

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know it is important because nobody rises up on something that is not important. However, I believe that when a committee visits, the procedure of this House is that you bring a committee report; you do not bring it as matter of national importance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is important. Just listen.

MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your protection. I would like to talk about the issue of shortage of water in Maluku and Morukatipe prisons in Mbale and Tororo respectively.

During our interaction with the inmates, they clearly told us that they had stayed for two weeks without water. You know what it means to have no water in the prisons. Although we also found out that there was congestion, absence of water was a huge problem in those two prisons. The women also told us that they are exposed to fungal and bacterial infections. They are also exposed to cholera. They can have a cholera outbreak.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would request the line ministries responsible to give an assurance to this august House that the problem will be fixed with immediate effect.

4.41
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of public concern specifically concerning Kobwin Senior Secondary School. It is a Government school, which has been in operation for the last 25 years. It is both an O’level and A’ level school, with a student population of 426. Unfortunately, there are only seven teachers, one bursar, one deputy and one head teacher in this school. Next month, they are going to sit for examinations but I do not know what they are going to write.

Madam Speaker, just about two years ago, the Ministry of Education and Sports started building an administration block and classrooms for the school; unfortunately, the project is incomplete. Assuming all of us had gone to such a school, I do not think we would be in Parliament today. I am actually sure and confident that while the examinations are coming up next month, they have not fully covered the syllabus.

Madam Speaker, despite a lot of reports that have been given to the ministry about this school, no attention has been given to the issues raised. That is why I pray that the minister tells us why Kobwin Senior Secondary School has been left in limbo. Secondly, I also pray that the minister immediately posts teachers to the school. Thank you so much.

4.43
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the issue of the earthquake, which affected Kakuuto County. The county is strategically located near northern Tanzania, near the Kagera Region, where the earthquake started.

As I speak, over 500 families are homeless. Houses went down and the remaining ones have big cracks; people have been evacuated from them. As I speak, health workers in Minziiro Parish, Kyebe Subcounty, bordering Tanzania, are also moving away from that place and we will be left with only the outpatients department. The maternity ward and staff houses all have big cracks, which is a very big threat.

My prayer is that we carry out a fundraising drive like the President of Tanzania did in the State House recently, and they raised over TShs 1 billion to support these people. As I speak, over 500 people are sleeping outside. Government must come in to help the –(Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, this earth tremor has put Bududa again on the brink of a looming disaster because it has not only widened the cracks but it has even deepened them further. When we dropped a 14-foot ladder, it disappeared mysteriously into the cracks. Therefore, I would like to inform the Member that much as Kakuuto has been affected, Bududa has also been hard-hit by these earth tremors and we need a lot of attention.

4.46
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Whereas I acknowledge the fact that the entire health sector in the country is suffering, I would like to bring to the attention of this House the appalling health situation in Buhweju District. This district has no district hospital. It has a health centre IV but even that health centre has a lot of problems; there is no medical doctor and the theatre is now closed because there are no surgeons or theatre assistants. The health centre has only 12 staff out of the 46 that are supposed to be there. 

There is also no district medical officer in the district. The district is more than 50 kilometres from Mbarara where the referral hospital is and the ambulance that is there carries patients from Buhweju up to Mbarara Referral Hospital almost five times a day. Just yesterday morning, one mother of 24 years old died because her relatives could not afford Shs 100,000 to fuel the ambulance to take her to Mbarara Referral Hospital. They called me to send them money, but I sent it late. When she reached the hospital, she delivered the baby but she died because she had reached the hospital late. Later, they called me to find out where they could get a nursing home to take the baby.

Madam Speaker, the situation is so bad that we have lost about seven similar cases –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have made your point. Honourable members, we shall ask the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to come back and tell us what they plan to do with the street children. We shall ask the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to give us an update on the request from Kasese Municipality. We shall also ask the Minister of Health to give us an update on the issues surrounding the strike by the interns - the dental, medical and nursing components – and the health situation in Buhweju. 

Further, we shall ask the Minister of Water and Environment to give us an update on the supply of water to the prisons in Mbale and Tororo, especially Maluku Prison. We shall also ask the Minister of Education and Sports to give us an update on the Kobwin Seed School. About the earthquake situation, I do not think that can wait. Is there anything Government can tell us today on the earthquake situation? 

4.49
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, first of all, we are sorry that this disaster, as usual, has taken everybody by surprise. In fact, it found me in my house. I commanded everybody to get out before I could also get out. Even if it collapsed on me, at least everybody would have been out. 

However, whenever disaster happens, the procedure is simple. Much as it is really urgent as you said, it is also true that the CAO of the district has a district disaster committee, which should go quickly on the ground and assess the situation in detail. They will know how many people died or got injured and what other damage has been done and how much it all costs in terms of money and materials. 

This district committee, working together with Members of Parliament, will then report quickly to the Office of the Prime Minister. Yes, there is no money but when this report is filed, people will then ask Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to release money to attend to these things. That is the situation, Madam Speaker.

MR KALEMBA: I would like to inform the Prime Minister that the committee he is talking about does not exist in Rakai. I talked to the CAO and he said there is no such committee in place because it is not financed. He said he would instruct the subcounty chiefs in the five subcounties. I do not know which is which. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, you do not need specific money to form this committee. This committee consists of heads of departments within the district. If Rakai does not have the committee, then the CAO can form one quickly - agriculture, health - to go to the disaster area. It does not need money. If the CAO has not done it up to now, he should be called to answer these matters. Otherwise, he should do it.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity. If this matter was raised as a matter of national importance, it deserves better and quicker action by Government. 

Disaster can hit me today and tomorrow it will be you and there is no saying that the CAO should go and form a committee and so forth; it has happened! We have got to handle it as an emergency. We have had disasters in this country; Bududa has been affected several times but we have not seen serious action. However, in the past year, Government has been attempting to do something. So, we expect a better response.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just came back this morning from Bududa and I can confirm that people have been evacuated from those high-risk places where cracks have been exacerbated by earth tremors. 

When I went to the ministry, they were only ridiculing us, saying they could not predict earthquakes. However, with advanced technology, we are reliably informed that there are gadgets in the West which can detect these earthquakes. I am sure Uganda has capacity to procure equipment at least for the metrological centre to be used to detect these things and give early warnings. 

The cracks have been an early warning sign for us in predicting landslides and we have now been able to evacuate the people. If it were not for the good architectural and structural designs of the buildings in Uganda, it would have also been bad. Buildings collapsed in Tanzania and in Kakamega and we have heard that over 100 people have been hospitalized following injuries sustained and others died. Madam Speaker, something urgent should be done.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as the Government organises itself, can we ask the Uganda Red Cross to go and rescue our people? We can do this as the Government organises themselves because it is urgent.

4.55
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the Members who raised this issue of disasters. Our sympathies go out to the families and individuals who have been affected by the several disasters that have hit this country. We feel for them and think something better should be done to ensure that Ugandans are safe and secure.

Madam Speaker, as a country, our preparedness for disasters is very limited. The Department of Disaster Preparedness is among the least funded departments; it is a disaster itself! (Laughter) We believe that when anyone is preparing for disasters, they should be sufficiently prepared to handle them. When a disaster happens in an area, then you say let the committees sit, first of all as a country we do not appropriate money to the local governments to handle immediate disasters. Even when the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) sits with his committee – 

There is a time when I brought up this issue of disasters when Kasese was severely hit and I was told by the Department of Disaster Preparedness that I had to go with pictures and recommendations from the CAO to indicate that people had been hit by a disaster. I complied and brought the said pictures and a report from the district leadership. By the time the Department of Disaster Preparedness went down on the ground, a lot of damage had happened and they went there empty handed. It was again the Uganda Red Cross Society that came up to rescue the situation.

The ministry set up a taskforce. I would like to let you understand the magnitude of the issues and the level of preparedness by Government in response to disasters. The ministry officials went there and set up a high-level committee to answer to these disasters, but all we were told was that the locals should contribute money to help in rescuing certain situations. It was a little bit shameful and sad.

As a state, there is much we can do to let our people know that we feel for them, that we care and that we are ready to answer to certain concerns. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as you rightly said, these are leaders and they should be in a position to answer certain calls; it is true but these are leaders who are helpless in terms of support. So, they will still look up to you as the providers. 

As you sit down to formulate the budget, in addition to the machine that the honourable colleague talked about that can detect disasters, can you consider going to other cities and they will tell you what they do. They do not encourage people to construct skyscrapers because their areas are earthquake prone. They only allow their people to put up structures that can accommodate the weather situations and possible related disasters. Can we guide the planning department on such issues so that our people are prepared? If someone is going to build, they should know the areas that are possibly out of danger and therefore they should not even be there. 

Secondly, can we have these gadgets that can help in demarcating certain areas? Otherwise, as a country, we are doing badly in terms of disaster preparedness and this is causing us to even get further back in eradicating poverty amongst our people and being able to control diseases. I would like to ask Government to rethink the budget allocation to the Department of Disaster Preparedness. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether we put money in the Contingency Fund. If it is there, I would like to request the Government to use money from the Contingency Fund to support Rakai because this is a disaster. However, in the meantime, let us ask the Uganda Red Cross to support our people in Rakai. 

There are Members who had wanted to also raise other questions but I will push them to Tuesday.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I would like to supplement the information provided by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that we have a whole Department of Disaster Preparedness. Unfortunately, the ministers are not here, but that department will liaise with the leadership of Rakai District to ascertain the numbers of those who are affected and Government will support the families that have been affected by the earthquake.

Also, soon I will bring a paper here to give guidance to the country on issues of housing, including the plan Government has to educate the people and support them in areas, which are prone to earthquakes. In about two weeks, I will come here with that paper. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have some work which is not – Information to whom? There is no one on the Floor.

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. While you were away, we had a lot of discussion regarding the Contingency Fund. It was clearly mentioned that the Contingency Fund, which is supposed to be 15 per cent of the budget, was not available, let alone the three per cent which was supposed to be apportioned for disaster management.

Madam Speaker, confusing the Contingency Fund with emergencies will not allow this country to respond effectively to these kinds of disasters. I had the experience of working in Namibia as a technical advisor in the Office of the Prime Minister. In Namibia, they specifically earmarked money under the National Emergency Account, which is money that you do not direct anywhere but is saved to handle such situations.

Therefore, I request that this House takes a position on the use of money from the Contingency Fund and tries to separate it from emergency. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, let us go to the next item but let us be quick.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENT IN IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS

5.03
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to reaffirm the role of Parliament in the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). It is moved under rule 44 of our Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS under Objective II of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy in the Constitution, the State is based on democratic principles of empowering and encouraging the active participation of all citizens at all levels in their own governance;

RECALLING that the United Nations General Assembly, under Resolution A/62/7 of 2007, encourages governments to strengthen national programmes devoted to the promotion and consolidation of democracy; and further resolved that the 15th Day of September of each year should be observed as the International Day of Democracy;

FURTHER RECALLING that in September 2015, the United Nations adopted the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development. The agenda requires governments, over the subsequent 15 years, to set targets for delivering on social, economic and environmental tenets for sustainable development, take ownership and establish national frameworks for the implementation and achievement of the 17 goals;

AWARE that the International Day of Democracy provides an opportunity to Parliament to reflect on the state of democracy in the world;

RECOGNISING that this year’s theme, ‘Democracy and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development’ is an invitation and challenge to all parliaments to think about the future of democracy, including the perspectives of young people and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and to particularly interrogate the present, to learn from the past and prepare for the future;

NOTING that Parliament is uniquely positioned to shape, advance and implement the Sustainable Development Agenda in Uganda;

FURTHER NOTING that Parliament must champion the development of relevant legislations and policies, monitor implementation, ensure oversight, accountability, transparency and good governance and define the fiscal and budgetary regimes needed to mobilise sufficient resources;

RECOGNISING that democratic institutions such as Parliament, political parties and electoral bodies are pertinent in the development of a nation and, therefore, responsible for the effective implementation of the 2030 SDGs;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it hereby resolved by Members of Parliament that:
1. 	Parliament takes cognisance of the theme of the International Day of Democracy.

2. 	Parliament urges Government to adopt the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as a blueprint for Uganda’s social, economic and political development in the next 14 years.

3. 	Government presents before Parliament, within two months from the adoption of this resolution, a report on:
(i) 	The compliance of the laws of Uganda with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;

(ii)	The mainstreaming of the Sustainable Development Goals into the national planning frameworks; and

(iii)	The progress achieved by Uganda towards the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.

4. 	The Prime Minister shall, in consultation with the administration of Parliament, ensure that a representative of Parliament is always part of Uganda’s delegation to the activities of the United Nations Economic and Social Council during the presentation of Uganda’s progress report on the implementation of the SDGs.

5. 	The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall present, together with the annual budget estimates, a statement showing how the SDGs have been integrated in the annual budget estimates.

6. 	The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall annually report to Parliament on the progress of the implementation of the SDGs.

7. 	Parliament commits to:
(a) 	Establish a parliamentary committee on SDGs mandated to conduct specific oversight over Government to facilitate the effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development; and

(b) 	Effectively engages its constituents on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to contribute to the knowledge about and ownership of the objectives and purpose of the agenda.

8. 	The administration of Parliament shall allocate resources to build the capacity of Members of Parliament to effectively participate in the implementation of the SDGs.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is it seconded? Okay, yes it is seconded. Is there any justification, hon. Amoding?

MS MONICAH AMODING: Madam Speaker, I will just mention one justification and then leave it at that.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the reason we are moving this motion is because today is the International Day of Democracy, and I appreciate Members for their participation in the earlier programme of the day. 

Madam Speaker, this is very important because, as you know, Parliament is indeed the architecture that we need in terms of ensuring that the Sustainable Development Goals are achieved in the various sectors of our country. Therefore, the reason why this motion has been brought to the House is so that we can emphasise the role that Members of Parliament and institutions of Parliament play world over to ensure that the global vision is achieved together. Through our oversight, legislative and budgeting roles as Parliament, we can ensure that we influence the processes towards the achievement of Sustainable Development Goals, which form the overarching goals towards which our countries work and are in the interest of our people that we represent.

Madam Speaker, I call upon the Members of Parliament to support the work that Parliament is putting across to ensure that on behalf of our country, we achieve the SDGs as they have been stipulated globally. Thank you.

5.11
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the mover of this motion for ably raising the issues therein in commemoration of the International Democracy Day. Let me also appreciate your office, Madam Speaker, for this morning’s arrangements where we had a discussion to that effect.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, you are aware that last year in September, the UN changed what we used to call the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which are now 17. Uganda, in its quest to become a middle-income country, will need to be guided by the SDGs more than the growth indicators. The SDGs take an approach beyond the income per capita. They take the human development index approach, which looks at the generalised issues of nutrition, water availability and how many children are going to school. 

Beyond the MDGs, there are three targets, which include climate change, ecosystems and biodiversity, which are in line with sustainable development. Therefore, this is more holistic. It is not possible to talk of becoming a middle-income country when you have actually had a lot of disparities and inequality. 

The approach of SDGs is inclusion and participation. We are, therefore, looking beyond the growth aggregates of per capita income. While we are fighting extreme poverty, hunger, interest in education, health, gender equality, water and sanitation and energy for all, - you can talk of generating a lot of power but is has to be affordable - in the SDGs we emphasise access and cost. 

As a seconder of this motion, I would like to urge Members and Government to make sure that we immediately institute a reporting system with a focal person. We would want to know the responsible person in Cabinet who will follow up whatever is happening. We would want to realign all our laws in this country with these goals and targets. As Members of Parliament, we have a role to play because we make the laws. When the budget is brought here, can we check if it reflects these targets and goals? 

Madam Speaker, since Uganda has Vision 2040 and this target is 2030, it is then very important as it could be one way to help us fast track our vision. Aside from the annual budget, we also have the National Development Plan II (NDP II); can we make sure that NDP II is reflected in our budget in relation to these targets? This is a very important target. As Members of Parliament, we have an oversight function. Can we put pressure on Government and demand for accountability to make sure that everything we need for the good of our people and children has been put in place? 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we are basically taking stock in this commemoration. We are evaluating our performance with our peers as far as achieving these targets is concerned. At this point in time, I would want to implore all of us, and more so Government, to make sure we become the converted and take a leap into making sure Uganda does not even have to wait for 2030, since we intend to become a middle-income country in just a few years from now. Let us do everything it takes to make sure whatever development we get as a country is inclusive, so that we do not suffer from chronic poverty. Let us also make sure that as we develop, we are mindful of the remote, periphery and poor people so that as a country we grow together –(Member timed out.)

5.17
MS ANGELINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As has already been said, moving this new agenda to a desirable end would require more committed hands in all Government sectors and from our leaders. They should stay committed without selfishly tagging it to political affiliation that in the end fails to deliver to the expectations of the population. I rise to support this motion. 

Madam Speaker, it is imperative to note that when democracy and development, especially as currently practised in most African countries, repeatedly excludes and marginalises the average citizen, who is supposed to be the direct beneficiary, then talking of achieving the Sustainable Development Goals becomes a myth. One needs to know that the Executive, who upon assumption of power is immediately insulated and gets engrossed in power struggles probably engulfed with greed, is oblivious of the view of the common man. The Legislature many times gets carried away with party politics, other than directing its efforts to the aspirations of the electorate. The Judiciary, more often than not, favours the elite at the expense of the masses. When all this happens, there can only be but a disconnect between success registered and the trickledown effect to the ordinary Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, reflecting on Uganda’s performance on the MDGs, we need to take account of our performance. A reflection on the MDGs’ implementation in Uganda reveals that the country registered mixed results across the goals and the targets. Besides progress on some indicators, many of the goals and targets were not met. Therefore, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, achieving the SDGs will depend on the evaluation of the MDGs’ performance – broadening the focus of the MDGs to new activities and sectors and deepening these successes to ensure that the achievement of the SDGs is truly universal and that no one is left behind. 

Madam Speaker, one of the biggest impediments to the MDGs attainment was politicisation of its goals, where the National Resistance Movement (NRM) opted to selfishly own them; they branded them to be their party agenda as opposed to the national agenda. Our focus suffered from the Ugandan virus of optimism, nepotism, corruption and lack of commitment by Government to allocate the necessary resources to enhance the achievement of the MDGs. 

It is indeed appropriate to have a true reflection of our performance on the MDGs whose outcome of normative ideals remained unrealised. By the end of 2015, out of eight goals, Uganda had only achieved three. There are always rosy figures painted and given to us as a public. Many times, facts are misrepresented and given to us saying that the MDGs have contributed to the reduction of poverty and yet we still have Ugandans going hungry every day because they cannot afford basic necessities of life, 16 women dying every day from maternal related complications and the list continues.

What is the role of Parliament? The SDGs outlined the development framework for the next 15 years up to 2030. One of the issues that came out of the review of the Millennium Development Goals and their implementation was a lack of an institutionalised role for parliamentarians –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have not finished? One minute to conclude. 

MS OSEGGE: The strangest being that the need to ensure participatory collaborative engagement of Parliament in the achievement of the development goals and our expected roles are known to all us. 

Madam Speaker, Parliament’s key role and responsibility is to monitor the implementation of Government programmes. Parliament approves the budget every year and allocates funds to each institution of the state in accordance with the plans and strategies of Government. Ministries in turn report to Parliament outlining how their expenditures contribute towards the policy priorities that Parliament endorsed. 

Madam Speaker, because there is not enough time, I would like to conclude by saying that building effective, accountable and inclusive institutions means strengthening them. Weak institutions undermine our country’s prospect for growth. Independent and well-resourced institutions facilitate accountability and provide all citizens with opportunities to participate in the shaping of public policies and building trust in Government to uphold –(Member timed out)

5.23
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion. I would agree with recommendation of mainstreaming the Sustainable Development Goals into the national budget framework because, as you realise, most of the items in the SDGs are cross-cutting. They cut across all the sectors of the nations like health, climate change and education, among others.

However, although I agree with the progress reports about the achievements towards the SDGs, the challenge has been that the SDGs are too many. We are talking about 17 of them and 169 targets and yet when you analyse them, you realise that some of them are not even quantifiable. I think I can only talk about the one on maternal health - the maternal mortality ratio which currently stands at 70 per 100,000 live births. It will be a bit hard for us to measure progress because they are not specific. I think they are too broad. However, as Government, we shall come up with a way. 

It is also good to note that on the Millennium Development Goals, Uganda did not perform well. We only attained 33 per cent of the targets. We, therefore, need to pull up.

I do not agree with the recommendation of forming a committee on Sustainable Development Goals because these issues are crosscutting. I propose that the different committees of Parliament report on the different issues that are in the SDGs; for instance, for SDG 2 about hunger, food insecurity, the Committee on Agriculture should report on all the progress in that regard.

The third one is about ensuring the health and wellbeing of – (Member timed out.)

5.25
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to the mover, who is a learned lawyer, I think that we needed more research on this motion. I would like to agree with hon. Khainza that there is no need for a parliamentary committee on SDGs because the issues are crosscutting. As she proposes, every committee of Parliament can report on their area of SDGs, especially the sectoral committees, as they interact with the various Government departments and vet their policy statements and their budgets.

On the issue of Government taking the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as a blueprint, I think it has done this. You need to remember that Government proposed these SDGs, of course in consultation with all of us, and they have them at heart. They are also imbedded in the National Development Plan, except that we would like, as Members of Parliament, to be sensitised and educated and given information as to how this has actually been done. I would like to agree that the SDGs should be paramount and should be made a priority in the area of planning and budgeting. I think we needed a bit more research before we take a firm decision on this. 

I would like to agree with No.4, that Parliament should be involved in reporting on SDGs. We have a problem where Government writes reports on international obligations without involving Parliament. The reports are written in a hurry at the last minute –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: That is an important point; conclude in half a minute.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you. The procedure is that the Government department should prepare their draft report and involve Parliament to approve these reports before they are taken to the international bodies. However, Government has been overlooking this and as Parliament, we need to put our feet down. If it is necessary, we deny Government funding but ensure that Parliament is involved in reporting on international obligations. I thank you.

5.28
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion. The motion about the SDGs has a slogan saying “leave no one behind”. I would like to thank the formulators of these SDGs. 

In Uganda, we have very good plans and policies but the implementation is very disabled like the way I am - very crooked. When it comes to implementation, inequalities come into play. Sustainable Development Goal 10, for example, is about removing inequalities. I would also like to beg the Government of Uganda, which had the sitting presidency of the UN when the SDGs were formed, to carry what we did in the UN back home and make sure that we implement it.

Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda has come up with a UPE policy and we have so many children in schools. However, what is the quality of the education they get? The quality of their education is questionable. If you want to have a nation moving to a middle-income status, you must have your people educated. Unfortunately, we might not be able to compete with other people as far as education in Uganda is concerned.

I would like to propose that the issues of SDGs be integrated into all MDAs, including the committees. I stand also to say that we do not need to have a special committee because these issues are cross-cutting. Each committee can pick its area and interest itself in it and be able to report.

We have the power, as Parliament, to call the ministers here to give us reports on how they are progressing. As the SDGs are coming out of the MDGs, I would like to request whoever was responsible to bring a report on the MDGs to Parliament because we need to start from where we ended, otherwise we have a lacuna. We are jumping to the SDGs; what about the MDGs? – (Member timed out) 

5.30
MS ANNE ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion. It is indeed good for Uganda to be part of the global agenda. 

My specific reference will be to goal No. 5 on gender equality. I think it is important for our country to look into the affirmative action, which was created under Article 33 of the Constitution. I know that Uganda has achieved in regard to affirmative action - we have a Parliament where we have many women representatives. However, I think it is important for affirmative action to be incorporated in all the sectors of the economy. What are the children being taught at school? Are they being taught about equality of women and men? Are they being sensitised early enough or brought up in that way? Are the cultural institutions, which are the biggest perpetrators of gender inequality, properly embracing the meaning of equality in our society? 

I think that it is important that each of the Government ministries looks at the gender issues and specifically gives us a report on equality. It is also important for the Ministry of Education and Sports to take advantage of one of the resolutions that has been moved under No.3, to give us a paper on affirmative action in the education system. The points that have been given to girls to join university- we need to know if this has helped to boost the females to rise and whether we need any more – (Member timed out.)

5.33
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and I thank the movers for coming up with it so quickly for debate. I think we needed it last year.

It is our role and responsibility to put Government to task to measure up with international standards. These SDGs are some of the standards we have to make sure our Government fulfils - I agree with most of the resolutions proposed by the movers except, as others have said, resolution No. 7 (a) which suggests that we establish a committee. I do not want to talk so much about it because I do not think we really need it.

Madam Speaker, I love the proposal that we involve our voters in understanding what the SDGs are. By explaining the SDGs to them as leaders, we would also be helping Government to make sure that whatever activities they carry out there are in line with the SDGs and we are collectively able to achieve them.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that as we try to achieve the SDGs as a country, we should focus on issues of ending poverty and hunger, improving health and education and combating climate change. Climate change has affected this country. I know it is global problem but we are going to see a very big problem arise in this country if we do not focus on it. 

You have already heard Members coming up with questions to the Prime Minister and to the Minster of Disaster Preparedness about what Government is doing in trying to handle the issue of climate change. Members have especially asked about curbing the drought that has affected this country and how we are not respecting the environment by cutting down so many trees. This is one of the issues we have to focus on if we are to fulfil the other goals. The core goals are those three I mentioned.

Madam Speaker, as a Parliament, we will have to pledge support –(Member Time out.)

5.36
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi North County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. Whereas Government has tried to implement the SDGs, some areas are still lagging behind like health, education and even climate change.

In education, there is no way you can say that we have implemented these goals when in other countries pupils from primary five are given laptops. There is no way we can compete with Kenyan and Rwandan pupils when our pupils are not well equipped on issues of ICT. That is why I am saying implementation of the SDGs is still lacking in the sector of education. 

When it comes to health, in some health centres, medical officials are still sleeping in the same wards as their patients. Madam Speaker, much as I support the motion, I pray that this Parliament resolves to direct the ministers to come and address those issues. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are going to arrange for a full-scale debate on all the 17 goals and Members will have some two hours to debate because as of now, we have other business. We are going to arrange for a day for us to debate all of them together. I want us to end here because we have some three important issues to handle. 

What is coming out is that the idea of a special committee is not favourable. Members would rather work through the existing structures. However, the important thing is that there should be a minister accountable. With the MDGs, nobody reported to this House about anything; we just moved on until they ended. Therefore, it is very important - It has been proposed that the Minister of Finance be the reporting officer. We need somebody to account.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, the issue under consideration deals with appropriation, implementation of Government programmes and management of Government departments. I would, therefore, imagine that the Minister of Finance and the Prime Minister would be in a better position to answer issues concerning the SDGs. The Prime Minister would be the driver and he would ensure that there are sufficient funds for the SDGs and their targets are met. 

This is because when we are asking about performance of Government, we do not go to individual ministries; we ask the Prime Minister to come here and address Parliament on the performance of those different ministries and departments. This should, therefore, be the responsibility of the Prime Minister’s Office. The Prime Minister should be the one to report to Parliament on the extent of compliance and the progress made by Government in response to the SDGs. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal is that instead of the Ministry of Finance, we have the overall head being the Prime Minister to -

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I want to propose that in addition to the proposal by the Leader of the Opposition, we would request that Ministry of Finance Planning and economic development creates a desk that specifically helps to fast-track the progress made, like we have done with the certificate of gender compliance that is required by every ministry. Ministry of Finance planning and Economic Development could find a desk officer who would be able to specifically deal with this and help us fast-track implementation, so that the Prime Minister or whoever is in charge of reporting to Parliament in the ministry is able to get the information first hand.

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING)	 (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, of all the SDGs are a global framework to facilitate accelerated transformation of society and are successors to the MDGs.

I think without pre-empting what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister will say, at Government level the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been coordinating the national report on the monitoring and implementation of SDGs. Therefore, I think it would be okay since the ministry also houses the National Planning Authority and all these are issues of planning.

I also want to say that we welcome the spirit of the motion. However, I want to assure the House that Government has been part of the process of coming up with the SDGs. Actually, Government provided technical people to even chair some of the thematic groups as this framework came up. Therefore, while you urge Government to adopt the agenda, it has already done so and I think the spirit of inclusiveness and wanting Parliament to be part of the process is definitely welcome.

On the issue of the committee, I also would like to agree that we may not need to form a committee but we have a Parliamentary Forum on Millennium Development Goals (MDGS) which I would probably request that we transform into a forum for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGS).

As we look at our rules of procedure, we may need to examine the roles of parliamentary forums and see how we can make them accountable to Parliament, even when they are not statutory in the way they are constituted. We could strengthen them through our rules and give them responsibilities so that they play a more meaningful role in the work of Parliament.

However, the forum on MDGS could convert into a forum of SDGS since MDGS are no more and it continues to support Parliament in the work of the SDGS. I just wanted to make those brief comments and also to emphasise that the National Planning Frameworks especially, those which were developed when the discussions on SDGS were already on, like the National Development Plan II (NDPII) and some of the sectoral plans incorporated issues which are captured in the SDGS. 

Madam Speaker, as these plans continue to be reviewed, I am sure Government will be able to integrate issues which are probably not very clear in those plans. Therefore, the assurance from Government is that we receive this motion. Government is already part of the SDGS and will continue to review the planning framework to integrate most of the issues captured in the SDGS. I thank you very much.

5.44 
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, the Inter- Parliamentary Union (IPU) is an international  organisation of Parliament - of sovereign states established in 1889, in Paris to promote representative democracy and world peace.

More than 140 National Parliaments are members of the IPU and several regional parliamentary assemblies are associate members. Most members are associated with one of the six geographical groups and each group determines its own officers and regulations or procedures.

The organisation is directed by a Secretary-General and a President. The IPU’s policy making body is a Governing Council composed of three representatives from each Member parliament. Further, an executive committee oversees the IPU administration. There are also other committees which function according to their own rules –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. All along, I have been thinking we are on this motion of SDGS. Now, I am hearing something else. The procedural issue I am raising is, have we changed from SDGS to the IPU? Madam Speaker, I need your guidance; I am lost.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is expected to report to the IPU about the day of democracy. So, it is a small preamble but I know it is going to work as the motion now –(Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) ALI: I never expected anything from my brother. There are also other committees – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, First of all, I rarely raise points of order to my elder brothers, especially those who were Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development during Amin’s regime. 

Madam Speaker, I am very attentive, I am not dozing. I listen very carefully, I understand very well and I see without glasses. Is my grandfather in order, to say he never expected anything from me, moreover a person from east where wise men come from; is he in order to say I have nothing yet I know I have something?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, he said you are his brother. That he likes you and he knows what you were going to say. Please, go to the motion.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: The IPU works closely with the United Nations (UN) and in cooperation with any other organisation that maintains similar ideals.

Sustainable Development Goals: This is what my brother wants to hear. There are 17 of them and I am going to tell the House what Government has so far done on the 17, one by one to show that I am relevant:
    1. SDGS and level of implementation in Uganda: End poverty in all its forms everywhere. In Uganda, the Government has been upfront in fighting poverty in many forms. The recent approach Government is using is the Operation Wealth Creation which has registered success already; many Ugandans have benefited from the policy;
    2. End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture. The Government has had a number of interventions in regard to food security and improved nutrition by promotion of modernised farming methods and plans are underway to construct regional silos for storage purposes;
    3.  Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages – (Interruption) 

MR WAMANGA WAMAI: Madam Speaker, the First Deputy Prime Minister is making a big statement. However, we do not have copies for us to keep abreast with what he is reading. We expected you to come up and tell us about the motion that was brought on the Floor of Parliament but you have taken us to IPU instead of SDGS. We know very well all about poverty in the country, but what is the per capita income in Uganda? We know poverty is everywhere.

Madam Speaker, we are members of the United Nations. When the UN adopted this motion in 2007, they expected member countries to go and carry out what the UN adopted. But as we speak, poverty is everywhere, hunger is everywhere. So, when you look at these 17 goals given to all nations to implement; you are saying that you worked on hunger, yet even where you come from, people are still suffering from hunger; poverty is biting everywhere - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it seems you are debating what he has not presented. Honourable Prime Minister, it seems you are now finally reporting to the country about what has been happening. I think you need to circulate it to the Members and we use it in that debate we have talked about, but not in respect to this motion; that is your report from the Government. You need time on the Order Paper to formally report and we debate.

MAJ GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I was actually referring to my notes in response to what has been raised, but if this is the ruling, I am most obliged, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your guidance and I would like to thank my junior colleague in the profession for conceding. The procedural point I want to inquire from you is, I thought the Prime Minister was supposed to come and address the resolutions Parliament wants to adopt; which of the eight goals is Government uncomfortable with? With that done, we can adopt the motion with those amendments and proceed to the next item.

I thought the Prime Minister would tell us that they do not have a problem with all goals, apart from No. 8 and then we move to adopt this motion. His would be to come and report within the timeframe we have given so that we can debate the report Government will have provided on the progress of SDGs. That is the procedural point I wanted to inquire from you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems the Government is not ready to give a reply to the proposals. Why don’t we defer this debate, the Prime Minister presents and then we hear what they have done and see whether what they are proposing is still relevant.

MS AKELLO: Thank you. Remember last year, Madam Speaker, on this very Floor of Parliament, you guided that Government comes before this House to explain, so far, what they have done on the Sustainable Development Goals. However, no report was brought here.

Secondly, as you wisely guided, resolutions of Parliament, are not barred unless they have financial implications. We are advisors to Government and we are trying to say by way of our resolutions; a, b, c, d up to 8 – that is what we think can help guide us through the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.

Therefore, I don’t think it really requires them to go sit down and think about them. That is our advice to Government unless they require a certificate of financial implications, which I do not think is contained in the resolutions.

5.55
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion has not been rejected by Government. If I got the Prime Minister and hon. Baryomunsi well, we have received it in good spirit and we think it is a good idea.
We would like to go with the advice of the Speaker that the Government comes up with a position. It is not a bad idea to give Government time so that we come back and report on where we are and then, we proceed with approving what we have agreed on. I request you Members to accept the advice of the Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can the Government report to us on Wednesday next week? We had started a report and I do not know whether the full report is ready. You can circulate it now - Members read through it and then you present it formally on Wednesday and we conclude this debate.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I actually came to respond on the issue of debate; since the debate was going on, it was not necessary to give out copies to the Members.

Now, if it is necessary for the Government to present a report, then, I need a bit of time to go and prepare the report so that we can present it on Wednesday next week.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall conclude the debate on Wednesday and for the first time, the Government will be reporting on SDGs. It is one year, by the way, since they were adopted. We need a report on that. The matter is adjourned to Wednesday next week.

Now, honourable members, yesterday, we had partially commenced on the national economy. We need to deal with it quickly because of time and then we come back to your issue. Let us use 30 minutes and I hope the copies are ready for the members. Yesterday, we stopped because there were no copies.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF A REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SDR 106,400,000 (US$150 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO SUPPORT THE AGRICULTURE CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 

5.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms SydaBbumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was reliably informed that the copies were made and are going to be circulated when I start presenting. The copies are available and probably, it is the Clerk’s system to delay us briefly. 

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I would like to beg that I start presenting as they bring the copies of the report – (Interjections) -  I can start presenting. Yesterday, I had presented the title of the paper and also laid on Table the various documents which are relevant to the report.

I would like to request that you bear with me and I present this full report, being the first loan to the Tenth Parliament and being a very important loan touching on the economic nerve of this country.

Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow $150 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank for financing the Agriculture Cluster Development Project. This proposal was presented to the House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and accordingly, referred to the Committee on National Economy in the Ninth Parliament under Rule 166(2)(b) and in accordance with Article 159(2) of the Constitution. It was saved and now, we are presenting it for approval.

The committee considered and scrutinised the proposal. By way of methodology, we had meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Under 22, there is a list of documents which were reviewed.

Madam Speaker, according to the national poverty line, the proportion of the population living in poverty declined from 56 per cent in 1993 to 19.7 per cent in 2013. This is based on international poverty line of $1.9 a day according to the 2011 purchasing power parity, as the poverty incident declined to 33.2 per cent from 68.1 over the same period. Most of the progress was attributed to higher agricultural income. Poverty reduction among household primarily engaged in agriculture accounted for 53 per cent of the reduction in poverty from 2006 to 2010 of 77 per cent of the reduction from 2010 to 2013.

Madam Speaker, the increase in aggregate crop production came largely from the expansion of the area under cultivation and not from productivity or use of technology. The dependence of agricultural incomes on all farm factors such as good weather and prices rather than on productivity enhancing factors such as technology training -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, sometimes, I do not like wasting time. International Development Association (IDA) is World Bank which lends Government. Today in the New Vision, which is a Government paper, they said: “World Bank freezes loans to Uganda.” That was item no.8 and we have other items. What we are trying to do is already a frozen thing. Is it procedurally right to continue asking for money which we do not have yet we have other things on the Order Paper?

THE SPEAKER: Let us find out from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development whether the loans have been frozen or whether we should continue looking for money.

6.05
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam, we do not run this country based on newspaper reports -(Interjection)- no let me speak. Excuse me - let me also speak my mind. This habit of shouting at me every time I stand to speak is not fair; let me say, I am a Member of Parliament too. 

THE SPEAKER: No honourable, we have asked the Government to tell us about the freezing.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: You sit down my brother – (Laughter) - however, I am happy to see him anyway. Many times I have not seen him. The best way is for us to proceed until we get an official report about this newspaper report. We do not go by newspapers; we would like to formally report to you as Government whether there is a suspension of that slot or not; that is my proposal.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, yesterday, while the Secretary to Treasury was leading a team to the Public Accounts Committee of this House, and was briefing the committee on our financial situation and absorption capacity, he made the statement that appeared in the papers today. This is the Secretary to the Treasury and a member of the board of the World Bank. At least I participated in approving him as a Member of the appointments committee. He speaks on behalf of Government and he is a member of the World Bank. 

That is a matter which appeared on television and was also reflected in the Government newspaper. Is the Prime Minister, therefore, in order to say that as a country, we cannot discuss matters of newspapers when his own staff from the ministry is the one who made such a statement? 

As a House, we have been saying that we are not even about to pass more loans until we get information on our absorption and the performance of the loans. Is the Prime Minister therefore in order to defend the proposal to borrow saying the issue is about newspapers only when we have not yet received a report regarding the performance of loans?

And secondly, a committee of this House was adequately given information that World Bank is hesitant to give us more money? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my difficulty is that I do not know what transpired in that committee because I did not attend it. However, in April, there was a report on performance of loans. I cannot remember the dates - I am just thinking off my head. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development where do we stand about what the accounting officer of Government has said?

MR KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, I attended the meeting that the- 

THE SPEAKER: Are you a Member of the Committee on Public Accounts?

MR KIWANUKA: Yes, I am and I attended that meeting. I have read the story in the papers. The story in the papers has no direct relevance to what the permanent secretary talked about yesterday. Therefore, the Leader of the Opposition somehow is misleading the House. That is the clarification I wanted to give.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. What did the accounting officer of Government say or what did he do?

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I can ably talk about what I know about the loans from the World Bank. About what the permanent secretary said, I was not present but I can check to know what he said. However, we have a problem with one loan of the World Bank which has been suspended on one of the projects in Fort Portal meant for a road. This was because there were allegations that the staff of the contractor raped someone; they were issues to do with gender violence and so this loan has been suspended. 

We are making a statement on the steps we are taking to make sure that the situation is arrested and the board is going to sit in October to make a decision on that matter. Therefore, it is true that one of the loans has been suspended because of the behaviour of the contractor on that road but the other loans are running. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the minister of finance. The President recently while addressing the Executive, indicated that there are quite a number of loans that we have as a country that we are not utilizing. Would you also clarify on that before we proceed with borrowing more money?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, this matter has come several times here and I remember you ruled that we should discuss the status of loans that we have already acquired. However, I would like to beg the indulgence of colleagues that this particular loan - it is possible to borrow and have one portfolio not performing well while another one is performing well. That does not stop us from moving forward with this particular loan which is meant to help the agriculture sector. What the President said, Madam Speaker, is true; he said that we have some difficulty with non-performing loans. And the reason why they are non-performing is largely because of ineffectiveness in the management of these projects.

Secondly, we had issues to do with counterpart funding, which we are trying to resolve to make sure that those loans which are not performing start performing as soon as possible.

So that is the situation and Madam Speaker, you agreed to give us space here to make a presentation. Do you remember when we came with information; you said you would give us space on the Floor so that we could discuss this issue? We shall make a detailed report loan by loan; explain the status of each loan and the reasons why they are not performing and the actions taken by Government on those non-performing loans. But it does not mean that all the loans – out of the $10.6 billion – are not performing. Actually they are performing –(Interruption)

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, I sit on the Public Accounts Committee – I know we are not supposed to discuss the report here. But actually the PS admitted and said that we are the worst in loan absorption and he even brought a list; we have loans that we acquired in 2007 and up to now we are not doing anything with them yet we are paying interest on them. So I think you can give us two weeks so that we bring the report here, as the committee, because the issue on table is very urgent. In fact we had requested for 83 loans but he brought only about 27 and we tasked him to bring the entire list. So I think, Madam Speaker, with your permission, we can put this business on halt until we get the report. Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, my point of procedure arises from that. Article 79 of the Constitution mandates this Parliament to perform an accountability function. If the minister himself has conceded that there is one loan that has been suspended by the World Bank; a Member of the PAC is saying a different thing while press reports are also saying something else. Is it procedurally right for us to proceed with loan request before we get a comprehensive statement from Government? 

We need a statement on whether indeed the World Bank has suspended any loan that has been approved by this Parliament. And if so why? Secondly, what are the available options for Government to ensure that if Parliament authorises Government to borrow, the monies borrowed are going to be put to proper use within time? So I would beg the indulgence of this House and Madam Speaker that the debate on this particular report should not proceed until Government comes here with a clear statement - for the Hansard - on the loans which have been suspended and why – that is necessary before we proceed to acquire new loans.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, if you look at this loan, which the honourable member is presenting – where is it going? It is mainly for the East, North-East and Norther Uganda; that is why Members are saying we should not borrow that money. Madam Speaker, I request that this loan be acquired. Thank you.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am surprised that my honourable colleague is speaking as though this Parliament is only for people from the east. I am from the east and when we talk about loans some of us feel even bitter because there is a road over which we got a loan in 2014; it is in eastern Uganda - Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi- Kamonkoli Road; but up to today there is nothing going on. So where does the east come in here? Should we just use the east to pile onto the loan portfolio?

Madam Speaker, is the honourable Member in order to regionalise this issue which concerns the incompetence of Government?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he was looking at the issues of equity.

MR AOGON: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, when we talk about issues of loans, these are issues of Uganda and for Ugandans. Loans have helped us from corner to corner. When we talk about these loans, they are not for Government or the Opposition; they are for all Ugandans. But the more serious matter now is that as much as we pay interest – on both electronic and print media, we are talking of over Shs 25 billion that Ugandans are supposed to pay because of redundant loans – just lying in the bank.

Madam Speaker, Kumi Municipality suffered – and we are still suffering yet the loan which was meant to be for water is there lying idle.

My view is that as long as the ministry that is supposed to utilise this loan has a proper record of it and have failed to put it to proper use, we can think about it. Let us check on the track record; are they okay? This will save us from tightening and thereby losing all we are trying to get as a country. This is a national matter; let us handle this matter sector by sector. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: I am not really trying to say anything that the House cannot make a decision on this matter but I am just supplying information to enable us make a decision.

First, we agreed, Madam Speaker that when you give us time, we will come here and give a detailed performance of our loan portfolio. And this will actually require several committees – it might require committees going to the field to check on this matter.

So the investigation and looking at the performance of loans is not going to end just in one debate on the Floor of the House. And yet the deadline that we have for this particular request is on the 19th of this month. And the importance of this loan to transform the 68.9 percent of Ugandans who live on subsistence farming is enormous. So we could move ahead, discuss this loan and the committee will come next week with the report of the performance of the loans as this loan moves forward. I beg to request, members.

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to draw the attention of the honourable members to page 16. Much as we have not yet discussed the report, I want to draw your attention to page 16. As somebody who studied economics many years back, when I look at this table, which is about the concessionality of the loan - we cannot say that when you get this loan, you will be required to get some money from the taxpayers’ coffers to back it up in order for it to pass. In economics, we call that counterpart funding. The reason why some of these loans have failed to get absorbed is because we have to wait for the taxpayer’s money before the World Bank can give us money to operationalise what we want to do. 

Therefore, honourable members, I would request you to allow this loan to be passed, as we wait for the other reports on the loans that failed to get operationalised. Thank you. 

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, the major issue that was moved here, which we have not resolved, is that we are not sure whether what we are discussing is going to be affected by the World Bank decision to freeze loans. 

It would be procedurally right for us to wait for concrete information. We need to know whether World Bank has frozen the loans or not, because it is not very clear. It would not be right to pass a loan request, when we may possibly not be able to access it. I do not think it would make sense to continue with this discussion. I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My colleagues have stated that some loans have not performed and they think it should be the basis for us to stop this particular loan request. 

I think this is a different docket and we cannot put it to a standstill simply because the other areas have not performed. I compare it to Government limping on one foot. As we investigate the performance of the other loans, let us approve this one. 

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are at this situation because a question was raised as to whether we are moving forward to approve this loan. At the same time, there is a report that the World Bank has since halted loans to Uganda. This is why we first wanted clarification from Government.

Unfortunately, the statements that have been made by Government seem not to persuade Members to agree to the loan request. I think this is where the problem is. I would think if Government had made the presentation with confidence, it would convince Members to their position. As it stands now, it has left a lot of uncertainty in the members’ minds, including myself. I am really very uncertain of that position- (Interruption)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the honourable members here that you are strangling the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for no good reason. This Parliament has always shared knowledge that this sector is receiving a raw deal and they actually know this. 

This budget runs at around 3.4 per cent, which is quite below the Maputo Declaration of 10 per cent. In fact, this loan is part of the agricultural budget –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I hate people who come here and cry crocodile tears. I have here a list of 16 loans. Allow me read for you the loans that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries got. 
    i) Urban Markets and Marketing Development of Agriculture Products Project; they got money in 2009 and out of the $10 million, they have only used $40,000 
    ii) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Uganda Agriculture Technology and Agribusiness Services (ATS); It became effective in 2011. Out of $14 million, they have used only $4 million. 
    iii) Agriculture in food security through increased rice production; they got $34 million and they have used none of it.

Madam Speaker, the minister knows that we love agriculture. One time in the Seventh Parliament, hon. Kazoora asked, “…supposing we close the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, shall we have any effect?” members agreed that there would be no effect because they did not see their impact. 

The minister is talking about 3 per cent, and yet he already has money he has not spent. He now wants to approve a loan request of $120 million, which will take another six years before it is spent. 

The Auditor-General’s report, which the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) is considering, says that we are paying a lot of money in commitment fees on unused loans. Why should we spend good money for nothing? 

Is the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, therefore, in order to come and lament yet he knows he has a lot of underutilised funds? 

MR AYOO: Madam Speaker, I think the information from the minister was good but as you can see, there is a lot more useful information from other Members. Parliament is concerned that we normally approve loans here and they are not utilised hence getting choked with loans that are performing badly. 

Madam Speaker, the ministers should have told us whether World Bank has closed our credit line or our loan portfolio with them was frozen so that we know how to move forward. These are issues that they should not hide and think we are not going to know. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you take the information? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the Eastern African Agricultural Productivity Project (EAAPP) funded by the World Bank- (Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural point. We have rules. Members are talking about the minister asking for $100 million, but they should look at Sub Rule 4 of Rule 71 in our Rules of Procedure. It reads, “No Member may refer in a debate to any matter in a committee report, until such a report has been Tabled in the House.” 

I thought we were still at the level of determining whether the chairperson of the committee should proceed to present the report and lay it on Table. When we now hear that the World Bank has now suspended loans - we are not supposed to debate in anticipation. 

Madam Speaker, in terms of procedure, I would like to beg that you guide us whether we should now not permit the chairperson of the committee to make her presentation and then we discuss it. We could reject or accept it, but not before she lays it on Table and presents it - we are now into the details. I think there is a procedural fault here. 

MR AYOO: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Magyezi is concerned about the same things we are talking about. Have our loans been frozen by the World Bank or not? Therefore, let us ask Government to tell us the facts so that we can proceed. This is because without that, Members are finding it difficult to proceed with discussing the committee report on borrowing.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will rule later.

6.33
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter at hand is whether this loan should be presented and debated. You inquired from the Ministry of Finance, whether the World Bank had frozen the loans of Uganda.  The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not particularly told us anything regarding the freezing of the loan. Yet information that we could have, regarding the loan that has been quoted - the question is, are we in order to proceed when the lender, which is World Bank, has already frozen the loan? That is where the contention is.

The minister has failed to justify whether they have got a message or any information to that effect - he does not know. The Secretary to Treasury has already committed himself and was seen on television. So, how do we proceed, Madam Speaker?

6.34
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The biggest challenge here is the bad patch; the history of loans in Uganda. We get many loans and we faied to utilise them for the good of Ugandans. That is why Members here are not comfortable with what the Chairperson of the committee is trying to present.

One thing that I am aware of is that, despite the inability of the ministry to absorb the money, there is no action taken on undisciplined individuals in those ministries, in addressing that challenge. That is what I was saying, if this money is going to be acquired, the question now is, is the money going to be properly utilised? That is where the biggest problem is.

Regarding this proposal, looking at the current situation in terms of agriculture - it is concerning Uganda, I would actually propose that we go ahead and let this report be presented and we debate it, regardless of the challenges. We could then look at it and give conditions on how to address all these challenges that we are faced with, when it comes to the loans. Thank you very much.

6.35
MR RICHARD OTIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Nobody is against this loan but it is a loan. What Members are concerned with is the fact that, in the past, loans have been procured but they have not been well utilised. The Secretary to the Treasury himself made a pronouncement on this. In the Cabinet retreat, he was condemning Parliament for approving loans which the country is not ready to utilise. That is the concern of the Members here.

The issue is how ready is the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to absorb this loan? Remember that it is unfortunate but a colleague raised it on page 16 and I attached it. This loan even has a condition and this condition is even similar to what has made us fail to absorb the previous loans. So, the ministry should allay the fears which are we are raising. Are we ready, so that if this Parliament approves this loan, the ministry will be in position to immediately absorb it? Remember that one of the conditions is that we must have an operational functional modality of utilising the money. 

Somehow, I have seen that it is not even there in this report. It is just talking about using a certain fund from somewhere to set up a unit to utilise the loan. So, these are fears of the members. Nobody is against this loan but it is only in a good spirit that for the sake of this country, we should avoid a situation whereby we make this country incur loans – (Member timed out.)

6.35
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The House is in a dilemma. The issue is whether the loan to be presented is not among those that were suspended by the World Bank. The responsible minister was on the Floor of Parliament and clearly submitted that, this particular loan is not among those frozen. It is clear and it is on record. 

Secondly, we have a situation where the Minister has said that the deadline for this particular loan is 19 September 2016 –(Interjections)– it is on the Hansard. We need to consider the balance of convenience. What if the chairperson of the committee is denied an opportunity to present the report, basing on the information that the loan was suspended and yet it was not? Ugandans are the ones to lose out.

Whereas there are those loans that are not performing, the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has been on the Floor of Parliament saying that his ministry is ready to absorb the loan. Madam Speaker, I think it is just and proper, that a report of a committee be allowed to be presented. Thank you.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It seems that we are mixing two issues. The issue concerning whether this is one of the loans the World Bank mentioned about and whether we should go ahead and pass this loan. I believe that what we must understand is, we need to look into whether this loan is of great value and importance.  Also we need to establish whether this loan has value and it is important to the people of Uganda.

If we establish that the answer is yes, then we play our role as Parliament. If World Bank does not approve giving us the money, then we would have really carried out our responsibility as Parliament. When I look at the project objectives and the project beneficiaries, we look at the beneficiaries and the loan is in the agricultural sector, a sector which is usually underfunded and yet employs many people.

When you look at the districts that they are targeting, they are the poorest districts. I definitely will have to support this loan. If the World Bank says no, we will have done our work. So, I support this loan.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we asked our committee to do this work, which they have done. I think we are obliged to hear their report then decide whether to agree with them or not. Therefore, let the chairperson proceed.

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. However, before I proceed with the report, I want to thank the colleagues for the concerns they have raised.

We also raised similar concerns in the committee and that is why among the documents we called for, was the status of the loans approved in the Ninth Parliament. It is among those that I laid at the Table yesterday. The performance of some loans is not good. However, this is a different product compared to the other loans. I now wish to proceed from where I stopped.

The dependence of agricultural incomes on off-farm factors such as good weather and prices; rather than on productivity enhancing factors such as technology, training, irrigation and farm to market infrastructure renders it susceptible to shocks and unsustainability.

For   continued   poverty   reduction, there   is   need   to   raise   agricultural productivity, including the use of modern production technologies as well as sustainable land and water management.

This is so because today the type of agriculture we have is by chance. However, we want agriculture that is designed.

Agriculture accounts for just over half of Uganda's export earnings. Increased agricultural production combined with increased exports to markets in the East African Community (EAC) and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) are quite feasible and represent a very compelling growth path for Uganda. Compared to other countries in the region, it is widely acknowledged that Uganda has a comparative advantage in producing staple food crops because it is said repeatedly that if we handle agriculture properly, Uganda can become the food basket of the continent.

Productivity performance of the Agriculture Sector in Uganda has been modest in comparison to neighbouring countries and is far below its own potential. The sector has been characterized by low yields and weak value chains and market linkages. 

The country has the lowest utilization of inorganic fertilizers in Africa, at only 1.0 kg per hectare (Morris et al. 2007). Farmers can increase their earnings through commercialisation of crop and market diversification.

Commercialisation in Uganda will require the farmers to move away from subsistence farming through improvements in productivity with the use of modern equipment and improved quality of inputs such as fertilizers and seeds. You all know what is happening in the seed market. Farmers are getting fake seeds, which do not give the yields they need.

Sustainable land and water management to address environmental concerns, improved skills and better access to finance will assist in improving agricultural production.

However, progress within the farms will not be sufficient, as linkages with markets also need to be strengthened through better transport and storage. We all know that farmers incur post-harvest loss is estimated at 35-45 per cent, infrastructure, transparent and competitive value chains and consistent Government policies.

To increase agricultural productivity on farms and to boost incomes, higher use of quality inputs, better storage facilities, improved land tenure security and increased access to markets and inputs is required.

Despite abundant rainfall and vast rivers and lakes, farmers are unable to manage and use available water resources for agriculture due to limited irrigation infrastructure and low levels of water management.

The development of the irrigation infrastructure, improving agricultural water management and insurance schemes will help reduce current and future weather related risks and will support agricultural commercialization.

It is in this regard, that the NDP II placed its focus on investing in various commodity enterprises along the value chain including cotton, coffee, tea, maize, rice, cassava, beans, fish, beef, milk, citrus and bananas.

We insisted in this case to get a letter from the National Planning Authority confirming that this loan was in line with NDPII and the letter is among the documents I laid at the Table yesterday.

These enterprises were selected due to the high potential for food security; high contribution to export earnings; increased female labour force participation in cash crop production; higher multiplier effects in other sectors of the economy; higher potential for employment generation; and nutritional need of the country.

The   NDP's   agriculture   chapter is aligned with   the   Agriculture   Sector Development Strategy and Investment Plan (DSIP) that is the basis of this proposed project.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is one of the eight ministries out of 23 which have submitted the Agricultural Sector Development Strategy and Investment Plan. The others have not yet done it. 

In the Agriculture Sector Development Strategy and Investment Plan, seven commodities (maize, rice, beans, cassava, coffee, tea, dairy and aquaculture) were settled for prioritization. The choice of the commodities was based on the following criteria; returns to investment; priority within agro ecological zones; number of households involved; contribution to exports; poverty effect multiplier, among others.

For quicker returns through regional trade, maize, rice, beans, coffee and cassava have been prioritized for investment in the first phase under the Agriculture Cluster Development Project.

The second phase of the cluster project will cover horticulture

THE SPEAKER: May be Members can read that. Can you go to No.6?

MS SYDA BBUMBA: But before I get to six, Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that this one is the first cycle. It is going to last for seven years but mid-way, a second cycle is coming. The first cycle covers 40 districts. 

The second and the third will cover the rest of the districts.

Madam Speaker, I would like to mention the districts that are going to benefit from this cluster project.

Cluster 1 will be Masaka, Mpigi and Rakai. 
Cluster 2 will be Iganga, Bugiri and Namutumba. 
Cluster 3 Pallisa, Tororo and Butaleja.
Cluster 4 is Kapchworwa, Bukwo and Mbale.
Cluster 5 is Soroti and Serere.
Cluster 6 is Amuru, Nwoya and Gulu.
Cluster 7 is Apach, Oyam, Lira, Kole and Dokolo.
Cluster 8 is Kabarole, Kamwenge and Kasese.
Cluster 9 is Kyenjojo, Kyegegwa, Mubende and Kibaale. 
Cluster 10 is Hoima, Masindi and Kiryandongo. 
Cluster 11 is Ntungamo, Kabale, Bushenyi and Insingiro. 
Cluster 12 will cover Nebbi, Arua, Maracha, Yumbe and Nyadri.

Those are the 40 districts and they are being taken as the pilot.

Madam Speaker, the beneficiaries of this project will be farmers’ especially small holders and other value chain actors at the local district and national levels.

These include farmers’ associations, cooperatives and a variety of private sector actors. The project will work approximately with 300 Area-based Commodity Cooperative Enterprises (ACCEs), representing 3,000 Rural Produce Organisations (RPOs) and the RPOs represent 450,000 farmer household, out of which 180,000 are producers of maize which is 50 per cent, 95,000 are producers of beans, 40,000 are producers of rain-fed upland and rain-fed lowland rice and 110,000 are producers of Robusta and Arabic coffee and 25,000 are producers of cassava.

Farmers in the selected clusters/40 districts will be provided with improved agricultural infrastructure, improved access to purchased inputs, improved post-harvest handling and more competitive prices for both inputs and outputs.

The criteria for benefiting from the project include: committing one acre of land to the project and for cooperatives, committing three to five acres of land. 

The project cost is covered under table seven and is divided into four components.
The first component covers US $ 85 million from the loan and the US$70 million would be the matching fund from the beneficiaries;

Component two will go for preparation for agricultural water management investment. This is going to plan for large-scale irrigation systems. This will be fully funded by the loan.

Component three is on market linkages and post-harvest handling, storage and value addition. US$45 million will be from the World Bank and US$28 million will be contributed by the beneficiaries; and 

Component four is project management policy, regulatory and ICT functions of the MAAIF. Madam Speaker, I have already indicated how the components are going to be allocated. 

Component one will provide subsidies to all the clusters for the cost of agricultural inputs such as fertilizers, seeds and on-farm storage for five priority commodities including; maize, rice, beans, cassava and coffee. Intensification of production of these commodities will be provided to 450,0000 selected households, approximately 25 per cent of the farm households in the selected areas located in 12 geographical clusters around the country.

Madam Speaker, this will be implemented through an e-voucher scheme in a matching grant. We have seen people giving farmers free input but they do not value them. They are given coffee seedlings and they are put in the shades but they get tried because they have no inputs. They do not own them. This is a subsidy, which will require the beneficiaries to put some small money so that they own the project.

An e-voucher is an instrument for providing a time bound, partial and diminishing grant for the purchaser. This is what they will be given to go and get the inputs from the suppliers instead of giving them money because if you give them money, it will certainly get diverted.

In the first round, of this arrangement, the farmers will get inputs equivalent to 67 per cent of the total amount which is Shs 200,000 and they will contribute Shs 100,000. In the second round, they will get 50 per cent and they will also contribute 50 per cent. In the third round, because you have got some income from the earlier two phases, they will contribute 67 per cent and the project will provide 32 per cent.

Madam Speaker, component two takes up two per cent of the loan and this is for large scale irrigation for rice growing areas namely; Iganga, Bugiri, Namutumba, Pallisa, Tororo, Butaleja, Soroti, Serere, Amuru, Nwoya, Lira and Hoima. 

Component three takes 29 per cent. It will be financed through the IDA debt and contributions by farmers’ associations. This component will support activities and investments to improve marketing and post-harvest handling. Market and post-harvest handling will involve constructing silos and processing for value addition. Support and technical assistance will be provided to farm cooperatives and farmers’ associations at local levels to strengthen their capacity to manage the business enterprises effectively and scale up their operations to improve their profitability.

Component four which is at US$ 15 million, six per cent of the project; this comes from the loan. This component will support project management and coordination at cluster and district level; capacity building for policy and regulatory functions of MAAIF to strengthen its effectiveness to carry out its role with respect to policy and regulatory regimes affecting agricultural inputs and output markets and the development of an ICT-based agricultural information platform. This project is going to be IT based and, therefore, the need to develop the ICT.

It will also support the Directorate of Crops to strengthen policy and regulatory frameworks including; among others, updating the Seed Act and associated regulations to make them consistent with the EAC harmonisation protocols and developing guidelines and procedures for inspection and certification for planting materials, developing plant variety protection laws and regulations to promote private investment in the genetic improvement and development of the inspectorate division of the ministry.

The Project Results Indicators: Progress towards the project indicators will be measured by the following:
    1. Increase in yields of the selected commodities;
    2. Percentage increase in production of the selected commodities;
    3. Percentage increase in production of the funded crops;
    4. Percentage increase in volumes of commodities marketed through produce organisations; 
    5. Increasing the proportion of direct project beneficiaries who are women. So, it pays special attention to the women.

Project Impact on the Economy

This project will realise the highest returns from rice, maize and beans in the first year. The incremental will be getting lower.

Cassava and coffee will not realise much in the first year but they will realise the highest return from the second year and it will go on reducing as the project matures. 

Results from the analysis indicate thatin the short run real wages rise slowly by five per cent in 2017 and  will reach the  peak at 23 per cent in 2021 as labour productivity improves relative to the base case level.

We all know that we pay low wages because of the low productivity of our people. They say that where you employ, one Kenyan, you need three Ugandans to do the same job and you need one Tanzanian to do the job of three Ugandans. The higher productivity gains generated will lead to increased growth of the economy by 14.3 per cent in the long run relative to the base case level. 

The breakdown of the cost financing which I have already alluded to is given in table four. I will now proceed to the loan terms.

The International Development Association will make available $ 150 million for the Agricultural Cluster Development Project and the terms are as follows:
    a) Loan amount - $150 million
    b) Loan period - 38 years
    c) Commitment Charge - 0.5 per cent from the undrawn balance from the date of commitment
    d) Service Charge - 0.75 per cent on un-withdrawn credit balance.

If there is slow utilisation of the loan, this is where we suffer. From table five, a commitment charge of 0.5 per cent per annum on the undrawn financing balance and a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum on the withdrawn credit balance will be applied over a six year disbursement period.

After that, the commitment fee ceases and they will be paying only the financing charge.

The repayment period is 32 years with a grace period of six years. The present value of the loan is $ 57.86 million and the debt service of the loan is $ 152.93 million. The grant element is 61 per cent and the discount rate is 5 per cent.

You can see from the present value of the loan and the debt service that we are getting a very good deal.

Loan Conditions

The financing has the following conditions:
    1. Submission to the IDA of the Attorney General’s legal opinion on the legal validity of the loan documentation, including the project.
    2. Establishment and operationalisation of a functional Project Coordination Unit in MAAIF. MAAIF needs to embark on this immediately because if we get any delay, this will be the cause of the delay.
    3. Appointment of the Voucher Management Agent; and 
    4. Preparation and adoption of the Project Implementation Manual.

The Economic and Financial Rate of Return is 16.4 per cent, which is good for a long-term loan.

Project Site Implementation Arrangement - I will not go into the details but they are covered under paragraph 10.

Madam Speaker, I would like to move to the observations and recommendations: 

    1. Repackaging of the loan. 

During the scrutiny of this loan, the committee proposed to Government to repackage this loan due to its limited national coverage of 40 districts.

The committee noted that the minister and the World Bank have heard discussions on how to accommodate the committee’s proposal. That is, there will be two other rounds to cover the rest of the districts.

In this regard, other parts of the country will be covered in the second and third phases. Drawing experiences from Kenya, the e-voucher Fertiliser Subsidy is currently piloted in three counties and has undergone a number of reforms. Therefore, we have somewhere to benchmark from. 

The committee recommends that Government should roll out the project to other parts of the country to cover different crop enterprises in which they have comparative advantages in terms of production and productivity in a phased manner. For instance, the first phase does not cover fisheries and animal industry. We would like these covered in the subsequent cycles.

    2. Policy and Regulatory Issues Affecting Agricultural Value Chains

The committee observes that phyto-sanitary standards in the country are not fully implemented largely due to human resource capacity gaps in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

The Pesticide Regulatory Framework is provided for under the Agricultural Chemicals Control Act. However, analytical facilities are insufficient to undertake pesticide testing and the Pesticide Residue Monitoring Plan is weak. In effect, the implementation of the Act is weak and because of its weakness, our farmers are being cheated. Many of the crops, which are being exported, are rejected because there is no proper system of testing the chemicals. When they get there, they are tested and if they have excesses of what they allow, they are rejected and farmers lose the products, the transport costs and all other associated costs.

The project intends to support the operationalisation of fertiliser strategy. However, the National Fertiliser Policy has not yet been finalised. The committee recommends that Government implements the existing sector regulatory and legal framework in crop sub-sector to facilitate efficient and effective project implementation.

Government should fully expedite the completion of the fertiliser policy to anchor the operationalisation of the fertiliser strategy. There is no way this country is going to become a middle-income country in the next four years if we do not apply fertilisers to agriculture. Therefore, agriculture needs to take this recommendation seriously.

    3. E-voucher scheme. 

The committee noted that Government is putting in place several measures in the governance of developed programmes in the agricultural sector. One of the most important ways in which this project will contribute to better management of public resources is through the input voucher scheme. It is envisaged that this programme will help the Government move from its current public input distribution programme under NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation to a much more transparent and controllable system of the e-voucher, explicitly designed to minimise opportunities for mismanagement of funds in input provisions.

The voucher scheme provides for a fixed value of voucher. However, input prices may vary across and this will increase the input costs of the farmers. If the prices go above what was projected on the voucher, the farmer will have to take care of that. That also helps to avoid farmers going to places and inflating prices because if they are inflated, it would be at their cost.

The e-voucher will be issued to the farmer once in a given season. However, the issuance of the seed voucher is open throughout the season. This may result in some farmers using the voucher after the planting window during the season leading to poor germination rate. In Kenya, the e-voucher fertiliser is only valid for seven days, but renewable.

The committee recommends the following:
    a) In order to sustain demand for inputs after the project, Government should expedite the rollout concept of input subsidy in other areas of the country. For instance, the cattle keepers are crying for water for their animals but they are saying, if Government can provide excavation machines, they will put in the fuel and take care of the operator. Those are the kinds of the subsidies, which we are recommending.

    b) The e-voucher scheme should be transformed into a nationwide agricultural subsidy programme in place of the NAADS programme. 

    c) For a nationwide agricultural subsidy programme, Government should consider implementing it in a step-by-step manner, covering growing geographical areas starting with those with the highest likelihood of success. This will enable the ministry and other implementing agencies to gain experience and learn lessons as the programme is rolled out nationally.

    d) We further recommend that the project should establish a standard kit by cluster area on what a voucher should acquire before any additional input purchase. 

    e) We further recommended that any significant rise in input costs during the three crop cycles that are not envisaged by the input dealer should be borne by the Government to cushion some farmers from the negative effects.

    f) Government should restrict use of the seed input e-voucher to the planting window to achieve the desired productivity gains.

    4. Establishment of a National Farmers’ Database. 
The committee noted that the establishment of a national farmers’ database in Nigeria was critical in the smooth implementation of the e-wallet scheme. Similarly, the e-fertiliser voucher programme in Kenya uses an electronic voucher system eligible to the farmers.

The e-wallet scheme has been such a success in Nigeria to the extent that it was the campaign tool for the President of the African Development Bank to get elected to that post.

The committee recommends that Government should establish an authentic national farmers’ database before implementation of this project. This will help in ensuring that the project targets the right beneficiaries. It should not be just guessing or hunting people with inputs because some may line up for the sake of it.

Provision of Agricultural Finance within the Project 

The committee noted that within the Nigerian Growth Enhancement Support e-wallet Scheme, agro dealers are provided with loan facilities at 18 per cent under the Nigerian Incentive Based Risk Sharing System for Agricultural Lending (NIRSAL). This is an initiative of the Central Bank of Nigeria where the bankers commit and the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, in addition to its many functions, administers a risk sharing fund through NIRSAL. This would be similar to the agricultural credit facility, which has not been well implemented and is with the Bank of Uganda.

The committee recommends that the existing Government Agricultural Credit Facility should be modified to benefit the agro-dealers under this project. In addition, similar arrangements should be extended to private manufacturers of fertilizers so as to take advantage of the existing raw materials. You are all aware that most fertilizers and even seeds are imported in this country.

Quality of inputs on the Market 

The committee observes that the import market has substantially been affected by inferior quality of inputs. This has necessitated the project to develop and implement a programme of accreditation to be undertaken by the ministry for all input supplies partnering with the e-voucher programme. Experience from Kenya indicated that the Bureau of Standards and the National Seed Company ensures quality planting materials countrywide.

However, since the project is covering only 25 per cent of the households in the selected geographical area, the larger part of the country may still face a challenge of poor quality inputs.

The committee therefore recommends that the National Seed Certification Service should be strengthened to test for quality and viability and assign designated market labels for each type of seed consistent with international seed testing procedures. This should also cover input suppliers not partnering with the e-voucher programme.

National Council of Seeds 

The committee noted that one of the institutions in Nigeria that has played a great role in the implementation of the Growth Enhancement E-Wallet Scheme is the National Seed Council. 

The committee recommends that Government should put in place the right policies, laws and regulations that will enable further development of the seed industry in order to develop linkages and skills to serve farmers with better varieties and reliable quality seeds in a competitive market. This will contribute to the achievement of this project development objective.

Limited Capacity at the District 

We noted the limited capacity at the district and this is the significant challenge of capacity in providing agricultural extension services. We all know about this and many of us who are farmers have experienced this lack of capacity. 

The committee recommends that Government should recruit the above skilled personnel in all local governments where the project will be implemented, especially in the right cluster areas to be part of the multi-disciplinary team to ensure coherent quality control, support district implementation and sustainability of the project in the local governments.

The Role of the Private Sector 

As we have already indicated, this is a partnership between Government and the private sector. We recommend that Government should sensitize the private sector entities, including farmers in their respective roles in the project, not to delay implementation. Provision of favourable fiscal policies to agriculture input dealers will also promote the successful implementation of this project.

Agricultural Marketing 

Under warehousing, you may remember that we passed the warehousing system here; I do not know whether it started being operational but we passed it 10 years ago. 

Valve Addition and Marketing 

Bulk demand for input provision is likely to be limited to farming households under the project and therefore, other members of the farming groups may not have the same effective demand for these input and later on, become attractive customers to financial institutions.

Despite the existence of the Uganda Commodity Exchange, there is a weak link between buyers and interested sellers. In the absence of the Warehouse Receipt Policy, which is supposed to clearly define specific roles of the stakeholders on the Commodity Trading Value Chain, the existing law may not be adequate to handle structured trading as conflict of interest in the Collateral Management System is evident.

Therefore recommend that: 
    a) To improve farmer supply and distribution systems of products, business farm associations need to be improved to provide foundation for marketing, identifying trade partners and pricing.
    b) Government should expedite the development of Warehouse Receipt Policy, which is supposed to clearly define specific roles of stakeholders along the Commodity Trading Value Chain and also provide ground for review of the existing law to adequately handle structure trading to overcome any conflict of interest in Collateral Management System.
    c) We recommend that Government should further develop online enterprise marketing platforms for both farmers and agricultural traders to interface for easy marketing of their projects.

The Project Impact on the Economy 

The committee observes that the project impact on the economy is positive as estimates of the Parliamentary Budget Office indicated a 13 per cent rise in the current real GDP growth rate by the end of the project. This implies that with the economy growing at five per cent currently, the project will add 0.6 per cent on top of the current growth rate. This is in addition to a rise in household incomes, employment growth and increased export of the selected commodities. 

However, with increased developments in the oil industry during the project period, the exchange rate appreciation will affect the competitiveness of the country’s exports. 

We therefore recommend as follows:
    a) Government should sustain the productivity investment in the agricultural sector to increase the level of export to overcome exchange rate appreciation pressures in the medium to long-term horizon.
    b) In order to sustain high productivity growth in the agricultural sector, the project concept of input subsidy should be rolled out in the entire country to benefit the larger farming community.

Project Management Cost 

The committee observes that the 15 million, which has been allocated for management of this project, is on a very high side given that the objective of the project is to do with increasing agricultural productivity. 

The committee recommends that during the implementation of this project, more funds should be allocated to support the intensification of on-farm production, especially providing for the purchase of key farm inputs for the beneficiary farm households.

Weakness in on-going debt finance projects under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

This is what honourable members have been raising concerns on. The committee noted that there are number of on-going and planned efforts, supported by other development partners, to raise agricultural productivity and improve the effectiveness of agricultural markets in Uganda. 

Implementation challenges have resulted from inadequate accounting staff, delayed reporting by districts, procurement related issues, diversion of project funds and inadequate counterpart funds of the project. Pooled financing also presents major challenges in terms of reporting closing balances and attributing expenditures and payment of staff allowances allowable under Government.

Madam Speaker, we recommend as follows:

That Government should address the above shortcomings of the on-going projects and establish an independent project account to overcome challenges with pooled funding. The required human resource under the project should be recruited in time to improve project implementation and overcome accountability challenges faced in the previous project.

As a committee, we are preparing a checklist, which we would like all loan applications to Parliament to follow and we hope that if that checklist is followed, some of the problems, which come up later can be hedged against.

Project Linkage with CAAIP Activities

The committee noted that some of the activities under the infrastructure component of this project are similar to those of the Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAAIP) in the beneficiary project.

For example, the project we put on rehabilitation of 1,700 kilometres of farmer access roads will not support opening up of new roads but rather, will concentrate on improving existing roads. Regarding access roads, if there are one or two broken bridges or a few culverts required in order to access farmers’ products, those will be funded but they are not going in for road construction per se.

The committee recommends the following:
    a) The project should target rural access roads that are not under CAAIP. 
    b) The local government capacity on infrastructure development should be complemented by the Ministry of Works and Transport in addition to a consultant to be hired to offer support and capacity building. 
    c) We also recommend that Government should ensure efficient coordination between MAAIF and the Ministry of Works to efficiently incorporate project activities in their work. Some of the post-harvest losses occur because of lack of access roads, especially during the rainy season and where farmers have perishable goods.

Project Implementation

The committee noted that the nature of sites for storage facilities were not identified, which increases the risk of cost overruns during the project implementation.

The chart of accounts is inconsistent with project costing as per expenditure components and categories.

IFMIS is not flexible enough to have certain items that are not part of the charter of accounts. This may cause delays in the execution of the budget. 

In addition, procurement-related issues have been one of the major challenges delaying project implementation under the ministry.

The committee, therefore, recommends as follows:
    a) Government should ensure that activities of the project use codes that are in the charter of accounts to ease project implementation and accountability. 
    b) The ministry should ensure strict adherence to the procurement plan designed for the project. 
    c) In addition, reallocated from ATAAS should provide funding to start the procurement process so that the project is not delayed.

Institutional Arrangement 

The project design provides a steering committee composed of Private Sector Foundation, farmers’ cooperatives and other government institutions (Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Ministry of Water and Environment, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; and Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology.)

However, the operational environment of the project requires the beneficiary to have access to reliable energy sources, like electricity, especially in rural areas to cater for storage for silos and for post-harvest handling and also for value-addition and agro-processing.

The committee recommends that REA should expedite the rural electrification programme to improve electricity access in rural areas. In addition, REA should be among the public institutions on the steering committee of the project.

Low Mobile Phone Penetration

According to a study undertaken by EPRC in 2013, the proportion of the rural population with registered mobile money services is slightly over 50 per cent.

The national mobile phone coverage for Uganda, in 2015, stood at 60 per cent compared to Kenya at 80.5 per cent and Tanzania at 64 per cent.

The committee recommends that in order to mitigate the low penetration of mobile telephones, MAAIF should, in addition, adopt the use of other forms of communication such as radios and print media to communicate with the beneficiaries.

Some of these areas where the penetration is low are because there is no network.

Land Acquisition

The committee noted that this project will involve land acquisition for infrastructure under rehabilitation of access roads and establishment of post-harvest processing and value chain facilities. The exact locations of these project activities have not been determined and will only be determined after pre-feasibility studies have been undertaken for the target locations in the geographical clusters.

The committee recommends that Government should provide funds in the current financial year to enable the ministry undertake feasibility studies of project size and estimate the cost of the public-private partnerships that have to be established for project effectiveness.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the request for Government to borrow up to SDR 106,400,000 ($ 150 million) from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to support the Agriculture Cluster Development Project (ACDP) be approved subject to the recommendations above. I beg to report. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and members of the Committee on National Economy. 

7.29
MR LAWRENCE ONEGIU (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Madam Speaker, I thank the minister and the committee chairperson for the presentation.

If I were to appraise the chairperson’s presentation, I would ask the following questions:
    1. What are the obstacles to increased agricultural productivity in Uganda?
    2. Maize and cassava have been selected in high population areas and yet they require big size land. The President has been talking about this. Regarding coffee, it is indicated here that we are going to have harvests in the second year. What varieties of coffee will be harvested in the second year?
    3. Arabica coffee is not included and Zombo district, for example, is not included and yet it is only in the Elgon area and Zombo where you can get Arabica coffee production.
    4. Are these crops covered under the Operation Wealth Creation? What enterprise selection criteria did we use in this?
    5. You quoted Nigeria as having 18 per cent for agriculture finance but in my understanding and experience in many places, it is only when you do agriculture finance at 3-12 per cent recommended by the World Bank that the farmers can benefit.
    6. You talked about inorganic fertilisers and Uganda is targeting green growth strategy. Do you think the World Bank, especially the International Finance Corporation, under the Environmental Safeguard, will approve this loan?
    7. Where will we do the value-addition and sell those – you talked of REA, yes, we believe that but most of these rural communities have no access to the processing centres – (Member timed out.)

7.31
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for its very good report but I have a problem with the methodology. They plan to do a project operation type but because we are borrowing money, this project operation type is going to cost a lot of unnecessary expenses. We are talking of procuring land, about feasibility studies, about employing people on the project, about procurement and other things. I really feel that this project type should be replaced by something else. 

Secondly, I think that the committee should have tackled the issue of seed production more seriously in the report. We have been getting seeds from the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) and most of them do not germinate. People have now resorted to seed production for business purposes because these seeds germinate instead of venturing into agriculture. 

Finally, they have covered Serere and Soroti in the Teso region. However, we have over 13 districts in that region. How are you going to spread it to other areas that produce more for example, Kaberamaido District? Thank you very much. 

7.33  
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. I would also like to base our trust in you as well as in the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries because I believe that this time round, we shall perform. 

Our problem, as Uganda, is not resources but implementation. Madam Speaker, when you look at this report, there is a part, which talks about clusters; the districts that are going to benefit. If you go to that page, you will notice that Kumi and Bukedea Districts are missing out. 

While you were away, Madam Speaker, I rose on the Floor of this House and spoke about the issue of hunger in Teso. It is unfortunate that when agricultural funds are given out, those are the places that are sidelined. Kumi and Bukedea have suffered. Around 2006, the President of the Republic of Uganda travelled to Bukedea District and went as far as Malera Sub-County. He did that because of the terrible famine situation faced in that area. 

I am, therefore, disturbed that these two districts have been complaining about not being given money towards disaster preparedness and now they have been left out. What is going to happen? Is there any other criterion left? I beg to know. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.35
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson of the committee for the good work done. On page 27, the committee recommended that consultants be hired to offer support and capacity building. 

Madam Speaker, this is where we may go wrong. In Uganda, we have the tendency of getting huge amounts of money and undermining the people on the ground. In the districts, we have the production officer, agricultural officer and the secretary for production. All the structures are there on the ground. I would like to advise that we avoid wasting this money in hiring consultants, who we shall pay very highly. Almost 30 per cent of this money will go towards paying consultants. Let us instead use the structures on the ground.  

The moment we try to hire these consultants, the people on the ground will be demoralised. We shall automatically make the project fail. How can we hire consultants from Kampala to go and do the work of the Amuru District Production Officer? We shall demoralise our staff on the ground.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we need to know the criteria used to select these districts because there are some districts that are more productive than others. 

Thirdly, we need to analyse what type of crop grows well in a particular district. In the report, I can see that there are some districts that do not grow rice but we are imposing rice on them. Automatically we shall not succeed. 

Finally, we need to monitor this money right from the centre to the grassroots. There is a tendency of injecting –(Member timed out.)

7.38
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Madam Speaker, first and foremost, I would like to thank the committee for including Nwoya in the programme. Nwoya is one of the newly created districts in northern Uganda with the biggest number of commercial farmers. If this programme is well linked with the commercial farmers, I know we are going to benefit.

Much as I express my appreciation for being covered under this programme, I would like to express two concerns and the first one is about the identification of the beneficiaries. In Uganda, especially in northern Uganda, we have a very bad practice of people who are very quick at identifying sources of funding, forming themselves into a group and yet, at the end of the day, they do nothing. They block the people who could potentially benefit from such a programme. 

Recently, there was research carried out by the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) that resulted into identification of a new rice breed called NERICA 1 and NERICA3. The unfortunate thing is that this product ended up benefiting the so-called organised commercial farmers who were actually absentee farmers. Most of the time, they have farms within the urban centres and they are not on the ground. When they access such loans, they end up coming back to Kampala. 

We need to find a way of critically identifying the real beneficiaries because these are loans, which we are going to pay at the end of the day. As such, they must transform the lives of the people. We have been borrowing and paying loans without much impact on the ground. Therefore, we need to find a way of critically identifying the targeted beneficiaries of these projects in order for us not to pay money to a few selected people, who position themselves to benefit on behalf of Ugandans. Thank you, I beg to submit.

7.40
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I entirely agree with the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy on the presentation that she has made. However, we have some issues with the SAGE programme where we selected some districts. We have issues explaining to our constituents when it will be rolled over to them. 

This programme is being funded by the Government but here we have the loan coming in at once. Let it be rolled out to the entire country at once. We need to have that equity certificate if technical compliances are considered. Thank you. 

7.41
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee and I support the recommendation on development of the seed industry. 

Madam Speaker, the existing documents in the agricultural sector have not given deserving emphasis to seeds despite seeds being the most important input on which other inputs depend for increased production and productivity. 

Today Uganda’s informal seed system accounts for 87 per cent of the planted seed and the informal system, which is the registered system, accounts for only 13 per cent. During the agricultural sector review, we were informed that Uganda has 28 registered seed companies with the ministry as well as counterfeit seeds on the market. 

I would, therefore, like to find out from the minister about the progress of the National Seed Policy. How far has the ministry gone in the development of this policy? It will help us a lot in reduction of counterfeit seeds, which may not germinate, as colleagues have already testified. Thank you.

7.42
MS MUGENI MILLY (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the well elaborated report and I would like to give my comments, specifically on storage facilities. I come from a district, which has benefitted from these storage facilities that have been newly constructed.

Butaleja District is well known as the highest rice growing district. Therefore, in regard to markets, since you have said that there will be diversification, is Government going to buy these products at a higher price or will it move at the same pace like we had in the past years? 

This is because farmers have a complaint that they engage themselves in agriculture but they do not benefit. They grow crops but when it comes to harvest, they are paid the lowest rates. 

Secondly, I would like to speak about the extension workers that the NAADS programme has been employing. What we want in this report is to see discipline regarding taxpayers’ money. These extension workers have had a policy whereby if they find a good garden of a farmer, they put up posters after giving them some little money in order to pretend that it is a NAADS programme. I do not know how you are going to discipline such people who are spoiling the name of Government.

Lastly, I wonder how you are going to handle the issue of procurement. We have had incidences where farmers are given chicken, which die on the way before they reach home. We have had issues of giving out seeds, which do not germinate and actually, some of them are rotten. I do not know how you are going to handle the issue of quality –(Member timed out.)

7.44
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to deliberate on this matter. I would like to thank the committee chairperson for giving us this submission in relation to the loan that we think is very important in pushing the agricultural sector to the required level.

My concern on this matter is that there was mention about capacity building in relation to district level officials. However, I would like to observe that we have problems with our farmers because many times, they do not know about the type of crops that are brought, especially with new technology. Farmers have a low adaption rate to new technology and as a result, we usually have more grade products than they produce.

Therefore, I would like to submit that there must be a specific strategy in place to ensure that farmers are specifically trained and to make them appreciate the value of work. According to the submission of the chairperson, generally Ugandans have a bad attitude towards work. Work that should have been done by one person, according to our records - one Kenyan does work, which in Uganda, is done by three people. That means that we have a problem of negative attitude towards work. These issues can be comprehensively addressed if we can help our farmers to develop the right attitude. 

I would like to appreciate the committee that did the –(Member timed out.)

7.47
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the request for the loan. I think with the new minister; hon. Ssempijja, and the strength I know he has, I hope this loan will really be an exemplary one. I hope that he is really going to use it and that we will not get the other problems that we have seen with other loans.

I would like to thank you for including Bushenyi. Bushenyi has the highest level of malnutrition and many Government projects tend to skip Bushenyi. They think that we are okay. No, we are not okay. This is one of the areas, which must be fast-tracked in this project. Hon. Ssempijja, I hope you are listening to me. 

We have been left out of many projects but you have identified Bushenyi this time round. Please, fast track it and bring it up front. In addition, please include tea, because it is one of the priority crops in this country. I have seen, in the report, that you have left it out in terms of implementation.

In terms of roads, we would like to support access roads just like CAAIP is doing but not opening new ones. I really wonder why we keep on doing this. This is a project for agriculture and you have said that where there is a problem of electricity, REA should fast track implementation of electricity projects.

Why do we divert money for agriculture into making roads? We have other sectors; let us restrict ourselves to agriculture. I know that there are linkages with the sectors but when you venture into housing, roads and electricity, I think we shall get lost.

Finally, I have a policy question for the honourable minister. You are saying that the e-voucher should replace NAADS. However, there is legislation for NAADS. We have moved slowly from NAADS to Operation Wealth Creation. You are now telling us about the e-voucher, which includes contribution by the farmers. Is this the new policy of Government on agriculture extension?

7.49
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I have listened very attentively to this presentation and I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy. I have a few issues to raise because – 

THE SPEAKER: You have to say your name and constituency for the Hansard.

MR ACIDRI: James Acidri, Maracha East.The reason I have stood up to make comments is because my district is one of those selected for this particular project. On page 8, the chairperson has brought out some facts and I will start with the selection criteria for the beneficiaries, where it is mentioned that you must have at least one acre of land to be eligible for this project and belong to a cooperative, on top of having a farm size of three to five acres.

Madam Speaker, based on the recent census, Maracha district is amongst the most densely populated districts in this country. It is actually the most densely populated district in West Nile region. I am not sure how many farmers will be eligible, based on the extent of land fragmentation in that district.

Secondly, I have seen that the allocation of resources for agricultural water for production is about $ 5 million of the $ 150 million being requested for. This is about three per cent. We are talking about climate, erratic rainfall and agricultural failure in this country, which is largely attributed to the weather. How do you think this project is going to succeed, if you are only committing these resources to cereals, particularly rice? I think that this should be reviewed – (Member timed out.)

7.52
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson for this report. 

Madam Speaker, I am very grateful that you have given me the opportunity to speak on this report because I was thinking of bringing my information as a procedural issue. My point of contention is that the Ninth Parliament approved a loan to boost agricultural productivity in the eastern Region, especially focusing on rice. We targeted the districts of Iganga, Bugiri and Namutumba and this was a loan from the Islamic Development Bank.

What surprises me today is that this loan also has cluster two, focusing on the same districts for which we passed a loan here and yet we have other districts.

Honourable minister, Kaliro is a district that produces a lot of maize, rice and so on. If your issue was trying to pick out some areas in particular sub-regions, you cannot target the same districts for which we passed a loan here. I am wondering what can be done to change this because we cannot pass two loans to do the same thing for the same place. Hon. Ssempijja, I wonder whether you know about this or maybe you do not know about the loan that we passed.

I demand that we revise this for more districts to be covered as far as this particular loan is concerned. We cannot repeat the same thing when we have Kaliro, Luuka and others.

Madam Speaker, the second issue I wanted to comment on is on page four of this loan report - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You are speaking for Kamuli so you have one more minute. (Laughter)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very good that you have talked about Kamuli. I will also comment that while other targeted programmes of Government like SAGE, as somebody pointed out, have left out Kaliro, Luuka and others, we cannot continue taking this.

The issue is dependence on weather for our productivity and you have noted here rightly that continued dependence on weather for production makes it susceptible to shocks. We now have simple technology for irrigation. While you have talked about it here, I do not see any recommendation that is capturing this concern on irrigation. I would propose that we need to factor in a recommendation to take care of irrigation, especially where they are using easy and cheap technology.

The reason we are importing food here - by the way, in our foreign expenditure, a lot of our spending is on food importation, especially rice. This is because we are depending on the weather. However, we could produce more here using simple irrigation technology and have sufficient –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my brother that part of the pledges that the President made include providing irrigation for the sub-counties of Melera, Kolwe, and Ingido in Kumi, tapping water from Mt Elgon.

That report of pledges is already with members of the Government Assurances Committee. Why don’t we take this opportunity to utilise the loan to provide the facility so that it is taken off the record? Everybody will know that the President has fulfilled his pledge.

Madam Speaker, I am really begging that the clustering be reviewed so that it is fairly done. Otherwise, I will be disappointed and I will remain disappointed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.56
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on page 18 where the committee recommended that they should consider comparative advantage. It is true that comparative advantage works well but at times, other districts and counties are cheated. For example, a district where a person is given a cow and a district where a person is given 10 kilogrammes of beans or maize and you expect those two individuals to develop at the same pace.

Who told you that there is a district in Uganda where they cannot graze cows? We might be excited that maybe the beginning of implementation of this project is going to start from your county. However, the counties or districts that have been mentioned last might get cows valued at Shs 2–3 million while you might get only beans and maize seeds.

Honourable Minister, people can graze cows in Kampala or Kamuli. Therefore, we should not use this as a cover when we see some districts benefiting a lot from all the projects.

Finally, we have seen people procuring animals, say a goat, which is equivalent to a rabbit. When they tell you the price, you may wonder. Therefore, who is going to procure? Is it the beneficiaries or are we going to see Government intervening and bringing rabbits in the name of cows? Thank you.

7.59
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakansongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the loan and I congratulate the committee over the report. I am very happy that agriculture is being enhanced and taken seriously.

However, we need to be very cautious when we are handling agricultural financing. You can put a lot of money in agriculture and get out with nothing if you do not deal with the risks within the sector and the biggest risk in this sector is actually because, as a country, we rely on natural rain.

When you look at the provision for irrigation, it is quite minimal and moreover, it should have been 60 per cent because there is no productivity without producing throughout the year. Just look at the seeds we put into the country recently. They are all gone because we are relying on natural rains.

I am so disappointed that the committee could not provide for irrigation for these areas to start with. You can see 0.3 per cent for irrigation yet this country has no irrigation policy.

Madam Speaker, the agricultural sector in this country suffers mainly because of lack of an irrigation policy. When are we going to look at this critical issue in this Parliament? I would like the committee to make adjustments towards that, if possible, so that we start with those areas in the first cluster although Nakasongola is not catered for.

Madam Speaker, provision of agricultural financing is very critical to the women who produce for this country because they are the highest producers. However, the committee recommends that the existing Government Agricultural Credit Facility should be modified only to benefit agro dealers. You know that agro dealers have been cheating this country as they benefit more than the farmers do. 

Actually, the Agricultural Credit Facility only caters for value addition. A lot of money is sitting in banks for value addition but how many people are doing value addition? How can you undertake sustainable value addition without increased productivity? I think we need to look at this – (Member timed out.)

8.02
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for this report. I also thank the Members for allowing us to finally debate the report.

Madam Speaker, on page 23 of the report, the committee highlighted the issue of limited capacity at district level. However, in the report, they do not mention limited capacity at national level. We had a stalemate earlier because loans are procured and they take years untouched and yet we are paying for them. 

Can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries assure us that there will be enhanced capacity, both at district and national levels, so that we do not pay monies that are not benefiting our people?

Of course, I have seen some institutional arrangement somewhere and I hope that we are not just gathering too many stakeholders to overburden the project. We should scrutinise the stakeholders and be sure that whoever is brought on board is adding value to this project.

I must thank the committee once more, especially for the observation on the management costs. When you talk of $ 15 million for management, I think that what the committee recommended should be emphasised; putting more on farm production. Like a Member mentioned earlier, if we use as much as possible for the existing staff, we would save a lot of this money and put it into production as compared to – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite the minister. Do you have any responses? As the minister comes, sometimes we make recommendations like the ones we have made: change this, change that and then we pass the loan. What I do not know is whether, after we have passed the loan, the ministry does what we have agreed.  

8.05
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES(Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the Members for this very beneficial input.

First of all, I would like to assure the Members that the ministry has the capacity and the right mind set to deliver this project. I would like to say that yes, we have several projects but let me mention that the Eastern African Agricultural Productivity Project (EAAPP), funded by the World Bank, was successfully implemented and was rated in December, 2015 by the World Bank as very successful. 

The Agricultural Technology and Agribusiness Advisory Services (ATAAS) Report of March, 2016 was rated satisfactory by the World Bank again and by others. We are trying. I would like to assure you that I have just left the backbench and I have not forgotten why we are here and what we are supposed to do as Members of Parliament and as leaders in this country. I will not let anybody down, not even my farmers in the countryside.

I would like to mention that most of the inputs will be carried as have been presented by Members. I just want to say that the policy on irrigation is ready and in three weeks, we are going to have it ready for Cabinet. The World Bank confirmed willingness to fund the project in writing. The bank wrote to the ministry inquiring whether the loan will be approved this week. Therefore, be assured that we are in the right direction.

Regarding the seed policy, we are going to present, at a later stage, our schedule for the regulatory frameworks that are pending in the ministry so that you know that we are really moving. This time, it is “Kisanja Hakuna Muchezo”. Thank you very much.
	
THE SPEAKER: Does the chair want to conclude?

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to clarify that, in our understanding as a committee, this is a pilot project. The great district of Nakaseke is not included. Our whole ecological zone; Nakasongola, Kyankwazi, Masindi, Kayunga - none of them is included but we are comforted that the second and third phase are coming. I would like you to bear with me and accept the promise from the minister.

Madam Speaker, there was an issue raised on whether Government is going to buy the crops. I think this would be a policy reversal. As overseers of the economy, we would not recommend that Government goes into buying produce. While it cannot provide sufficient funds for the core activities, why should it go back into competition with the private sector? We think that is not necessary.

What is important is for Government to provide a conducive environment like regulation, infrastructure and the rest for the private sector to thrive. Otherwise, I thank you very much for your contributions and I once again pray that we approve this loan. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this loan be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know there are important issues to discuss but the Archbishop has been here since 6.30 p.m. and he would like us to join him. We can do this next week, there is no harm. Parliament is not going to close. The House is adjourned to Tuesday, 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 8.10 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 September 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)


