

Tuesday, 27 September 2016

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to inform you that we shall be going for the independence recess from 6 October to 14 November. Consequently, all the committees that have been working will be required to present their reports during the final week before recess, that is, from the 4 to 6 October. Therefore, whatever work that is on-going must be ready by the end of this week, so that you present it on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, just before we go on recess. In that regard, I will be adjourning the plenary today so that the committees can work both in the morning and afternoon, in order to have those reports ready.

I would also like to remind the Government that since we commenced, you have not brought any business to this House. Even for the Bills that we reintroduced, for which you were required to reprint about 300 copies of each, nothing has come so far. Consequently, the Bills cannot be reconsidered because Members do not have copies of those Bills. I request you to do the needful so that after the Independence Day recess, committees can work on those reports. We need to get those Bills out of the way. 

Quite a number of those Bills came in very late during the end of the Ninth Parliament and we would, therefore, like to get rid of them because I believe that the Government had serious intentions of enacting those various laws. Please, get them reprinted and distributed to the Members of Parliament.

Honourable members, we did have a wonderful ceremony yesterday in which we acknowledged the work of all our parliaments that have supported democracy from the post-independence Parliament to the Ninth Parliament. We thank those who were able to come and attend the ceremony. For those who have not received their medals, they can get them from the Chancery. I have also instructed the Clerk to update all the records because apparently, we still have some gaps. We need to update all the records so that we can have proper history for the legacy of this House.

Honourable members, just the other week, we had a meeting of the IPU-IGAD in Uganda. We have revived our activities; one of the things that we have done is to establish the women’s caucus to deal with mainly women issues and also poverty, human trafficking, violence against women, advocacy against female genital mutilation, teenage pregnancies and many other issues. We shall be updating you on the course of events as we proceed. 

During the same meeting, we also agreed to send a delegation to Juba, South Sudan, in November to show solidarity with the people there, and to discuss with them the need for dialogue and peace. The delegates were happy to be in Uganda and also to be in a rural area. We look forward to seeing some of them next year when we have our tourism activities in that part of the country.

I would like to thank the Members of Parliament, the Clerk and her staff, the security personnel and other stakeholders for the wonderful work they did in ensuring we hosted our friends successfully and securely in the country. I thank you very much. 

Hon. Anthony Okello had something to say and hon. Amongin.

2.47
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance, and I would like to thank you for the opportunity to raise this matter.

In a bid to alleviate transport difficulties on our lake, His Excellency the President made a number of directives; one of them was the installation of the Bukungu ferry that plies between Bukungu, Muntu in Amolatar, Kaberamaido and Kasilo and back to Bukungu. It is famously known as the BKK Ferry. 

The Office of the Prime Minister conceived this project in August 2007 and delivery was planned for financial year 2009/2010. The project was approved under the Office of the Prime Minister and given a code by the development committee of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In December 2007, a delegation agreement was entered into between the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Works and Transport for the Ministry of Works and Transport to procure the ferry. 

Substantial resources have already been spent on this project; it should not be abandoned half way. The design of the ferry was completed and the corresponding offshore infrastructure and survey of the routes that the ferry would ply were done. This project was programmed to be implemented in three different phases; phases one and two were completed and what remains now is phase three - to procure the ferry and the contractor to construct the offshore infrastructure.

On 22 January 2009, the then works minister, hon. John Nasasira, wrote to the Prime Minister, indicating that the implementation of the directive by His Excellency the President to provide ferry services on the Lake Kyoga basin was on course, and the delivery of the BKK ferry was planned for 2010. It is now nine years since this project was conceived; I wonder what happened to this – 

THE SPEAKER: There is information from hon. Eraju from Kaberamaido.

MS ERAJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to speak in support of this matter of national interest. The provision of this BKK ferry on the shores of Lake Kyoga is long overdue, Madam Ferry –(Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: That shows how badly she needs the ferry. (Laughter)

MS ERAJU: Madam Speaker, this is not a laughing matter and I am so sorry. This water stretch where the BKK ferry is supposed to ply covers the entire shores of Lake Kyoga, serving several districts. It covers half of my district, which is six subcounties. This ferry would also be so useful to the people of Busoga, Teso and Lango regions, because it will ease transport across River Nile and shorten the distance from Kaberamaido and the lakeshore districts by so many kilometres. It will also improve the trade in that area. 

Madam Speaker, my people and the people of Busoga trade a lot in cattle, cash crops and sometimes we get people coming to hire land on both sides of the -

THE SPEAKER: Is that still information? You are now submitting. (Laughter)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you very much, hon. Eraju, for that information. Madam Speaker, this shows the magnitude of this matter and how important it is across the board. 

Hon. Veronica Kadogo had also wanted to give information, Madam Speaker. I beg for your indulgence so that I can allow her to give information on that matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, let us get some information from the woman representative for Buyende.

MS KADOGO: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information that I want to give my colleague is that the BKK ferry that he is talking about is abbreviated thus because of the name of its route - Bukungu-Kaberamaido-Kagwara, which border with Busoga. In fact, this affects three subregions - Lango, Teso and Busoga. 

This ferry is very important in a way that it can boost business once put in place. Lake Kyoga has 46 fish species and this can boost fish tourism. If this ferry is put in place, it will improve accessibility to the regions. 

There is an issue at the moment as to why this ferry has taken so long to be procured. Other ferries were procured at the time this one was proposed. This ferry was proposed in 2007 and the implementation was supposed to be in 2009. However, up to now, nine years down the road, this ferry has never been procured and it always appears under the unfunded priorities. The question to the minister is: why has this procurement of the BKK ferry failed to take place?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you so much, hon. Veronica Kadogo, for that information. Madam Speaker, allow me to also put it on record that on 3 April 2007, the President again requested the Ministry of Works to procure a ferry to ply between Amolatar and Apac, because essentially, Amolatar District is a peninsular. However, you can imagine since 2007 up to now, nothing has been done. 

My request goes to Government and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; please provide funding for this project so that the project can be finalised. I also request for a status report on the implementation of this project and probably, a timeline for delivery of this ferry. This will be very important for us to monitor and to provide information to our people. As I speak, the people are very anxious. Government pledged to provide a facility, but nothing has been done for the past nine years. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We attended the sector review meeting at Hotel Africana and the Ministry of Works officials were there. The director gave us information to the effect that they were still looking for a source of funding for the BKK ferry project. 

Only this morning, we had a committee meeting where we had the Minister of Works and Transport and the Minister of Finance, hon. Matia Kasaija, appear. It is very surprising that the Minister of Finance did not know that the money for the ferry was not available. He thought the money for the ferry had been disbursed and that procurement was going on. It is an engineer from the Ministry of Works who informed him that they had done some preliminary work but they had not got funding for that project. 

Therefore, they decided to go back to Cabinet to sit and see where they can get money to purchase the ferry. So, that is where we are. The minister did not know that he had not purchased the ferry. All along, he thought the money for the ferry had been sent and that the construction of the ferry was going on. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is exceedingly sad for the people of the Kyoga basin. I used to represent Buyende and one of the first things I spoke about when I came to this House, many years ago, was to demand for the Kyoga ferry. 

The people of the Kyoga basin have been demanding for this ferry for almost 25 years. It has appeared on the public investment plan and disappeared several times for a number of years. The last action we took was to go with hon. Byabagambi together with hon. Ochola, then of Serere, and hon. Bintu and we rode on a speed boat for about five hours to Bukakata to go and agree on the site of the ferry. 

He was the Minister of Works then and before he left the ministry, I asked him where the project was, he could not tell me. I do not think it is acceptable anymore to deceive the districts of Busoga, Lake Kyoga, Teso and Lango – 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I happen to attend all the meetings that take place between the President and the ministries. I particularly attended the one with the Ministry of Works and Transport officials. In that meeting, the Executive Director of UNRA reported that five ferries were going to be commissioned during this term and the BKK ferry is one of them. Two ferries are already waiting for commissioning in October. 

I request the Minister of Works and Transport to come and give us the status of that ferry. However, I recorded five ferries, which were reported as ready to be installed during this term. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to hear about this term; we want to know when BKK is coming. We do not want to be among the general five; BKK is what we want to hear about. We do not care about the other four – Yes! When is BKK coming, that is the question? 

MR OUMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is good that we are giving this information when you, who has been in this Parliament for quite long, is still around. The Government Chief Whip has talked about a number of ferries, but we want her to tell us exactly which five ferries these are and when they will be commissioned. If not, may you use your powers to instruct the concerned minister to come and give a statement to this Parliament on when these ferries will start working? 

MS AMULE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When the Government Chief Whip tells this House that one of the ferries about to be commissioned is BKK, I would like to know where the ferry is in the first place. I am saying this because I know that the ferry that is due for commissioning is MV Kyoga II, to operate between Amolatar and Nakasongola. 

Those of us who use ferries are suffering because this mode of transport is not being prioritised by the Ministry of Works and Transport. Even the ferries that are available are also a pain. You go to the ferry and at times it has no fuel; sometimes we are told the ferry lacks an engine; and at times a ferry that is supposed to operate six times a week operates only twice. When you try to call the authorities, nobody responds. Therefore, the clarification I seek for is: where is the ferry called BKK, which is to be commissioned? Thank you.

MS SUUBI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to inquire from the Government Chief Whip if the Nangoma-Rakai ferry is also included on the list. This is because it is now nine years and pupils from the Nangoma Island cannot access secondary schools, and yet they have to cross the water every day. Thank you. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I belong to the committees of physical infrastructure and national economy. During a Committee of Physical Infrastructure meeting, we asked about these programmes. 

I would like to inform the House that they give us sector review reports per year. The UNRA Executive Director and two ministers were present, and we were told that they have not got a source of funding for that project. They have not got a source to provide Shs 13.4 billion to construct the ferry.

Secondly, today morning –(Interruption) 

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, the Government Chief Whip has just given information to this House about the status of the ferry and Members are contributing in a quest for more information from her. Is the honourable member in order to continuously refer to the committee when the report of the committee has not been presented to the House? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, he is enriching the discussion. He has the latest information from the committee and it seems they are discussing the issue.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, the information I am giving has been discussed. I have just said that today morning, we had the Minister of Finance in our committee of works –(Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It has been made categorically clear that the report is still in the committee. Is it in order for the honourable member to pre-empt the committee’s report, which is yet to come?

THE SPEAKER: The Member is anxious about the absence of that ferry on those waters. Honourable members, the Minister of Works and Transport should come here next week and report on the BKK ferry and the four others. They should give us the dates and timeframes because they are not in the budget.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I stood here to give you good news and I stand by that news; five ferries will be commissioned - this is a committed programme for this year - and the BKK ferry is among them. 

I agree with the Members who said that the Minister of Works and Transport has to come to the House to give us a detailed programme on all the ferries. However, I could not sit quiet with this information, which I am privy to; it is my obligation to stand here and give you information.  The good news is that the ferries will be commissioned and the Minister of Works will come to give Parliament detailed information. Also, Lake Kyoga has got other ferries and we will add more ferries. So, it is not –(Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Today marks the 26th sitting of this Tenth Parliament. I have been keeping trail of matters of national importance. Literally in every sitting, Members raise at least five matters of national importance. What does that mean – 26 multiplied by 5 is 130 matters of national importance.

Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure are crystal clear. They clearly spell out the role of the Government Chief Whip – attendance, monitor voting and playing a facilitation role. I am aware that you are adjourning the House; my humble prayer is that when we resume, this time we have the ministers here. Probably, we will be happy for the Chief Whip to deploy any member of the Frontbench because constitutionally, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MR KATUSABE: Is it procedurally right for the Government Chief Whip to continue playing a kitchen-sink approach of management; in other words, playing the role of a full minister?

THE SPEAKER: She assists the Prime Minister.

MR GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I have been here for long. When I look around in this House, you and maybe three other Members have served longest in this institution, right from the days of the NRC. 

You know that every ministry has a minimum of two ministers, and I would like you to clarify on this issue. Matters raised by honourable members, from time to time, under the various Rules of Procedure of this House, need definitive responses from main ministers. When the Executive is away, Parliament cannot sit. 

Therefore, I would like you to help us understand this as we expedite the business of this House. I request that you interface with the Prime Minister so that he directs his ministers to be present whenever there is a sitting. Every ministry must have a representative for us to have direct responses from the sector. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I was happy when I saw hon. Bagiire, my friend, walking in. I am also happy about your ruling on this ferry. Imagine, this has been going on from 2009. That is why we lose elections and that is why the President’s performance progressively declines; it is because of mchezo. So, since this is kisanja hakuna mchezo, let us have definitive responses.

Madam Speaker, one of the rules in our Rules of Procedure says that, a minister shall not take more than two weeks to respond to a question raised by a Member. I would like you to help us to expedite business rather than having the Government Chief Whip promising us, and probably never communicates to some of the ministers, and questions go unanswered to that effect –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of order, for record purposes. Whenever Parliament sits and there is a directive or an undertaking by the Government Chief Whip, I immediately write to the concerned ministers. 

I had –(Mr Nzoghu rose_) - I rose a point of order and it takes precedence -[Mr Nzoghu: “I rise on a point of procedure, Madam Speaker”]- Oh my goodness! We need more induction, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

Hon. Guma Gumisiriza is insinuating that probably, I am overwhelmed and that I do not communicate to the ministers sometimes. I wonder whether he is really in order when I communicate spontaneously.

THE SPEAKER: I can confirm that the Government Chief Whip writes. However, on a serious note, hon. Bagiire, you are the minister of state for transport, we want to know about the BKK ferry next Tuesday, together with the others. We want especially timeframes and not statements on where you met and what you said; we want the programme.

Honourable members, in the public gallery we have some citizens from Sebei subregion. They have come to present their petition on the long-awaited Suam-Kapchorwa Road. (Applause) They are represented by hon. Chemutai and hon. Cheptoris. You are welcome.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I am only begging for your indulgence because I have some of the correspondences about BKK – 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, come down and lay them on the Table quickly.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg for your indulgence so that you can allow me to lay on the Table some of the correspondences that are related to the BKK ferry. 

On 22 January 2009, a letter was written to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister about ferries on Lake Victoria, River Nile and Lake Kyoga. This letter gave the status of the implementation of His Excellency’s directive on ferries. The letter was written by hon. John Nasasira, the then Minister of Works and Transport.

I also have a copy of the letter written on 15 April 2013 to hon. John Byabagambi, the Minister of State for Works and Transport. It was about the delegated procurement of ferries by the Office of the Prime Minister for Lake Kyoga. It was written by hon. Matia Kasaija, the then Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Madam Speaker, I also have a copy of a letter written on 6 May 2013 to the Rt Hon. Rebecca A. Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament, about the Bukungu-Kasilo-Kagwara Ship. That letter was written by hon. Abraham Byandala, the then Minister of Works and Transport. In this document, there is also a status of the delegated procurement of ferries from the Office of the Prime Minister as of April 2014.

Lastly, I have a copy of the letter that was written by His Excellency the President to hon. John Nasasira, the then Minister of Works and Transport, about the ferry for Amolatar and Apac districts. It is signed by the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay these documents on the Table.

MR HASSAN FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I have been bleeding in my heart as chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation as I, together with my committee members, looked at the long and still growing list of unfulfilled government promises. There is the BKK ferry you are talking about here. There are our people from Sebei, who you have just introduced, who have come here to petition Parliament about the Suam-Kapchorwa Road, which was promised in 1986 but up to now, it has not been worked on. 

When issues like these surface and a Government minister comes here and makes new assurances on top of the old ones, which have not been fulfilled, there is a problem with Parliament. I wrote to you, Madam Speaker, as a person, requesting for an opportunity for Parliament, particularly members of the committee, to examine the lacuna in the law, which can enable Parliament be a dog that can bite someone who breaks their promises with impunity. 

Unless certain things are addressed, we are going to keep shouting here and recycling promises, even those given by the Government Chief Whip, instead of the Leader of Government Business, the Prime Minister, who is here and nothing will happen. To stop Parliament from being taken for granted, Madam Speaker, give us that opportunity to amend the Rules of Procedure so that when promises are made on the Floor of the House, they are binding. This will help us avoid having these promises reoccurring. So, we are requesting again, honourable members, for your – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have written to me and I have not yet answered, but you are now introducing your letter to the House. (Laughter) 

We are waiting for that statement on the BKK and other ferries next week without fail.

3.19
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri West County, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. During the last Parliament, we moved a motion to constitute a committee to investigate privatisation in Uganda. Unfortunately, because of campaigns, we were unable to do that. 

Madam Speaker, privatisation has been done, but it left a lot of problems. We have entities which we, Ugandans, had shares in before they were privatised, for example the National Housing and Construction Corporation and Uganda Telecom Limited (UTL), among others. However, our interest is Uganda Telecom Limited. 

Uganda Telecom emerged from the former Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Company and it inherited the entire postal infrastructure in Uganda. Madam Speaker, we initially had 49 per cent shares in; it was reduced to 31 per cent –(Interjection)- Yes, when I talk of the percentage, I mean shareholding and when I say “we” I mean Ugandans. 

As we speak, Uganda Telecom, which is supposed to be the only telecom company in which Ugandans are shareholders, is experiencing real problems. It had prime properties like the “exchange” in Bugolobi but it was sold to MTN. They had another one in Mengo but also sold it to MTN. When you sell an exchange facility, what do you use?

Apparently, UTL is heavily indebted, to the tune of over Shs 200 billion. The prime properties like land, like the one at Clock Tower, where there used to be a yard, was sold. Dairy Corporation in Bugolobi was sold, the property in Nakasero was also sold, and the remaining ones are already mortgaged in the banks. 

You are aware that Uganda Telecom was one of the companies which were taken over by the Libyans –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, make your request quickly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The request needed a background so that you know it. Madam Speaker, when the gentleman died - 

THE SPEAKER: Which gentleman? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The then President of Libya, Col Muammar Gaddafi; when he died, these companies got problems. In Rwanda, the Government withdrew their licence from them and it took over. Zimbabwe as well as South Sudan also took over such companies previously owned by Libyans. However, Uganda did no such thing and as we speak, we are about to lose out. Even Lake Victoria Hotel, which was the best, is collapsing and National Housing and Construction Corporation is also dying anytime. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that, as we wait for the select committee on privatisation, the urgent committee work to be done should focus on UTL. Government should quickly take over UTL because it is the only thing we have. Otherwise, if we leave other entities like MTN, Airtel -(Interruption) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. The issues raised by hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi are critical and of profound nature. However, as I was trying to listen, I imagined that this issue would be best served if it was moved by way of a motion, so that salient prayers can be captured for this House to take immediate action on the same, in a form of resolution. 

In the circumstances, I do not know the status of the committee that was supposed to investigate the privatisation unit and privatisation of the properties. If it exists, so be it. However, in the absence of that, and due to the urgency of the matters, I would propose that this be formulated into a proper motion for the adoption of this House, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have not formed that committee because we have not debated that motion on privatisation. If you so wish, we can create time for it - it was beyond UTL; it was generally about privatisation. We can create time for it if you want.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are so many international protocols and treaties. Uganda is a member of the United Nations and pays allegiance to the UN Security Council. When war broke out in Libya, sanctions were put on all companies and shares that were held by the Libyan African Investment Company (LAICO), some of which had holdings of shares in very many Ugandan companies. 

It is true some countries intervened, but that was in a caretaker status. What I want to say, in form of guidance, is that Uganda should not risk transgressing this, as it would be in breach of the UN sanctions. If Uganda wants to come in in a caretaker portfolio, it should learn from the other countries. South Africa and Rwanda were both recently warned and they took heed. All monies collected on those accounts are governed and controlled by a certain caretaker committee that was appointed by the United Nations. 

Whereas I agree that very many of our privatised companies are in a dire state, particularly Uganda Telecom and other companies where the Libyans, mainly LAICO, had an interest, I want to give guidance to this honourable august House; under a UN Security Council resolution, it was agreed that a committee be set up to directly administer to all those companies, reporting all dividends accruing from them and being controlled by the United Nations. That is the guidance I want to give.  

THE SPEAKER: In that case, why don’t we ask the minister, who is holding shares on our behalf in that company, to bring a statement here? It is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that holds our shares there. They should give us a status report because we do not know anything about the functions, for example. Can the minister arrange to bring a statement, so that we know what we are talking about?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think my brother, hon. Muhammad Nsereko, who speaks very good English, is behind news. If you are not aware, when the Government was taken over, it meant that all assets that belonged to the Libyan Government, where they could not manage – You see, these are Libyan assets and these sanctions applied during the war. Now that the war has ended, there are no more sanctions on Libya.

Madam Speaker, what he is talking about applied during that time of the war, not now. Rwanda had privatised 100 per cent while Uganda had privatised 49 per cent but now is down to 31 per cent. Since we now have an interest - because they took over the infrastructure, but the chairman of the board is a Ugandan –(Interjections)– Hon. Muhammad Nsereko, kindly listen so that you understand. (Laughter) The chairman of the board, under the agreement, is a Ugandan. Uganda, therefore, has three board members and the others have four. That is why I am saying that we have an interest. 

Madam Speaker, you have said the minister is going to come and make a statement, and you are right we have delayed because this is the only entity where we have an interest. Therefore, before the telecom sector goes down, it is important that we set up –(Interjection)– Yes, you are right, it is security sensitive. 

I can confirm to you that we have an interest. If you carefully look at the police telephone numbers, you will realise that they all start with the code 071, if you had never known. That is because their telephone service provider is UTL. So it is urgent - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, it is urgent but our shareholder is here, so he will bring a statement. 

3.30
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I agree entirely with what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said. The company is in distress because our brothers and sisters of Libya have not fulfilled their part of the deal, even before the death of Gaddafi. 

Therefore, I also concur with you. Next week, we will come here to give you the whole status on how this company is fairing and where the challenges are, including Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) cutting them off sometimes. The other week, I had to plead with UCC to rescue the lines for them to continue serving the nation. 

We shall come next week with a statement to tell you the exact position and what steps Government is putting in place to make sure UTL does not completely collapse. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, let us do some work in education first; we will go to item 3(i). However, before that, I had forgotten to mention that hon. Samuel Odonga Otto lost his father. There was a church service this morning and burial will take place on Thursday in Pader.  There will also be a bus leaving Parliament at 5.00 a.m. in the morning to take honourable members to Pader. I request that we stand for a minute of silence in his honour and thereafter, I will invite the Minister of Education and Sports to present a statement. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to present a statement on the quality of teachers according to media reports on the National Assessment of Progress in Education (NAPE) findings, 2016. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I wish to submit to this House a statement on the quality of teachers, according to media reports dated 21 September 2016, based on the National Assessment of Progress in Education (NAPE) findings of 2016. This is in response to the honourable Dr James Nsaba Buturo’s concern, raised some time back as a matter of national importance.

Government made a commitment to come and brief the august House. Whereas the ministry appreciates the important role the media plays in development, we wish to categorically put the record right on the quality of the teachers, as reported by the findings of the NAPE report as follows:

Madam Speaker and colleagues – (Interruption) 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this matter, which the minister is presenting to us, is very important. Not all of us have been able to activate the iPads which were issued recently; may I know why the document has not been circulated? On this side, we do not have –(Interjection)- I personally do not have a copy, yet, I am a whole commissioner. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Apparently, a number of Members have copies. Minister, please continue.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whereas the ministry appreciates the important role the media play in development, we wish to categorically make the record clear on the quality of teachers as reported by the findings of the NAPE report. 

Uganda has always been committed to the various international initiatives aimed at improving the quality of education. Uganda is also committed to the 17 Sustainable Development Goals, which were adopted in September 2015. The fourth goal is to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. 

Earlier on, the Education Policy Review Commission Report of 1989 and the Government White Paper on Education of 1992 established that the only source of evaluation of a basic education system was through Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE), which was found to be ineffective. Therefore, to evaluate the effectiveness of various educational quality improvement interventions, the National Assessment of Progress in Education was established and its first assessment was conducted in 1996. Since then, NAPE has been conducted annually in primary 3 and primary 6.

This year, the assessment coverage extended to include the pre-service and in-service teachers and also the Primary Teachers College (PTC) tutors in numeracy and literacy in English. Uganda is one of the few African countries with a functional national assessment system like this. 

Madam Speaker, the table below shows the achievement of the pre-service and in-service teachers and the PTC tutors in numeracy and literacy in English by percentage. As you can see in that table, we have indicated that among the pre-service teachers – teachers who are still in training - the females were proficient in numeracy by 29.9 per cent and the proficiency in literacy in English was 34.5 per cent. The males’ proficiency was 15.7 per cent in numeracy and 42 per cent in English. The overall proficiency in numeracy is 21.8 per cent and in literacy in English 38.8 per cent. 

For the in-service teachers – these are the teachers in primary schools - the females who sat the exam were 69.5 per cent proficient in numeracy and 69.4 per cent proficient in literacy in English. The overall average is 60.4 per cent for numeracy and 66.4 per cent for – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, they can read that.

MS SENINDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the above, it is clear that teachers that were still in training had low achievements in numeracy and literacy in English, while those in the in-service programme achieved to the required expectation. The PTC tutors achieved exceptionally well in numeracy and fairly in literacy.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the reasons for this performance include: 

1. 	Entry qualification requirements were a minimum of five passes obtained from a sitting of UCE, which, however, rose from three passes five years ago. Out of the five passes, one must be in English language and the other in mathematics.

2.	The second problem is inadequate staffing in PTCs. This was due to the ban imposed on recruitment of tutors by the Ministry of Public Service. The Ministry of Education was allowed to recruit only on replacement basis, that is, replacing of the dead, the retired and those who absconded. The ban meant most PTCs operate at less than 60 per cent staffing levels; for example, whereas each PTC is supposed to have three English language tutors, most of them only one tutor.

	The above factors combined had adverse effects particularly on high order skills such as critical thinking, logic and creative thinking. 

3. There is also inadequate support supervision due to lack of funds. 

The challenges faced by the PTCs are: 

1. 	There are no tutors for local languages to promote the acquisition of literacy skills among the pre-service teachers. We all know that the first language informs the second language.

2. 	There is inadequate funding, which affects – 
support supervision; 
continuous professional development; 
implementation of the probation curriculum; 
inadequate supply of instructional materials; 
inadequate capitation grants, which in turn affect the welfare, attitude and performance of tutors as well as students.

The ministry is not quiet; it is doing something. We have reviewed entry requirements to PTCs to at least credit 6 passes, with a credit in both English and mathematics. Therefore, for anyone to be enrolled in a PTC, they must have acquired a credit 6 in English and a credit 6 in mathematics. This starts with the next intake.

Secondly, the ministry carried out a national assessment of teachers’ study in 2012 and identified teacher training needs in the specific areas of literacy and numeracy. To that effect, modules on literacy and numeracy enhancement were developed and used to train in-service teachers to improve their competences. 

Under the Uganda Teacher and School Effectiveness Project (UTSEP), funded by the Global Partnership for Education (GPE), the ministry is printing more copies of the two modules, which will be used to enhance training of pre-service teachers in the primary teachers’ colleges. These are the copies of those documents I am talking about. We want to ensure that we use them even in pre-service training.

We have also reviewed the primary teacher education curriculum to make it competency based and introduced continuous assessment. This increased the subjects from seven to 13. In the reviewed curriculum, 25 per cent of a mark obtained is from continuous assessment while the 75 per cent is from exams. This revised curriculum also creates provision for students to specialise in teaching either lower or upper primary. 

We have further developed competency profiles for teachers at all levels, to set proficiency standards for them. 

We have also undertaken a comprehensive study on teachers’ issues in Uganda, which highlights a number of factors affecting teachers’ performance such as morale, welfare, attitude and training.

Under the Uganda Teacher and School Effectiveness Project funded by GPE, the School Health and Reading Programme (SHRP) and the Learning and Retention Activity (LARA) funded by USAID, currently the ministry is implementing an early grade reading programme for the in-service teachers, where they are trained in the teaching of literacy skills. The process to integrate the early grade reading methodology in the primary teacher education curriculum is also underway.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, what is the -(Interruption) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Minister. I am trying to understand the essence and efficacy of this statement. It was brought partly in response to what we read in the media, that tutors in PTCs could not comprehend simple English and mathematics questions, and that they had indeed failed as reported by NAPE findings.

What I am reading, and what the minister is labouring to present does not put the record right, that what was in the press was misinformation. What she is doing is just telling us the procedures the ministry is taking to strengthen the tutors, primary teachers colleges and even telling us that, you now require a credit in English and mathematics in order for you to be enrolled. This has all along been the case.

Madam Speaker, is the minister trying to pre-empt a committee report by way of a ministerial statement? Wouldn’t these matters be properly addressed before the appropriate committee? 

The question we wanted her to answer is whether it is true or false and then a discussion would follow. However, what is here? She is telling us the measures they are putting in place to bolster the tutors and primary teachers colleges but also at the same time she is not coming out clean on this. 

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to address these matters to the appropriate committee? As for the question on whether our PTCs are collapsing or not, that would require another statement that is not here. Should we take more time on this, yet, it can be done at an appropriate time?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am a professional teacher and for the first time, I disagree with my friend, hon. Ssekikubo. The minister is reading something very interesting that we need. There are a lot of issues we are going to address here. Much as what she is giving is irrelevant to want was asked by the hon. Nsaba Buturo, let us have it. My proposal is that you give us time to internalise it so that we give facts about what she is saying and after that, we shall get the source of the problem.

I know hon. Sseninde as a teacher, and I know this is not her work. It is ministry work. She is just presenting the ministry’s views. I am sure if it was her real work, the hon. Sseninde I know would not present this. Therefore, is it procedurally right for her to continue reading the report - but you give us time to answer before we come to a logical conclusion?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, if there are specific questions asked, they should be answered specifically. We cannot just give you time to talk generally about things. We cannot work like that. What is it that the honourable Dr Nsaba Buturo wanted to know? Is that what the minister is answering? What issue did you want to be answered, hon. Nsaba Buturo?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I am interested in the minister’s response and as far as I am concerned, she is spot-on in terms of dealing with the concerns I had then.

One of the concerns was that standards obtaining at that time - and maybe even now - were indeed substandard. However, the Minister is narrating what steps they are taking and personally, I feel happy that this is going on.

What should be my concern is the issue of whether what the minister is saying is indeed happening. The issue of inspection seems to be one of the biggest challenges that the ministry and the country is facing. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that I am happy so far, with the minister’s response.

MS SSENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When the honourable Dr Nsaba Buturo raised the concern, it was necessary for us to give the facts. This was because what was published in the media was totally different from what we are presenting to you. That is why we have endeavoured to give you a copy of the NAPE report, so that you can appreciate the actual results as compared to what was published in the media.

Secondly, even after we have shown those results, anybody would like to know why they are like that. That is why I have endeavoured to give you the reasons why there has been a problem. I then went further to show you what the ministry has tried to do to solve that problem, as an intervention. I was also going further to show you what we are planning to ensure that we have even more interventions to solve the problem because your concern and ours is to have quality education.

Madam Speaker, I need to take Members through what the ministry is planning to do because they need to know this. We need to disseminate the NAPE findings to the tutors, second-year teacher trainees, and the district education authorities. 

Secondly, we plan in order to carry out an in-depth analysis of the NAPE study report to identify the specific areas of weakness and design appropriate interventions which will be integrated in the ongoing programmes.

We want to strengthen our focus on the ongoing professional development programmes to target the areas of weakness identified by the NAPE study.

Madam Speaker, we also want to advocate for more funding to enhance support supervision and monitoring of the teachers by all key stakeholders, starting with us, Members of Parliament, the communities, local leaders, parents, head teachers and so on.

We also want to implement a certificate –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have looked at what the honourable Dr Nsaba Buturo raised and realised that when he raised this matter, the Chair then, directed the relevant minister to respond. At that moment, it ceased to be a matter of Dr Nsaba Buturo, but a matter of Parliament. The issue was about the quality of teachers according to media reports. 

Madam Speaker, I think the minister should be telling us that the media reported on such and such schools, we are looking at this number of teachers and the structure in these schools is this. From the time the media reported on this matter, it would have been incumbent upon the minister to visit some of those areas, which were mentioned.

Therefore, the discussion here would be about which schools were mentioned, what the infrastructure there is and whether it is true or false. This statement is just generic. Actually, this statement can only be for general discussion; it does not address the issue, which the honourable Dr Nsaba Buturo raised. 

I would suggest, Madam Speaker, that we get to the bottom of what the media reported, so that against that, we can have the issues that were raised by the media addressed in her report. The report by the minister should capture what the media reported, but not this kind of statement. I do not think we should proceed with this statement, because I do not feel that it is answering what the honourable Dr Nsaba Buturo raised.

MR OLANYA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. It is quite unfortunate that we come from different education backgrounds. In this august House, we have lawyers, engineers, teachers and so forth. As a teacher, when a question is raised, it is paramount to understand the background of the problem. When the teacher is marking exams, they look at how students brought out the background of the problem.

Madam Speaker, I really feel that the honourable minister is moving in the right direction. If you look at appendix 1, it is about the achievement of primary school pupils and teachers in literacy and numeracy. The point that came out was that the teachers were not able to read and/or do simple mathematics. The minister is now bringing out the background so that we understand that our teachers are competent and that our teachers are not dull; they are good teachers.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, the minister is proceeding correctly. (Applause) Let us give time to the honourable minister to finish, and Members can rise up to debate. As a professional teacher, I feel she is moving in the right direction. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, what is the point of procedure? Honourable minister, please complete your statement quickly.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, we are also planning to implement a certificate in teacher education proficiency for teacher educators to enhance their capacity to train teachers with a special focus on literacy and numeracy. Under the GPE project, the ministry has planned to train 400 tutors in the teacher training institutions.

The ministry also plans to integrate the early grade reading methodology in the teacher training programme of Kyambogo University. 

We further plan to improve the efficiency by remapping the coordinating centres to enhance support supervision by the centre co-ordinating tutors.

The ministry has embarked on the development of a comprehensive teacher policy for Uganda, which will streamline teachers’ training, recruitment, management and welfare issues. This decision was adopted from the recommendation of the Teacher Issues in Sub-Saharan Africa (TISSA) Report of 2012.

The ministry plans to enhance continuous professional development to align the new teachers’ skills to the world of work. This is realignment of an earlier probation curriculum, which was designed to address the gap, but was overtaken by events surrounding the revision of the probationary period from two years to six months as well as lack of funds to implement this.

As a way forward, Madam Speaker, there is need to strengthen the mentorship and continuous professional development programme for teachers and tutors in order for us to have our teachers be where we need them to be. 

In addition, there is need to have a proficiency qualifications framework for teachers. 

There is also need for additional funding for teacher training and support supervision for both the ministry and local governments. 

Finally, there is need to revise the unit cost upwards per student, per day from Shs 1,900 to a level that suits the current cost of living. 

For further details, the NAPE report is attached as I said. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I do not know whether Members would not want to study the NAPE report before they can deliberate on this issue.

3.59
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. As my honourable colleague, the teacher said, as an engineer I was keen on the numeracy. I would like to refer to the table on page 2. I would like to know from the minister whether somebody who did mathematics really looked at these overall totals. This is because, I tried to add by simple intuition and they are not adding up. I do not know where they generated the overall totals from.

Madam Speaker, I also need to know what the set pass mark was because I have not read the report. Otherwise, I would like to appreciate the ministry for the work they are doing.

4.00 
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for presenting this report.

Madam Speaker, the only way you can prove that a teacher is a good one, is by the results they get after doing exams. In Uganda, and I have insisted on this in the Committee on Education and Sports, we need to separate UPE results from the results of private schools. That way, you will know where the failures come from.

Recently, in my constituency, at a school called Kabale Roman Catholic Primary School in Kabale sub-parish, I found a teacher teaching Primary 4 pupils, together with those of Primary 7, in the same class. As a professional, I had to carry out my inspection duty and I met him separately. He confirmed this and said, “honourable member, we were doing revision with these children.”

Hon. Rosemary Seninde, the new minister, is aware, and I gave her the paper for Kabukunge PTC, where we have a full teachers’ training college with no mathematics and English tutors appointed by Government. When you talk about lack of tutors, the issue is not about lack of tutors; tutors are there but these PTCs are employing them privately.

Secondly, the most important thing in education is inspection. You cannot talk about the quality of teachers when you do not supervise tutors and students; you will not see good performance. Today, most of the PTCs are charging fees from parents. They charge Shs 1 million or Shs 800,000 and Government is giving Shs 1,900. For a student to qualify as a teacher after two years, he or she must use at least two reams of manila paper, and a ream of manila paper and markers is above Shs 500,000. 

Honourable minister, concerning what you were answering here, you were presenting something useful, but it cannot solve the problems because everything has been here. However, I agree with what you stated on the coordination centres, because teachers must pick it right from the beginning.

Madam Speaker, when I was a teacher, - now I am a lawyer because I passed my exams at Makerere University - I would like to put it on record that when we were in the staffroom and we fed on cassava and beans, the rule was that if the food remained, we do not give it to the children; if it remains, throw it away because the children will go and tell people that their teachers feed on cassava and beans instead of meat, and that is a bad record.

Madam Speaker, today the image of our teacher training colleges is appalling. The PTCs do not have vehicles. Tutors have to go out every after two terms to supervise students during school practice at the various centres. However, when you visit the school, it is like a kraal. The institutions where the students come from are poor.

Madam Speaker, we need to fund primary teacher education colleges; PTCs need money. Even though you talk about NAPE findings and so on, if you do not fund these teacher training colleges – That is why most private schools that get teachers from these colleges first retrain them before placing them in their private schools. Some of you own such schools and I know you know that it is true that when you recruit teachers from Shimoni PTC or Kibuli Mosque PTC, when they come to your schools, you fast retrain them. That is how these private schools are beating us.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, the only way you can prove that Ssewungu is a teacher – (Member timed out.)

4.04
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not surprised by the findings of this report and I do not think the ministry is surprised either.

Madam Speaker, lately, we have shunned the responsibility of taking care of education. We are talking about PTCs, but how many PTCs were phased out by the Government? If you talk about supervision, it should be the role of Government. If Government knew that PTCs were very important, why did they close some of them? They would still be existing. The church founded PTCs were also sold out; look at Ggaba PTC, Kakoba PTC - all of them were phased out. Look at Shimoni PTC. What do you expect, honourable minister?

Madam Speaker, I think if Government wants quality, they need these PTCs back. Why should you monitor my PTCs because I am an investor yet you have failed to monitor yours? 

Honourable minister, you are a professional teacher; my humble prayer is that you please help us. We need these PTCs back. Do not look at other people’s property when you have failed to manage yours. I thank you.

4.06
MR ABACANON GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute North County, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am one of the very proud Ugandans who understands and knows the value of teachers, because when we started PLE, we sat the same papers with P.8 pupils and I got 100 per cent in mathematics. I was awarded very highly. I, therefore, know the quality of teachers who taught before today, as we talk about the quality of teachers and what has happened. Something has gone wrong, and that something is not what the honourable minister is talking about. It is not about more funding. Whenever we meet, we talk about funding from stakeholders, and that has been done, but quality has not come about.

Madam Speaker, the quality of teachers affects the quality of education. It affects the quality of primary, O’level and A’level results and now the graduates. The latest reports from Makerere University are that, although some students have gone there with AAAA, the ones who went there with Cs and Bs are doing better. What has gone wrong? 

When you look at some primary schools, in the last 30 years, some primary schools have not even managed to get first grades. When we talk about the Sustainable Development Goals, do we qualify, really? I am doing research in my constituency; even in some villages, there are still no O’level and A’level leavers, and do not even mention graduates. 

What are we talking about when it comes to quality of education? Perhaps, the proposals you are giving here may help, but I think one thing is needed: Parents in Uganda need to be assisted. When you go to areas around lakes, you will find pupils who are supposed to go to school, going for fishing instead. When you go to the rural communities in the morning during harvest time, parents take their children to help them in the gardens and nothing is done about it. 

There are many schools that have performed wonderfully in this country, with their PLE results showing that all candidates pass in first grade. However, honourable minister, you have not bothered to follow up on such pupils to get to know where they have ended. I am saying this because I am reliably informed that it is due to bad education standards that we cannot wipe corruption out of this country. 

In the past, we would be assisted from A’level up to university. Today, you pay your fees at university. As a result, many beautiful girls are getting money from various sources. Therefore, when one qualifies and money comes to their office(s), the first thing is to think about how much they spent to educate their child or themselves, and so, you cannot stop corruption by that. 

So, what do we do? The stakeholders we are talking about and Government must be serious because the quality of education also means quality of Government. Let us not hide this information. We cannot fight corruption and inequality in education, when we are fighting for our own quality. Unless and until we realise our challenges and translate them into opportunities to enable us develop this country, we will not do much to develop this country. Thank you very much. 

4.11
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora Country, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. 

Madam Speaker, the future of Uganda is dependent on education. When there is a problem in PTCs, it means that products out of there are going to be challenged. I grew up knowing how to look after cows. If you do not feed your cows well, do not expect a good calf, do not even expect milk from it. That is the situation in Uganda as far as education is concerned.

Madam Speaker, the issues raised here are very many, but I do not want to dwell a lot on them. I just would like to mention some few things that are very pertinent, and one of them is the banning of recruitment of tutors. That is one of the biggest problems. Can you imagine some PTCs have only one tutor? What miracle do you expect from that single tutor? 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the programme for developing teachers also has challenges. I would like to request the ministry to seriously handle it, because that is one of the biggest problems we have in the primary education sector in Uganda. Another problem that I am sure affects the quality of both the teachers and the outcome is the teacher to pupil ratio. Can you imagine, one teacher teaching about 300 pupils? What miracle do you expect from there?

The other problem, which is also very serious, is the quality of the teaching tools that the teachers use. You may be embarrassed if you compare our schools with the private ones. Yesterday, I was in my constituency and I visited some schools. Can you imagine, out of 500 or 900 pupils, only 100 have gone back to school because the rest are hungry! 

Madam Speaker, as I sum this up, I would like to say that if we do not put all our energy in improving the quality of education in this country, the country will go into wrong hands in the future. My appeal to the ministry is to specifically address the key areas as a way of promoting quality education in Uganda. God bless you.

4.14
MR SAM BYIBESHO (NRM, Kisoro Municipality, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern is that people just focus on teachers only and yet there are things we should focus on also. The parents must also come in because this is the background from where the child comes. I am a teacher by profession and when you blame only teachers, it becomes very difficult for some of us who are teachers.

The Government also has a role to play. The other time, Government tried to ban the recruitment of tutors. In my college in Kisoro, we were supposed to have 20 tutors on the payroll but currently, we have about only seven. To cover the gap, the principal now just employs some part-time tutors who are not trained in PTCs. 

Secondly, in primary schools, you will find that most of the pupils do not have any meals at home because of poverty. Therefore, when they reach school, they dose throughout the day. I would like to call upon the minister to put into consideration the provision of meals for both the teachers and pupils at schools. That will also help us.

Also, when teachers’ remuneration is not good, it becomes a problem. There is an imbalance in payment of salaries. My district is supposed to be a hard-to-reach area, but when you look at the teachers and tutors within towns, you realise they are not being catered for as much as those teaching in the rural areas. You find a teacher in a rural primary school earning more than what a tutor in a PTC does by Shs 200,000. How do you handle that tutor? Don’t you think this tutor is likely to leave and go somewhere else to look for greener pastures?

In conclusion, let us have a proper report concerning education. It should not only focus on the teachers but also at pupils, parents, the district education officers, district leaderships and Government itself. That is when things will get better. 

4.17
THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Betty Kamya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for her presentation. 

This topic brings two issues to my mind.  The first is the quality of the media reporting. What the minister is saying is that it was a wrong media report –(Interjection)– She said it. Okay, but that is all that this report is saying. 

What I am saying is that, it has taken a wrong media report to give us this information. Wrong media reporting happens every day. Madam Speaker, if a one Dr Nsaba Buturo took the trouble to respond to every wrong media report, we would be here every day saying “no” and giving reports that are not actually planned. 

Granted, this report is very good, but it could have been, like what the previous speaker said, planned correctly, taken to the committee and discussed properly. However, because we are responding to a false media report, here we are. The flipside is that if one wants to get a Government report, they can get a wrong media report, come here and it is responded to.

Madam Speaker, it is time to start thinking seriously about the quality of media reporting. Media is the custodian of the people’s right to information. Therefore, if they keep giving wrong information with impunity, it is a matter that we should give –(Interruption)

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I look at the response by the minister, I realise that she does not refute the media report. Actually, when you look at page 2, the table confirms that the proficiency is low in numeracy and language.

Therefore, I am wondering whether procedurally, hon. Beti Kamya is right to imply that the media report was wrong and that the Minister of Education refuted the statement. What we actually have is not refuting the media report. The minister admitted that the media reported the right thing –(Interjection)– That is what I have with -(Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, when the honourable Dr Nsaba Buturo raised a concern as a result of a media report, as a ministry we took trouble to come and give Members the clear picture about what UNEB did to come up with the NAPE report. 

If anything, what was shown in the media is not the truth as compared to what I am presenting to you. That is why when I got up, I told you, Members, that it is not true that what was indicated in the report is what it is. It was just alarming. What we have indicated to you in this report is the truth; it is what UNEB produced. We just wanted to give you the actual figures. 

However, for the teachers that are still undergoing training, we have shown you the results and have indicated that they did not perform well due to the reasons we gave you. We even went further to show you what the ministry is doing to ensure the problem is solved. I went on -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the problem is that the minister was not explicit. You did not say what Government’s response was to the press report. You did not talk about it. You talked about what you are planning to do but you did not say whether it happened or not. You were vague and that is why Members are speculating. Please, conclude before we can hear from hon. Ndeezi.

MS BETI KAMYA: Madam Speaker, the reason I am raising this is because the minister said that the press reports were wrong and she is standing to give us the correct information. She even went ahead to say that she is going a step further to tell us the other steps that Government is taking to improve the quality of education.

THE SPEAKER: Is it in this report?

MS BETI KAMYA: It is in her statement and on the Hansard, I am sure, as a preamble –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, she either did or did not say it, but I did not hear it and yet, I was listening. If you were vague, accept that you were vague.

MS BETI KAMYA: Madam Speaker, my point still stands that we know that in media reports, there are a lot of falsehoods. Sometimes, they even quote – they have quoted me many times -(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I rise on two points, one of which is a point of order, which I rarely do, against a senior colleague. 

The first is that the current minister presenting the report is a former chairperson of a parliamentary forum on quality education. In my simple office, I have numerous reports given out by the forum on the quality education here in our lobby, articulating the exact failure that the media reports indicated. I have attended not one or two or three seminars where the current minister was lamenting about the same issues. I now wonder how the same person, barely four months after, comes onto the Floor of Parliament and completely forgets everything that she used to advocate for while she was a chairperson of that parliamentary forum.

Secondly, I have been very clear that the honourable Dr Nsaba Buturo raised a very straightforward and explicit question that we expected it to be answered head-on. However, the minister has been talking about what they are doing and plan to do and so on. 

Therefore, is the honourable minister, and especially hon. Beti Kamya, who may not have known what was taking place in the forum for quality education, in order to stand here and deny that the minister is not aware that the media reports are right? Are the two ministers in order?   

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to propose that our education committee takes up this document, studies the strategies and gives us the report because there are so many proposals. Please, conclude before we listen to hon. Ndeezi.

MS BETI KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In conclusion, I would also like to know from the minister whether the review covers private schools. The reason as to why I am asking is because in Kampala – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, as far as I know, hon. Beti Kamya is not an elected Member of Parliament but an ex officio member. She is only a member of the Cabinet. (Laughter) In Cabinet, they discuss and there is collective responsibility. She even has no constituency to question anybody about. 

Madam Speaker, is the hon. Beti Kamya, the Minister for Kampala, in order to also want to know from a fellow Cabinet minister something, which she should have asked while they were in Cabinet? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: She is deemed to know what is going on in Cabinet. She is out of order. Let us have hon. Alex Ndeezi.

4.28
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have two points. One, the report contains many issues that cannot be adequately captured and addressed in discussions in this House. I therefore, propose that the education committee takes up this matter very seriously, so that we are able to understand the situation and have a way forward.

Secondly, according to the housing and population census, 2014, there are more than two million learners with disabilities. They too are entitled to the same quality of education as others. Many of the learners with disabilities get the lowest grades not because of inability but due to neglect. I am sad to say that this report has also ignored this situation. It has also not focused on this neglect. 

Any assessment of education services in this country that does not take into account the needs of all common Ugandans is both unfair and discriminatory. Therefore, the request that I would like to make is that, we require more disaggregated data in terms of assessment of learners with disability and their teachers. We demand that the next reports be tabled in this House, adequately addressing the situation of learners with disability. I thank you so much. (Applause)

4.30
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her presentation. Well, it may not have indicated that there is a big problem but it has cited that there are some problems that caused the press to publish its report. However, I may have a different perspective, in that, instead of us trying to find so many faults, we should find a way forward. If there is a problem, what do we do?

In the early 1970s, whoever was supposed to be a primary school teacher ought to have scored highly at primary 7; only the best performers were taken for a four-year course to become grade II teachers and after that, they would upgrade. Those have so far been the best teachers in the country. 

However, today when a person completes senior 4 - the minister has ably indicated that the requirement had been three passes, but now it is five. The fact is that, most of the people who go for teaching courses today are those who will have failed to be absorbed into other institutions of higher learning. This is like a fall-back position but not their passion –(Interjection)- Just hold on because you may eat into my time. 

Just because people have not taken teaching seriously, because it is the only option available to them, they do not have the passion. Many of them fail to get schools after qualifying and they go on upgrading before they get a chance to teach in schools and interact with students. So when the time comes for them to get a job, they cannot deliver to the expectations – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, the Member stated very clearly that our teachers normally join the teaching colleges as a last resort. I feel her statement is quite unfortunate. Many of us here in this august House went to teaching colleges after scoring very good grades. Many students who join the university to do education put that course as their first choice. 

Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to put it on record that many of our teachers joined teaching colleges as their last resort, yet we have many capable teachers who are producing very good results?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is difficult – I am not privy to statistics about who joined willingly and who joined as a last resort. I do not have them. Please, conclude. 

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your protection. We have a problem and if we do not change the curriculum, we shall still have a problem. Children learn for long hours and their perception rate keeps reducing. They have little time for play. A child gets up at 5.00 a.m. to go to school and returns home at 7.00 p.m.; we cannot expect too much from such a child. 

Also, there is the issue of lack of teachers, as the minister has ably said in the report; for example, there are supposed to three teachers for English but there is only one. You cannot expect one person to handle all the areas of English. There is one teacher who may be needed for phonetics, another for grammar and another for comprehension. If there is only one teacher, they may not be all round. 

We should accept that there is a problem and find a way forward. Let the ban on recruitment be lifted and teachers be recruited so that we can get the best out of these PTCs. 

Madam Speaker, inspection is not being done thoroughly and that is why we still have a problem. This morning, I was at the National Council for Higher Education and I asked them why they are not inspecting universities. They said they do not have adequate funding. The problem goes up to the roots; if there is no money allocated for inspection, we are still going to experience problems. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had indicated that there are so many proposals by the minister in this document. Therefore, we want to ask our committee to take it up and give us feedback. Take into account the issues raised by hon. Ndeezi on the issue of PWDs and the absence of data concerning the PWDs. Please, take it up and bring us a report. 

Now, honourable members, let us move quickly to item No. IV. I want to allow the citizens to go back to the islands. We shall come back to item No. III later. So item IV, hon. Chemutai. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY THE PEOPLE OF SEBEI ON THE TARMACKING OF KAPCHORWA–SUAM ROAD

4.37
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to submit a petition under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

The humble petition of the people of Sebei Region comprising of Bukwo, Kween and Kapchorwa districts regarding the poor state and delayed tarmacking of the Kapchorwa–Suam Road; 

Your humble petitioners are from the communities of Sebei region comprising of the districts of Bukwo, Kween and Kapchorwa and are dissatisfied with the delayed tarmacking and continuous deterioration of the state of the Kapchorwa–Suam Road in the Sebei Region; 

The Kapchorwa–Suam Road links Kapchorwa Town to Kween and Bukwo districts and also connects Suam to the international border in Kenya. This road therefore plays a strategic role in the development of Sebei and Uganda as a whole. 

Despite this important role, the Government has consistently deferred the tarmacking of the Kapchorwa–Suam Road; notwithstanding the repeated mentioning of the Kapchorwa–Suam Road in every budget estimates, especially from 2010. 

As a result of the neglect of the tarmacking of this road, it impassable in rainy seasons as it is filled with gullies and puddles, reducing means of transportation on the road to motorcycles and “footsubishi”. 

The condition deteriorates in the dry seasons, even further affecting the communities owing to heavy dust generated from the road.  This is evidenced by loss of business to farmers in the Sebei Region as transporters stay on the road for up to three days for just a 77-kilometre road; lack or delayed access to basic services such as education and health services; loss of revenue expected from tourism and a busy border post at Suam; escalated cases of respiratory infections in the Sebei Region. 

Your petitioners have suffered and continue to suffer economic constraints particularly failing to exploit the untapped businesses expected for the operation of the border post at Suam border point; 

Your petitioners are discontent by the uncertain plan by the Government over the upgrading of the Kapchorwa–Suam Road.

Wherefore, your humble petitioners seek the indulgence of this august House and pray that this Parliament urges the Government and Uganda National Roads Authority to prioritise Kapchorwa–Suam Road and ring-fence funding in the next financial year, and ensure that it is used for this purpose and not delayed. Your petitioners as are duty bound will always pray. 

Hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures in the said book from the Sebei Region. We have more than 7000 people who are concerned and their representatives are here. I beg to lay this on the Table, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Chemutai. Honourable members, I do acknowledge that this is a petition and that it requires going to a committee. However, the exegesis of the matter requires relief to the people of Kapchorwa. 

I would want the minister to answer this question next week: are you going to ring-fence funds for Kapchorwa–Suam Road? Even before the committee looks at it, we want an answer from the minister; he should tell us whether you are going to ring-fence the money. This has been a very long story, too long indeed. Let us hear from the minister first; the minister of transport is here - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are right, the petition should go to the committee, and I am happy you are saying that the minister should answer. However, I would like to raise a procedural issue, and this is from institutional memory. 

Our potion from the East African Community compensations was supposed to do the road from Sironko up to Suam and we got the money. We got the money and instead decided to work on the road up to Kapchorwa, but it never even reached Kapchorwa; we had to get Government funding. 

There was a World Bank report, which was presented here, and there was a request for funding to tarmac the road from Kapchorwa to Suam and it was passed –(Interjections)- This is about institutional memory, before the minister can come in to tell a lie.

Madam Speaker, you know I come from that area; at every campaign, they promise to tarmac the roads immediately. The only place where the best wheat and maize is grown in Uganda is Sebei region and the place is very fertile. The procedural issue I am raising is that we have approved money, where has it been put? What will the minister tell us now; is the minister going to change what Parliament passed here?

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We appreciate the petition of the people of Sebei sub region. However, it is my prayer that this august House allows us as a ministry to come up with a statement on this, together with the BKK issue, on Tuesday –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, statements have been made and we have read them; manifestos have been printed and we have read them; it is no longer time for a statement. Can the minister be called to order by informing him that this is kisanja hakuna mchezo and we cannot wait for statements anymore? 

We would like to know from the minister the steps and actions being taken to rectify the Kapchorwa–Suam Road and to answer the plight of the people of Sebei subregion.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Minister is aware that many times when the Sabiny people are going to other parts of the country, they drive to Kitale in southern Kenya and then come into Uganda. That is how serious the situation is. 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, it is in that light that I seek for this august House to allow me to come with concrete information about this because –(Interruption)

MR ONGIERTHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought you asked the minister a specific question about whether they will find money or not; it is not about a statement. Let him answer the question you asked, whether they will find and ring-fence some money for this specific road. Thank you so much.

4.47
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I am standing here to give this information because as I told you earlier on, I was present when the Minister of Works was doing reprioritisation, and all the roads, from Kampala to all borders of this country, are a priority in these five years.

I am giving the information I got from a meeting and this is what the people of Sebei would like to hear. This Bukwo-Suam Road is going to be worked on -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the people of Kapchorwa would like to know when the construction is commencing.

MR MANGUSHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The  information that I would like to give to this House is that this is embarrassing and we, the leaders from Sebei, are scared. This is because the Minister of State for Transport and Works, Mr Bagiire, whom we have been engaging together with the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), cannot even assure this House, even when my people of Sebei are in attendance, about the engagements we have been having. 

This means that this is another kisanja yiko na mchezo, because we have engaged UNRA of recent and talked about African development funds, but the Minister cannot commit himself in this august House. This means that there is a sinister move to deny the people of Kapchorwa the opportunity of development in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR ALEX BURUNDO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give this House facts. Bukwo and Kapchorwa in Sebei subregion are totally unique from other areas of Uganda. I am saying this because, in January when the whole country faces famine, in Bukwo and Sebei sub-region they are harvesting maize. This maize could even be sold here in Kampala, Teso Region or in other areas where there is famine. However, due to the bad roads, the maize is sold in Kenya and Ugandans are left to starve.

Secondly, like you said, in January, instead of using Muyembe-Kapchorwa-Bukwo Road, our colleagues used Malaba-Kitale Road and then they came back to Uganda. Therefore, the question is: when we get allowances here, they calculate it in terms of mileage, what about our colleagues who cross into Kenya first, how do they calculate their allowances? Madam Speaker, I would kindly request –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that we have talked about the same issue so many times. Minister, the prayer of the people is that you urge Government and UNRA to prioritise the Kapchorwa-Suam Road and ring-fence funding in the next financial year. That is the answer I would like to get from you on Tuesday.

Concerning the committee, I instruct our Committee on Infrastructure to receive the petition and examine the issues raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi that money was given to Government for these roads under the East African Community. I also know that sometime back, we were very happy, including hon. Tete, when we passed the loan. Therefore, we would like to know what happened to that loan. 

4.52
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In August, I did raise an issue to do with the new roads projects, where the Executive Director of UNRA stated that there will be no construction of new roads in this financial year. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Works has not come here to give a clear picture about what Government is thinking about that. Why should we have this ping-pong, where the UNRA Executive Director is saying a different thing, and the Leader of Government Business is saying another and the Government Chief Whip also is saying something different? Which information is right? I think it is better that this House be properly informed, so that we know Government’s position is.

MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT: Madam Speaker, on 16 August 2016, the Minister of Works and Transport, hon. Monica Azuba Ntege, responded to hon. William Nzoghu’s concern about media reports, that the UNRA Executive Director has suspended construction of new roads.

Madam Speaker, the Minister came here and it seems hon. Nzoghu was not in the House that day. You can refer to the Hansard of 16 August 2016. She made a response and even presented documents here on the on-going road works. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable members, I confirm that the Minister of Works did present that statement. Let us move to the next item and hear from the Minister of Education.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister for Works. When I raised that matter on this Floor and the Minister brought the statement, the statement was rejected and she was told to come with clear information about what I raised. (Applause) It would be fair and in the interest of this House and the people of Uganda to know the truth. That is what we are seeking. Therefore, Madam Speaker, we are not here for comedy; we are here for serious business. 

I have been saying that there is an imbalance of development in this country, especially in terms of infrastructure. Some regions are more favoured than others. Most of the roads that I mentioned are in eastern Uganda. These roads had been mentioned by the UNRA Executive Director and she said that they would not be worked on. That is the premise on which I am raising this. So Madam Speaker, let us have the Minister commit the ministry –(Interruption) 

MR KABERUKA: The Minister presented a paper here and we found it lacking. She asked for a month; I do not know whether the month has elapsed, but she has not brought the report. So, she should not hide behind that – (Interjections)- Yes, she presented a statement but it was lacking. She was asked to bring a report - and there were even negotiations on how much time it would take her; she asked for three months, but the Speaker ruled that one month was enough. 

Madam Speaker, we can look in the Hansard. She should not hide behind that because there were many roads that were mentioned, but the information was not harmonised. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, we will require the minister to come and complete that statement, in any case, before we go for recess. We cannot go for recess without that information. We want that information so that we can go and inform our voters about the roads. (Applause) So, next Tuesday, we want information, on the BKK ferry, Suam-Kapchorwa Road and the ban on new roads projects. Okay, let us hear from the Minister of Education; you can take the Floor.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometime back, prior to the qualification of our team for the Africa Cup of Nations, my colleague, the shadow minister, was concerned about Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium and why it was closed by the Uganda Revenue Authority.

Honourable members, these are the issues that relate to the closure of Nakivubo. Fortunately, the stadium is back in operation but it is my obligation to give you the information that led to the closure even though it is now operational.

On 19 July 2016, the Registered Board of Trustees of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium was served with a letter of distress by M/s Kamugasha Agencies Ltd, the official agents for the Uganda Revenue Authority. The order was signed by the Commissioner General of Uganda Revenue Authority, seeking to recover outstanding Value Added Tax (VAT) and income tax arrears and accrued interest respectively, totalling to Shs 484,236,638. 

Their agent sought to enforce the warrant of distress on Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium by locking up the stadium facilities, pending removal of items and selling them unless the stadium paid the above mentioned tax arrears plus the agent’s fees and costs of the said distress.

Background to the Closure

Madam Speaker, this is the second time in which Uganda Revenue Authority has been constrained to take action and distrain for arrears of taxes owed by the Registered Board of Trustees of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium.

On 14 March 2013, the facility had been closed over accumulated VAT and PAYE arrears in form of accrued interest for the period between January 2004 and February 2009 to the tune of Shs 865,936,279. The principal amount due was Shs 356,728,390 and the interest accrued was Shs 509,207,889.

Concerted efforts towards re-opening of the stadium then led to the signing of a binding memorandum of understanding between the trust and Uganda Revenue Authority. The board of trustees then made a down payment of Shs 50,000,000 towards the tax arrears and Shs 20,000,000 towards the then fees of the bailiffs that had been engaged by the Uganda Revenue Authority to recover the said arrears.

The memorandum of understanding provided for a three-year repayment plan. By that time, the decretal tax arrears together with the accumulated interest thereon would total to a sum of Shs 865,936,279 as indicated earlier.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, over the agreed three-year period, the trust has been able to pay to Uganda Revenue Authority a total of Shs 430,405,488, leaving a balance of Shs 484,236,638. In fact, this is what caused the problem recently. Out of that, Shs 223,567,608 is the total amount of the actual tax arrears and Shs 260,669,030 is balance on the accrued interest over the said three-year period. 

The board of trustees then was able to raise revenue towards clearing of the said tax arrears from the development partners. This followed the signing of a series of public private partnership arrangements with potential developers from whom the trust was able to respectively generate resources as commitment fees. 

The board of trustees’ other major source of income at that time when the memorandum of understanding was reached with Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), as mentioned above, had been revenue generated from the Park Yard Market. Unfortunately, it was gutted by fire on several occasions thus denying the board a definitive revenue source that had been earmarked for servicing of the said tax obligation. As we talk, no single coin is coming from Park Yard.

The stadium management had committed to Uganda Revenue Authority Shs 21,500,000 per month, which was being collected from the Park Yard Market before it was gutted by fire. However, this is no longer forthcoming, which resulted into management failure to remit the funds to URA. 

The Current Closure

Madam Speaker and honourable members, on 19 July 2016, the Uganda Revenue Authority again moved in to close the Registered Trustees of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium over the said tax arrears, to the tune of Shs 484,236,638 only. They demanded for full payment of the same in addition to Shs 48,000,000 as bailiffs fees, without which the stadium facility would remain closed under lock and key. 

The new board of trustees engaged the Debt Management Unit of the Uganda Revenue Authority to resolve the impasse, with the basic aim of having the stadium facilities re-opened to the public. Tentatively, an understanding has been reached along terms for having the said stadium facility reopened as follows:

a) 	The board of trustees makes a down payment of Shs 100,000,000 only towards clearing the overall tax arrears as mentioned above, which is still due and owing. So far, Shs 75,000,000 has been paid to URA with a balance of only Shs 25 million left.  

b) 	The board of trustees has negotiated with the bailiff for the fees of levying for the distress/closure of the stadium facilities. So far, a sum of Shs 25,000,000 has been agreed upon and cleared to the bailiffs. The stadium facility has been fully opened and the sports business activities are continuing now.

c) 	The Uganda Revenue Authority to provisionally take over the collections of rentals from the stadium facilities for a period of not more than three months to inter alia, establish the actual current resource base for the board of trustees. During which time, the stadium facilities shall be opened for business supervised by the authority. 

This was a very good idea because the Uganda Revenue Authority adds several fees thinking that Nakivubo is earning a lot of money. So, Nakivubo management said if they want to ascertain how much they are earning, the authority should go collect money alongside them in order to get a clear picture. 

d) 	The board of trustees and Uganda Revenue Authority to jointly agree on the repayment methodology for the outstanding tax arrears upon a down payment of Shs 100,000,000 referred to above. 

e) 	On the strength of the above stated arrangement, the stadium facility is now open to the public for commercial and sports activities but still under the management of URA. Once the agreed fee is cleared, - the remaining Shs 25,000,000 - URA will hand over the stadium to the management of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium Board of Trustees. 

The following football matches have so far been played at the stadium:

Vipers vs Bright Stars
Vipers vs Express
Eid Cup
SC Villa vs Lweza

Eid dua prayers were also conducted there to show that the place is now open. 

f) 	The ministry has also instructed the office of the Inspectorate General of Government (IGG) to carry out an investigation into this matter. A letter was written to the IGG to clear all the rumours about these people making money. While this process of collection is taking place, let the third arm also come in to give a clear picture. 

Challenges Ahead

Madam Speaker and Members, as already indicated, the revenue base for the Registered Board of Trustees of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium is currently at the minimum. This is for the basic reason that following the signing of the respective public private partnership agreements with the respective developers, the management of the stadium facility gave notices to the then tenants to respectively vacate the property, in anticipation of the commencement of construction works. It is going to be a challenge to clear the above tax arrears.

Secondly, the respective public private partnership agreements are a strategic decision of the board of trustees to mobilise resources and generate extra revenue. This positive process has, however, not taken off for the following reasons:

a) 	Delays by the Kampala City Council (KCCA) to approve the respective re-development plans (architectural drawings) that the board of trustees and the development partners had jointly submitted for consideration and approval. It has been impossible, therefore, for the board of trustees to engage these development partners directly with the view of resolving the matter of the tax arrears with the Uganda Revenue Authority.

b)	There was a parliamentary select committee constituted to investigate the arrangement between the trustees and the developers in the Ninth Parliament. The committee took more than four months investigating and did a very good job. However, it created uncertainty on the side of the investors and threatened to erode their confidence in the partnership. Otherwise, their report was clear and they took their time.  

c) 	There is also a simmering conflict between and amongst the development partners, to the extent that one of the development partners has already taken the board of trustees to court and has obtained an interim order, temporarily restraining the trustees from developing. However, the ministry has intervened as we wait for the court’s decision. That is why the IGG was also co-opted in.

Way Forward

a) 	The ministry and the Registered Board of Trustees of  Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium has already engaged the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the way forward as far as the accrued interest, not the principal, which is part of the total sum of the tax arrears, is concerned. 

b) 	The board of trustees, together with the ministry, are engaging the relevant officials of the Kampala Capital City Authority to expeditiously consider and resolve the issue of the approval of the architectural drawings for the redevelopment works for the stadium. I beg to submit. 

That is the history of what transpired and led up to the closure. However, the place is now open and the payment arrangements are purely administrative. Some issues are in the courts of law and we are waiting for them to be concluded and then things will be settled. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. This is a matter of taxation. I do not know how much you can debate about the adequacy of taxes or memorandums of understanding on payment of taxes. The other issues are also in the courts. Do we really need to debate the issues of taxation here? There are parts of this issue in court, so I do not know how far we can go with our debate.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It has been the practise of this House that when matters are before court, and it is also largely in good legal spirit, we respect the independence of the arms of Government. Therefore, as the Legislature, it would not be appropriate to proceed and engage in a serious comprehensive debate on matters that are before court.

So, Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence and I think that it is procedurally right that we follow our own – but you are also predictable, Madam Speaker. That is what I would like to seek guidance on.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is - we are not talking about the court issue. No, some of –  

THE SPEAKER: How do you stop Members from touching the court issue?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is, we are talking about taxes and the issue of – (Interjections)- please listen. Do not make noise for us. In taxation, VAT is collected on supply and the issue we are looking at is, why was the money remitted to URA? That is all we would like to know. We are not interested in development partners and the like. This results from people like hon. Bakabulindi, who collude with management and mismanage the resources of the country.

So, the procedural issue I would like to raise is, is it procedurally right for people to hide the inefficiency, the cheating of public resources in the name of court? For us, we are not interested in their development plans; we are only interested in our taxes and management.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, even if it is an issue of management, we have a committee of this House that can follow up on management. I thought you wanted to know about the closure and not the status of taxes. We cannot debate that whether they were adequate or they were too much; how can you?

Can we have our COSASE committee follow this up? They have the statutory authority - (Applause)- they can handle that. Okay, the committee of COSASE should follow up this matter, especially the issue of the failure to remit taxes. (Applause)

The court is there, it will be too much openness; the court is involved, the IGG is also involved and Parliament too. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORTS AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR TOWN COUNCIL’S ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014

THE SPEAKER: Where are the commissioners? Can someone volunteer to assist the commissioners? Okay, commissioner Ogwal is here.

5.16
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the Town Councils account for the year ended 30 June 2014.

    1. Bukomansimbi Town Council
    2. Masindi Municipal Council
    3. Kamwenge Town Council
    4. Muhoro Town Council
    5. Namayingo Town Council
    6. Kayunga Town Council
    7. Matete Town Council
    8. Kalisizo Town Council
    9. Kamwenge Town Council
    10. Northern Division Moroto Municipal Council

I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, the second lot of the reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statement for the year ended 30 June 2014.

    1. Uganda institute of Health, Allied and Management Science, Mulago
    2. Mulago
    3. Arua Technical Institute (RAGEM)
    4. Uganda Technical College Lira
    5. Arua School of Comprehensive Nursing
    6. Lira School of Nursing and  Midwifery
    7. Kaberamaido Technical Institute
    8. Uganda College of Commerce Soroti
    9. Uganda College of Commerce Kabale
    10. Mubende Community Polytechnic
    11. Bukedi College, Kaconga
    12. National Teachers’ College Kabale
    13. Kabale School of Comprehensive Nursing
    14. Uganda Technical College Bushenyi
    15. Public Health Nurses’ College
    16. Jinja School of Nursing and Midwifery 
    17. Ministry of Health 
    18. The National Medical Stores
    19. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs
    20. Makerere University
    21. Public Service Commission
    22. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs
    23. Makerere University 
    24. Public Service Commission
    25. Uganda National Medical and Dental Practioners’ Council
    26. China-Uganda Friendship Hospital Naguru
    27. Ministry of Health Allied Health Professionals’ Council
    28. Ministry of Health, the Uganda Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria project, health systems, strengthening Component
    29. Makerere University Support to Research Activities Program (SIDA)
    30. Irish Aid Support to Gender and Inequity and Equity Budgeting
    31. Ministry of Water and Environment, Second National Communication Project
    32. Uganda Property Holding Ltd
    33. Uganda Embassy in Ankara
    34. National Water and Sewerage Corporation, Kampala Sanitation Programme Phase
    35. Makerere University Africa Institute for Strategic Animal Resource Services in Development (AFRISA)
    36. The Rural Electrification Agency
    37. The Uganda Livestock Industries Ltd for Six Month Period

REPORTS AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2015

    1. The Uganda Development Bank Ltd
    2. The DFI World Bank Grant for Development Plans under ADPII Project
    3. Pride Microfinance Ltd
    4. Post Bank Uganda Ltd
    5. Danida Uganda Good Governance Programme (UGOGO) Support to the Justice Law and Order Sector 2011 to 2016
    6. The report of opinion of the Auditor General on the Financial Statement for Town Council Accounts for the year ended 30 June 2014;
    7. Buwenge Town Council Accounts for the year 30 June 2014
    8. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Commissioner. Item No.5 (a) should be sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back. Item (b) and (c) are to be sent to the Public Accounts Committee - 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO DECLARE A STATE OF EMERGENCY IN TESO SUB-REGION AND COME UP WITH SUSTAINABLE SOLUTIONS TO ADDRESS FOOD INSECURITY

5.26
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to declare a state of emergency for Teso sub-region, and come up with sustainable solutions to address food insecurity.  I am moving under Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Yes seconded

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members:

“WHEREAS Teso sub region consists of districts of Amuria, Bukedea, Kaberamaido, Katakwi, Kumi, Ngora, Serere, Soroti and parts of Pallisa with a population of over three million occupants;

AND WHEREAS the sub region has two major seasons in a year which are clearly known, the dry and wet season;

AWARE that Teso sub region has this year suffered from drought for more than ten months resulting in prolonged drought and famine, the drought has not allowed people to do cultivation and plant on time while what had already been planted has not yielded any fruits because of the prolonged drought;

AWARE that this prolonged lack of water for production has become a threat to lives of both people and animals and yet the region entirely depends on agriculture for both food and income. This has also affected the enrolment of students in schools as we opened the term in Teso because most of the income of the people of Teso comes from agriculture;

COGNISANT of the fact that as a result of this prolonged drought and famine, a number of people have been taken ill and others have died as a result of starvation;

NOTABLY, the most vulnerable, including those suffering from HIV/ AIDS, on ARVs and mothers, especially expectant mothers;

FURTHER COGNISANT of the fact that food insecurity has increased, there is a lot of theft in the region as people are struggling to get what to feed on;

KNOWING that the Government of Uganda is a signatory to- (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the motion the honourable member is moving is so important. I was thinking that she was moving it for the entire north and she defined the boundaries of Teso, to include Kaberamaido which is just next door to Dokolo.

We actually have the same markets and so forth. Despite the importance of this motion, I am back on the Floor to say that we do not have the document.

We also wish to request this Parliament, that this motion involves the entire north and not only Teso. (Applause) I think it would be wrong and unfair - I know by the time you designed the motion, some of us were not around. We were not aware, but we appreciate the initiative you have made. However, what you are reading is exactly what is happening in my own constituency Dokolo, which is the nearest to Teso, and the entire northern region.

I would wish to implore the House that this motion be differed and we bring a motion involving the entire north, so that we all stand in one accord.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, what hon. Celia Ogwal has raised is very pertinent. As a matter of procedure, I am also puzzled because the mover is a member of the NRM caucus. Our Rules of Procedure recognise caucuses and we have our Rules of Procedure for those concerns.

This matter did not come through the caucus to gunner support, so that we can involve the whole Parliament. We would have guided her. What hon. Cecilia Ogwal is raising is very pertinent. I am at a loss and I think we can work out a very good motion that can benefit all the regions –(Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Government Chief Whip, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, has been attending this House very consistently since the Tenth Parliament began. The Government Chief Whip is very much aware that Members from across the country, especially from Northern Uganda, have been raising this matter of drought repeatedly. The complaints of drought have been coming from Acholi, Lango, Teso and all over the country.

Is it in order for the Government Chief Whip to come and allege that it is a matter of the caucus when it is a matter of national importance?

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister wanted maximum support from the House and she knew that there are other people who have a problem, and would have wanted to be part of the motion. That is what she was saying.

MS AKELLO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. However, we thought that the motion would be reinforced by bringing on board other sub-regions that were not included. This is because it is a matter that has been raised frequently; Members have been speaking about this. I remember very well the issues of famine and food insecurity have been coming now and again. Therefore, it is a matter of national importance and not just a caucus matter.

5.34
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, we do not want our country to take matters of famine or hunger as a joke; for how long will this happen? We have cried and I do not know what colour of tears you want to see, so that you know we have a problem?

Madam Speaker, it is on record that, on 14 July 2016, I stood up here to talk about the issue of hunger in Teso. I have a letter directing the minister in charge of disaster preparedness to do something about Teso. What are we doing? Somebody says, “let us go to caucus”. Can you caucus on matters of emergency?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope this matter is not being misunderstood. What the Government Chief Whip was saying is that, there should be other areas included, so that they are also party to the motion. She is talking about other areas which are also suffering – West Nile, Lango, Acholi etcetera.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, just like we saw in the matter of the Kapchorwa-Suam Road, it is the same way the matter of food insecurity in Teso is being treated. By the way, this is not a road; it is about somebody’s stomach.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: I would like to thank the honourable member for giving me way. As I speak, two months ago, 14 people died in Kitgum out of hunger. The situation is very alarming. Parliament needs to do something.

THE SPEAKER: What everybody is saying is that the situation is bigger than Teso – it is for Acholi, West Nile, etcetera.

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, our rules are very clear that once a motion is tabled on the Floor of the House, there are those that can be amended on the Floor. I have tabled the motion for the House to either take it or amend it. Therefore, the rules are clear. We can amend to expand the coverage, but this is a motion that I have tabled on behalf of the people of Teso because it came from the Teso Parliamentary Group –(Interruption) 

MR BYARUGABA: I rarely want to disorganise or disrupt a colleague. However, in this matter – important as it is – is it procedurally correct for the honourable member to move such an important motion without me having a copy to refer to? We do not have iPads.

That aside, having listened to our senior colleague that famine is devastating, not only to Teso or Northern Uganda but also Kabale and Isingiro. You saw animals dying because of drought. I would rather ask my honourable colleagues to admit the fact that, this is a very important subject that needs a concrete motion to cover the entire country, and a complete decision to be taken by Government.

5.38
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, I was in my constituency the whole of last week. For sure, what hon. Cecilia Ogwal said here is what is happening almost all over the country.

In Bugangaizi East, we had prolonged drought. After sometime, when we got some rains, we planted, but we received a very heavy hailstorm that ravaged every crop, and people do not have what to eat there. Therefore, I think this is a national issue.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if it is bigger than Teso, make some proposals so that we move. We need to find a solution.

5.39
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to propose to my sister that, following the guidance of our senior, hon. Cecilia Ogwal as well as the Government Chief Whip, she withdraws this motion for now and goes back so that we expand it. Some of us want to contribute to it. In my case, people are also dying of hunger in Tororo. Let us withdraw this motion, so that we sit down and improve on it and bring a comprehensive motion such that the whole House benefits.

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker and colleagues, whereas I appreciate the enthusiasm that you have towards the people who are suffering in this country, especially without food, the motion is not only addressing food; those are the immediate solutions. The motion is addressing long-term solutions, so that people cannot be crying of food year in, year out.

However, having been a Member of the Ninth Parliament and this Tenth Parliament, it is on the Hansard that honourable Members raised the issue of famine in the country and up to today, we have not got any feedback. I came here on an issue of national importance in regard to the dying vulnerable communities of people who are suffering from HIV/AIDS, since they cannot swallow their ARVs, as well as expectant mothers who need to eat. It was tabled last week, but nothing was done.

Colleagues, our rules are clear that a motion can be amended on the Floor of the House. If the House has seen that it is imperative to expand the coverage, I think the onus is on the House to look at areas as we amend the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it would be untidy if everybody stands up saying “I want to talk about Adjumani, Karamoja and so forth. Why don’t we sit under the Chairmanship of the Committee on Agriculture and identify all the areas and defer the motion to Tuesday. You can conclude it on Tuesday, but covering all the areas. (Applause) 

This is because I do not know whether everybody will be able to speak for their area today. Do you mind if we delay it a bit up to Tuesday and we get the other areas? Everybody is saying they have a problem. I just want to defer it to Tuesday, so that the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries – where is our chairperson – (Ms Oketayot rose_) - can convene a meeting and all the areas which have problems can be added to this motion for debate on Tuesday?

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, may I get guidance? Hon. Amongin is raising a very important matter, but I am afraid the Constitution looks at it differently. I would, therefore, invite my colleague and the committee to critically examine Article 110 of the Constitution which provides for the state of emergency and under what circumstances a state of emergency, is declared, and by whom. See also whether Parliament indeed, under the Constitution has the powers to declare a state of emergency.

THE SPEAKER: She was not declaring - she is inviting Government to take notice of the gravity of the matter and to declare it. That is what she is looking for.  

MR NIWAGABA: But they need to look at it in order to improve the motion. 

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, it is in the right direction that this motion can be well furnished to address the concerns of the various Members. I think that Tuesday next week is quite far. I would appreciate if the Chairperson of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Chairperson Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the other concerned parties agreed on the timeframe. Let us have the meeting by tomorrow so that this matter is brought back to Parliament on Thursday, if that is in order, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I had already indicated that on Wednesday and Thursday, there will be no sittings because the committees have to complete their reports and report back. The next sitting day is Tuesday. That is why I am looking at Tuesday; but you can meet tomorrow, identify the areas; the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs can help us on framing a proper motion and make other changes and then on Tuesday, we give you your day. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I request that, owing to your guidance, on Tuesday we debate this motion extensively. May I also request the Government Chief Whip, that all ministers in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be present on Tuesday?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we thank hon. Amongin for moving the motion. We would like to enrich it. So, we shall come back to it on Tuesday when we have incorporated all the areas which are under pressure and with support from other committees. So, hon. Oketayot, this is now your responsibility; today, tomorrow, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday - convene this meeting so that we are ready for Tuesday. Thank you very much, hon. Amongin.

MS AMONGIN: Much Obliged, Madam Speaker. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a matter of procedure. Before the start of this Parliament, Parliament was requested to change its rules and other relevant laws to expand the Cabinet of the current Government in order to accommodate various interests, and more specifically, to increase the number of Cabinet ministers.

Madam Speaker, I am speaking with a lot of concern particularly, in view of the fact that the media is not very friendly to the Institution of Parliament and I would want the Government Chief Whip to explain to the Speaker and the House why on earth Parliament would labour to give you more Cabinet ministers and more ministers of state yet these ministers do not get time to sit here and attend to matters of national importance -(Applause)- matters for which they were appointed ministers.

Madam Speaker, I think that when you interview Members to become ministers, they must agree and make a pledge that they will have time to sit in the House. It is only by sitting in the House that you will carry out the concerns of the people and translate them into political action. However, the front bench has continued to be empty.

Madam Speaker, I can see how much the Government Chief Whip, my dear sister is labouring. She is at pain all the time struggling  to stand in for ministers; speaking for ministers time and again; now we do not know whether she is the Leader of Government Business or a mere whip. This is because there are people in this country who have accepted to be in high positions but who do not want to serve the country.

This is a matter which I feel Parliament cannot just sit back and watch. I think we have to say something. Therefore, Parliament is being condemned every other day and I know that even when Cabinet ministers decide not to attend Parliament, they will still blame the Speaker and the Members of Parliament yet we have nothing to do with it. I would like Parliament to take its position on this matter. It is a matter of public disgrace and they cannot just sit by and watch –(Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my very senior colleague for giving way.

Madam speaker, in this honourable House, let us accept and admit that there is a crisis in the country. Ugandans are tired and sick of emptiness and nothingness. Every time they walk out of their houses, they are confronted by the challenges that this House has been lost in for the last many years.

Madam Speaker, you have the last voice; let us call the Cabinet and invoke the Constitutional powers given to you by the Parliament of Uganda to ensure that that this front bench is full during every sitting. 

The patience of Ugandans is getting exhausted; Members of Parliament have literally lost constituencies because we are supposed to provide solutions and we are not taking our role seriously. As I sit down, this is no laughing matter. We need to move as a country and it is only your office that will save us from the black mail, the deception and the lies because Cabinet will say it is Parliament. Every time we go out there, we are black mailed and branded all sorts of ugly names. As a country, we need to move and move seriously to make this House relevant to the needs of Ugandans. Thank you.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the honourable member for giving me information. I did not know that you actually had an intention to make a contribution on the matter –(Laughter)– but I do appreciate it because it is a very important matter.
Madam speaker, I feel a lot of sympathy for the Government Chief Whip. I definitely appreciate some of the ministers who have been very consistent in coming to answer the concerns of the Members of Parliament.

I am raising this because I would like actions to be taken. I do not want us to just listen to our own stories and go back. We must agree and take responsibility because Parliament, ultimately, is responsible for monitoring the Executive wherever they fail to perform. 

I would like us, as Parliament, to accept we are responsible because we accepted to be elected as leaders. It has so happened that a lot of us who accepted to be on the front bench are “first among equals” but there are many highly qualified persons on the back bench of the NRM who should have been there. Why did they agree to be on the front bench when they do not have time to sit there?

Madam Speaker, let us discuss this matter as a matter of national importance. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ogwal and colleagues. Of course the matter you raised is important. Unfortunately, Parliament has become a punching bag of the public even in matters that are not before this House. On Sunday, I was on a radio programme and there was a very long lecture by one of the clerics about a Bill on abortion. He was saying: “Why are these educated people discussing this”? However, the Bill has never come here although they are out there telling the pubic that it is what we are doing.

The Bill has never come here even for a single day. I told the church that I do not have that Bill and it has not yet come for the first reading. Yesterday, I was reading The Daily Monitor and another leader was saying “Harass Parliament to enact the laws on Agriculture which have been standing there for some years.” In the Ninth Parliament, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries did not even bring a single Bill. Therefore, there is nothing pending from the ministry, but on this page, the leader is telling the public to pressurise Parliament.  

Also, Government Chief Whip, stop these Government people who talk about things they do not know and incite the public against us. Look at what we are facing. You will find it there: “Pressurise Parliament for the laws.” There are no Bills here from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

This afternoon, I said we haven’t seen Government business. We are just working on Members’ motions and matters of national importance. That is what we are doing. That is why I have to close Parliament today because Government has failed to bring business. Government Chief Whip, where is the big Cabinet? We had a real struggle here to approve the increment of the ministers. 

5.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I cannot thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal appropriately, but I thank her very much for having raised this pertinent issue which is really shaming.

What you are raising is obvious and it is not the first time. At the beginning of the session, there were at least some numbers on the front bench, but towards the end, the number reduces tremendously. As the Government Chief Whip, I do not like this. 

I have officers from my office who attend Parliament and even committees. I wrote to you, Madam Speaker, to inform you about that arrangement. They take rollcall on a daily basis and every Wednesday which is Cabinet day, I brief Cabinet on their performance; I award grades to ministries. I urge my colleagues to always give priority to Parliament during those three afternoons of our sitting, because Parliament sits only on three afternoons in a week, but we are not improving. 

I know we can do a lot more, you and me, through the Appointments Committee. We can devise means of inviting such ministers to answer so many questions before the committee because oversight does not stop only at confirming names. Parliament has the oversight role and it stretches up to the functions of ministers. The Appointments Committee is the committee of Parliament where we appear to answer questions and we make promises to them. Why doesn’t the same committee call us back when we do not perform?

It is high time we switched to another procedure to make sure we perform our duties. The Executive and Parliament are supposed to complement one another to serve this country.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, you and I can sit down with your staff who take roll call. We know the ministers who attend and those ministers whose capacity to stay up to the end is wanting. They may be having problems; let them express to you their difficulties.

Any minister who is a Member of Parliament is supposed to seek authority from you, the Speaker, whenever he or she is travelling and will not be able to attend plenaries. How many ministers seek such authority from you when they are travelling? They are also supposed to seek permission from the Prime Minister? How many of them seek permission when they are travelling? We need to follow them up together. 

I appreciate hon. Cecilia Ogwal who has raised this issue and I pledge to this august House that I am not a person of “mchezo”. Once I receive support from colleagues, I will co-operate so that we serve the people whom we represent.  

I have nothing to add, but to thank you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for tolerating us. I pledge, as the Government Chief Whip, together with the Leader of Government Business, that we will not sit. Let us use the Appointments Committee and engage the ministers. We know who attends and those who do not; I also know those who walk out when the Speaker is still in the chair.

MR KATURAMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate what the Chief Whip has suggested that ministers be called by the Appointments Committee and they account for what they are doing. However, as far as I recall, I served on the Appointments Committee for a very long time and all the proceedings of the Appointments Committee are not brought here on the Floor of the House.

May I know whether after interacting with the ministers, the information will be brought on the Floor of the House before amending our Rules of Procedure? 

THE SPEAKER: For me, I have another strategy to instruct the Clerk to give me the names of the ministers who have been absent perpetually and we name them on Tuesday next week publicly for the country to know which ministers are not attending. (Applause)

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. The information I wanted to give my sister, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, is that the Speaker is the Chairperson of the Appointments Committee. She has said time and again that your ministers are making her work hard. In a way, those are warnings for you to do something -(Interjections)- they are her ministers, but they are headed by the Prime Minister who is the Leader of Government Business. Time and again, you have not asked her to represent them; you have always carried the burden.

That is why she comes back to you and says you have always carried the burden and you should tell the ministers that she is giving them a warning. This is not a matter that has only surfaced today. Everybody is concerned about the absence of ministers despite their huge numbers. There is no single ministry that has only one minister – maybe the Ministry for Science, Technology and Innovation. 

You find a ministry with over four ministers but never at one time will you see any of them here. We do not know whether all of them go out of the country at once. 

When the time comes for the House to decide to take its position on some of the ministers, I pray that this does not become a matter of the caucus. It will become a matter of the caucus of the entire House where we shall all take interest in the matter and if we are to discipline a member - the Appointments Committee does it on behalf of this House.

Therefore, if the ministers are to be called to this House and possibly the House decides to discipline them, I pray to the Chief Government Whip that it does not become a matter of the party caucus but of Parliament. We discuss it and discipline our ministers the way we want to discipline them. If it means recalling or warning them, then we do so. 

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition for giving way.

Last week, there was a question on health which I raised. The health ministry has three ministers but none of them was here and yet this is a House of representative of the Ugandans. More often than not, the Government Chief Whip has shouldered all the problems unnecessarily.

THE SPEAKER: Unnecessarily and unfairly. 

MR KABERUKA: I would like to know from my Government Chief Whip about what happens when she enters Cabinet. You have informed them and so what happens? The appointing authority is the chair and sometimes it is the Prime Minister - what do you always tell them? What should we do as a country? 

Madam Speaker, we are being put in a difficult situation for which I cannot answer whenever issues are raised in my constituency. When the Government Chief Whip was presenting the many names here, the reason given was for efficiency and effectiveness. Are we living up to the reasons that were raised on this Floor? Do we have any law we can invoke like how the President reshuffles them for efficiency? I thank you.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I am only learning today that our dear Government Chief Whip has been standing in for some of these ministers not because they have been requesting her but because she wanted to fill the gap.

On several occasions, we have raised issues and she has stood in to give information on behalf of these ministers. Today, she is also telling us that she is not aware as to why they are absent and why they are often absent.  

Madam Speaker, we do not want our fellow ministers to think that we have any issues against them. This Parliament and country is there for us all. The ministry that has three ministers, a Government that has a Leader of Government Business and Government Chief Whip cannot coordinate to know that we do have business today and so mobilise for at least 20 ministers to represent Government so that in case there is a very contentious issue, somebody is there to know and offer solutions. 

On several occasions, the Prime Minister has responded to issues of national importance like the way anybody else would respond and we continue to move on like this. The five years will end and we shall say we were Parliament.  You raise an issue and the Government Chief Whip stands in to defend and it ends there. Everything has a beginning and an end. 

Madam Speaker, we must bring this to an end and we must map a way forward. If the minister cannot manage to handle what is going on, let them inform us and we do something different.

THE SPEAKER: We are concluding. Two minutes, please.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, there was a minister then, - I was not a Member of Parliament - that we invited as a chief guest to a church fundraising. The minister did come for two minutes, but said that he had so many programmes to attend to. After five minutes, the minister left without attending to the fundraising.

After the function, we found this minister somewhere in a hotel drinking beer. (Laughter) I am bringing this up because there is a tendency for ministers to create a busy environment around themselves when they are actually not busy. We may think that they are out there attending to issues of national importance, while they are actually somewhere enjoying their lives.

We need to find a solution. Probably among the solutions we might think about is for the appointing authority to consider the ministers attendance of Parliament during their appraisal otherwise –(Interruption) 

MR NIWAGABA: The information that I wish to give the Member is that, Rule 101 of our Rules of Procedure is very clear. If a member is absent for 15 consecutive times – and most ministers have – he/she is referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. If a report is made that they cease to be Members of this House, then they cease to do so. 

I think the only way to do it is for the Clerk to read their names on Tuesday and refer those who have been absent for 15 consecutive times to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR NSAMBA: I thank you very much. We should do something on what is going on. For us who are NRM, we are abused because of the inability of our ministers to respond to some of the important issues. When I looked at my chief whip looking helpless, I felt like I should support a motion that is going to whip these ministers to do the right thing. I thank you very much. 

MR SSEMPALA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. My point of inquiry is one.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Hansard wants to know your name and constituency. 

MR SSEMPALA: No, let me make my point.

THE SPEAKER: I am asking you, for the record of the Hansard, to mention who is speaking.

MR SSEMPALA: I am Ssempala Kigozi Emmanuel Ssajjalyabene; I am sorry, Madam Speaker. Now, I wonder whether we should not discipline them. Mustn’t we also check the register? They could be signing but actually not coming here. 

Madam Speaker, as you get into the nitty-gritty of why we are not here, let us also get that information because it would be a good way of reminding them that they are not fountains of honour to this House. 

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I really sympathise with the Government Chief Whip because this is not the first time that this issue comes up as a matter of concern of this Parliament. Many times, Members have asked questions and the ministers are not here. 

I remember in the previous sitting, hon. Fungaroo tried to stop the Government Chief Whip from defending these ministers but today, matters are worse. At least the other day, the number was bigger than what I see today –(Interjections)– honourable minister, let me make my point; I will give you an opportunity later. 

I am of the view that this Parliament comes up with some action points or resolutions to address this problem, which is not only affecting this Parliament but also Ugandans who –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable member and thank you Madam Speaker. From the assessment, the ministers who have constituencies are actually the habitual absentees. Honourable minister Joy Kabatsi, who does not have a constituency, has been here consistently and I would like to thank her for that. (Applause)

This is the proposal I would like to give to the Leader of Government Business, Gen. Moses Ali, and to the Chief Whip that it is high time the appointing authority and Government considered ministers who are not necessarily Members of Parliament so that we can have ministers who are technical and who can devote their time to this House and be able to deliver for this country. 

Madam Speaker, the Opposition made this proposal that even with the almost 100 ministers that we have, only less than 10 appear. If we had about 20 committed ministers, they would serve this country and save us the embarrassment that this country and this Parliament is going through.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are 13 ex-officio ministers but there is only one who is here; where are the 12?

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the front bench, we have many ex-officios in this House. However, we now have only one of them present; where are the rest? I think we have a big problem and we need to sit down together and come up with a solution. 

The issue of writing names will not work. I have seen some people’s names appearing there when they are not even present in the Chamber. Therefore, that might not help us. 

Even in the ministries – I had a problem last week and I went to one of the ministries, which has three ministers. Two of them were out of the country and the other had gone to represent the ministry in a workshop –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, honourable members, on Tuesday, I will name the ministers who have been out without my authority and have not been in this House. 

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the position you have taken to guide this House. It is the best way to cure that problem. I also would like to plead, on behalf of my very good friend, Evelyn Anite, that as they name the other ministers, her name be excluded because she has been sick for some time now. She cannot sit for more than four minutes and I have evidence to that –(Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are clear; if you are not able to attend the House, you inform the Speaker. 

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concerns expressed by colleagues and personally, we have struggled with this issue of absenteeism in the House and even in Cabinet, it is on record. 

We lack sanctions and I have said it many times. In the army, we do not forgive; if you make a mistake, you have to be punished so that you do not think that your mistakes are forgivable.

Madam Speaker, I think this is a joint effort because this House is run by you and the Executive. I would like to support the proposal that she made, that we need a joint meeting with the Speaker and the Leader of Government Business - that is the Prime Minister – so that we come up with a solution. If somebody is not in the House without reason, they should explain and action must be taken. 

These ministers are adults; they are mothers, fathers and some are grandfathers. You cannot expect me to be beaten up for a mistake but because we agreed to work in the interest of the country, we must respect that oath. If I do not, I must explain why; if I want to leave the House, I must tell the Speaker and so forth. If this continues and no action is taken, then we will continue lamenting. 

I suggest that we report this tomorrow to Cabinet and I suggest that we make a proposal for the Prime Minister to meet with you and let the two heads of the Legislature and the Executive propose a way forward. The proposal that ministers should not be MPs should have been brought up in the Business Committee when vetting these ministers. However, since the ministers are already vetted, you cannot block them now. [MR NZOGHU: “No; we are saying we shall amend the law.”]These are the proposals we should look into.

We lack sanctions and if we would like to improve on the situation, we must introduce stringent sanctions and they must be implemented by both sides because this is a House for the country and the ministers are there for the country. The positions exist for the good of the country and they must ensure that the questions are answered properly.

May I take this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to inform the Members who are doubting whether I am the First Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business or whether the Government Chief Whip has taken over my roles or not; the Government Chief Whip has not taken over my roles. She is in the House and answerable to me, by the way. (Laughter) 

However, it is advantageous to me that she is as active and answers most of the problems that you expect me to answer because I need a chief whip like her –(Laughter)- because I need some time to recover. Therefore, if she can speak as many times as possible and offload my problem, I will speak in the near future. In addition, the Government Chief Whip is doing her job and she has not interfered with my job. I am here supervising and watching my teams including the Opposition –(Laughter).

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE SHODDY WORKS AND PERSISTENT DEFECTS ON THE ONGOING CONSTRUCTION SITES OF KARUMA (600MW) AND ISIMBA (183MW) POWER DAMS

6.24
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker and Members. I am moving a motion under rules 47, 48 and 50(k) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament for a resolution of Parliament of Uganda on the shoddy works and persistent defects on the on-going construction sites of Karuma (600MW) and Isimba (183MW) power dams. 

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 90 provides that Parliament shall appoint committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions;

NOTING THAT objective  XI (ii) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution provides that the State shall stimulate agricultural, industrial, technological and scientific developments by adopting appropriate policies and enacting of enabling legislation;

NOTING FURTHER THAT Article 8A of the Constitution provides that Uganda shall be governed based on the principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the national objectives and directive principles of state policy;

AWARE THAT Objective X provides that the State shall take all necessary steps to involve the people in the formulation and implementation of the development plans and programmes which affect them;

FURTHER AWARE that the Government of Uganda has prioritised development of electricity infrastructure as a key element to catalyse socio-economic development;

COGNISANT that Government, through its Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, has contracted infrastructure development of 600 MW Karuma under EPC hydro power project with Sinohydro Corporation costing $1.6 billion, which is equivalent to Shs5.6 trillion and the 183MW Isimba hydro power project with China International Water and Electricity Corporation at $570 million, which is equivalent to Shs 1.4 trillion as government public funded projects to keep traffics at affordable levels;

APPRECIATING THAT Government, through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, appointed the Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited as its representative in overseeing the construction works and owner of the hydropower plants;

NOTING with concern that in line with its mandate, the Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited has confirmed that despite the construction progress made on the projects, poor design and shoddy construction works and non-compliance that have repeatedly been raised by the Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited management still occur on the two projects;

FURTHER NOTING that in the exercise of the Constitutional mandate under Article 98 and 99 of the Constitution, His Excellency President Museveni strongly warned that if not urgently addressed properly, the shoddy works on the two projects may have a serious effect on the safety, reliability, stability and durability of the dams in the long run;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:

    i) Government be urged to take immediate and decisive steps to bear on the project contractors to rectify the defects and non-compliances cited in the Government flagship projects of Karuma and Isimba power dams.

    ii) That the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development expeditiously implements the tripartite memorandum of Understanding between Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited, Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited and itself in relation to the power sector projects comply with its own policy direction as well as give full effect to His Excellency President’s directive to giving full contract administrative powers over the Karuma and Isimba projects to Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited.

    iii) A joint sectoral committee of physical infrastructure and natural resources be set up to urgently investigate the conduct and role of the Minister and Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for the shoddy works on the Karuma and Isimba projects.

    iv) Government takes urgent measures to ensure local content and participation of Ugandans in the Shs 7,595 billion Karuma and Isimba power projects.

    v) In light of the critical matters involved in this motion and the colossal amounts of money that the taxpayer shall ultimately pay, the joint sectoral committee of Parliament be granted exceptional facilitation to conduct its work with speed and report back to the House within 30 days.”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker and Members, I proceed with the justification of this motion. Government of Uganda has prioritised the development of electricity infrastructure as a key element to catalyse socio and economic development.

To this end, construction of the Karuma dam project to produce 600MW was awarded to Sinohydro Corporation of China under EPC arrangement in June 2013. 

The dam is costing Ugandans $1.6 billion, which is equivalent to Shs 5.6 trillion of which China finances 85 per cent - that is Shs 4.8 trillion; while Uganda borrowed from Exim Bank its 15 per cent counterpart funding of Shs 1.4 trillion. The balance to be obtained from the energy fund, the dam is expected to be completed by December 2018. I have the Annexure 1 of the Loan lending agreement between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and the Uganda Electricity Generation Company Ltd. It talks about the money involved and it was entered on 28 October 2015 between the Government of the Republic of Uganda, represented by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (hereinafter called Government) on one part, and UEGCL on the other part. 
I beg to lay.

Similarly, Isimba Hydroelectric Power Station is a 183 MW project costing $570 million (equivalent to Shs 1.4 trillion) which is being constructed by the China International Water and Electric Corporation. The project is financed by a loan from China’s Exim Bank as approved by Parliament, and it attracts a two per cent annual interest payable over 20 years. Uganda is expected to contribute the remaining $107 billion (equivalent to Shs 374.5 billion). Madam Speaker, that loan was passed by this very Parliament.

Persistent defects on Karuma (600 MW) and Isimba (183 MW) Dams

The defects on the Karuma and Isimba dams have persisted despite being flagged by the implementing agency of Government – UEGCL.

In its site progress report to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, dated 19 July 2016 – just two months ago – and titled: “Outstanding Critical Issues Affecting Karuma (600 MW) and Isimba (183 MW) Hydropower Projects,” the UEGCL Board of Directors reported that despite the construction progress made, a number of design and construction quality issues and non-compliances that had been repeatedly raised by the board are still occurring and have not been resolved by the owners’ engineer – this is the person supposed to supervise the construction and the EPC contractors.

I have that report, dated 19 July 2016 and addressed to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development by UECGL board of directors. It talks about the outstanding critical issues affecting the two projects. It is here and I beg to lay it on the Table.

Now, moving on to specific defects on Isimba:

    a) Embankment dam design and construction non-compliances:
    i) Commencement of works of embankment without approved detailed designs.
    ii) Failure to undertake soil and rock material tests that would form the basis of dam stability calculations. This is critical if we are to have a long-term dam of this nature.
    iii) Founding of the embankment on loose soil and river deposits.

The embankment of these dams was made on loose soil and river deposits; they never took time to find the hard soil on which to construct the dams.

b)	Outstanding concrete quality issues to cover:
    i) Delay by the EPCC to undertake expert investigations and repair of reported concrete defects that include: systematic cracks in stilling basin (SP2), upstream face of gravity dam and drainage galleries and; roof of the race sections of units 1 and 4. There are visible cracks in these supposedly water-tight concrete structures.
    ii) Missing and misaligned water stops, inappropriate removal and repair of exposed form work tie rods and delays in correction of abrupt concrete surface irregularities on hydraulic flow sections among others.

Madam Speaker and Members, the contractors were found to be using mild steel tie rods, coupling cut at the concrete surface and yet these mild steel tie rods will lead to corrosion in future. This is supposed to be hard steel but when you use mild steel, you can be sure to come up with shoddy work.

c)	Use of inferior grade for draft tubes, poor fabrication and welding quality for draft tubes unit 1-4, use of uncertified welders for industrial standard welding and; failure to undertake confirmatory non-destructive tests and alignment checks on the installed draft tube units.

Madam Speaker and Members, these projects are supposed to be under water; that means for now, water is being diverted. Once the dams are complete, that water will be released. However, if this is happening under water and they cannot take corrective measures instantly, by the time Ugandans wake up, these dams would have been washed away and that is the crux of the matter.
 
Defects on Karuma:
a)	There is continued failure by EPC (Sinohydro Corporation) to adhere to technical specifications, employer’s requirements and international standards specified in the contract. And this is the contract that they signed. This is coupled with the inability of owner’s engineer – these are the technical teams supposed to be inspecting and I will come back to that. 

Energy Infratech of India is just one company that supervises both dams. Unfortunately, the dams are at different levels. So supervising dams at different levels with a minimum level of competence is what is causing this – and unqualified engineers among others. 

The owner’s engineer has been unable to enforce adherence to technical standards, for example, use of inferior Chinese Codes and standards; failure to undertake cooling studies and to test cement heat of hydration before commencement of concrete mixing; transportation and placement methods, among others.

Madam Speaker, my colleagues will be coming later to supplement but you will find that, for instance, on Karuma dam, there is no ice plant to cool this concrete mixture. Moreover, even the mode of mixing the concrete; it is mixed outside – since this is an underground tunnel, the concrete mixture is loaded on a tipper, driven for over a kilometre and then tipped to where they want to put it. Yet ordinarily, there should be a concrete mixer and the ice plant to ensure that the concrete that is poured is cooled immediately to avoid the overreactions and the alkaline ingredients.

b)	Concrete defects including systematic thermal cracks, honey combing, segregation and poor/uneven surface profiles, coupled with delays to undertake repairs of the thermal cracks that led to stoppage of concrete works in April; sub-standard formwork and non-standard fixing procedure, improper reinforcing, poor installation practice.

Madam Speaker and Members, you may recall that the President in April this year ordered the stopping of the construction because these irregularities and non-conformities were going on and they were not being corrected. He told them, “First stop; correct those” but these are still on-going.

c)	Failure by the OE and EPCs to comply with the recommendations of the Dam Safety Panel of Experts on the use of C40 concrete grade with 75mm for the dam overflow section – that is the aggregate – as opposed to the inferior C30 concrete grade with 37.5mm aggregate. 

Aggregate is measured in millimetres. However, they are using 37.5 and the inferior C-30 instead of the C-40 concrete with 75 millimetres for the dam overflow section. You can now imagine putting the destiny of this country in such a precarious situation. 

There is unsatisfactory testing of aggregates- Alkaline Reactivity to check if aggregates are potentially deleterious. There are some mixtures - stones, concrete and aggregates that if you mix with cement, they react. However, this has not been tested to ensure that it is the proper quality needed at the dam. The more conclusive long-term tests like ASTM C-1567, ASTM C-1263 have not been submitted, as I present here. 

Reduction in design quantities without following value engineering principles; the constructors have undertaken reduction. They are cutting corners in order to save on the quantity and materials to be used without following value engineering principles. These include excavation, consolidations and grouting, which is used to mitigate the blast damage. There is a rock once it is blasted, it can go down. Therefore, grouting is used to seal all the avenues and it is missing here - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, my difficulty is that you are now going into the demerits of the inquiry. You have moved very fast. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: With your permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to just raise one small point on the defects in the structural and finishing work for residential and non-residential buildings and lack of master plans. Indeed these are supposed to be housing units for the present and future. However, these structures lack the minimum ventilation; they are being built in 2016 and yet they have no fire escape routes. 

To underpin the potential catastrophe on Karuma and Isimba Power Dams, H.E the President communicated to hon. Irene Muloni on 22 March 2016 and almost immediately on 5 April 2016 and further in July 2016 about the disturbing reports of the shoddy works on the two dams; that if not urgently addressed properly, may have a serious effect on the safety, reliability, stability and durability of the dams in the long run. 

Madam Speaker, I have that communication with me here. In the said communication to the minister, the President is further perturbed by the fact that these shortcomings have been repeatedly raised to the contractor in numerous communications and always copied to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, but no decisive action has been taken by the ministry to address this issue. 

Similarly, the Uganda Electricity Generation Company limited (UEGCL) as the implementing agency for the project has equally continued to raise those issues but sadly, the ministry has continued with the inaction and yet work on the projects is continuing.

Consequently, in the attendant overarching 8-point directive to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development on Isimba, H.E the President ordered a proper investigation and analysis of the draft tubes that had been installed in position. That if found necessary, this should be removed and new ones ordered and pre-assembled before they are installed. 

On Karuma, the President ordered a proper investigation analysis of the visible cracks in the concrete of the dam structure to clearly get to the root cause and the effect these cracks will have on the durability of the dam and in take structure so that the necessary corrections are done immediately. 

Honourable members, it is the duty of this Parliament as well to not shy away from this responsibility. This is all our future and, therefore, it is upon this House to see how we can save this situation. 

To date, unfortunately, these critical interventions by H.E the President, UEGCL, project management consultants and the Ad Hoc committee’s report have not been addressed by the ministry and the contractors. 	

Madam Speaker, I may not dwell much on the ministers but let us see the remedial actions we might take, as Parliament; this is to ask the ministry to expeditiously allow Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited to take full contract administration of Karuma and the Isimba Projects. 

With this, the above is in conformity with the Tripartite Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic of Uganda as represented by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited in relation to the power sector projects funded by the Exim Bank, which I have already laid. 

In the said memorandum, clauses 2.5 and 2.9 provide that Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited has the legal mandate to build, operate and maintain electricity generation plan and to carry on business of power generation and sale within Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I have the said Tripartite Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic of Uganda as represented by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development (MEMD), Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited and Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited in relation to the power sector project funded by Exim Bank of china. It is annexure 4 and I beg to lay the same. 

It is my prayer that I allow my colleagues to come and beef up the rest of the points. However, it is also critical that I must mention the local content. This country, and this Parliament particularly, have been yearning for local content. This is a Shs5.7 trillion project but as you may realise, even the sand mined from Lukaya and scooped from Lake Victoria is supplied by the Chinese. 

The concrete aggregate and cement is from Kenya and China and yet we have Tororo and Hima among others. At Isimba, the Chinese contractors have even set up a piggery to slaughter their own pigs because they do not want to buy pigs from the neighbouring communities. 

They also have a 50-head cattle farm at Karuma because they want to keep their cattle and they do not want to extend it. You even have Chinese forex bureaus, travel bureaus and Chinese food. Even your own sand here is supplied by the Chinese so at the end of the day, what is the trickledown effect from this Shs 5.7 trillion project? 

Madam Speaker, I am going to talk about the Community Development Action Plan; a host community which is facing all the negative consequences. The ministry has been allocating billions of funds each year to this Community Development Action Plan (CDAP). It refers to the benefits that will accrue to the host community to be able to welcome the project and also be part of this. It needs thorough investigation.

Recently, as Members must have read, the host community is stressed and the hygiene is not proper. The elephants in the nearby Murchison Falls National Park have also been stressed and as a result, they have not produced for two years due to the blasting of rocks. (Laughter) 

Therefore, at the end of the day, you need the Community Development Action Plan (CDAP) to address the stress and the inconveniences that come along with the project. Madam Speaker, I give way to my colleagues to supplement. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, please use five minutes.

6.52
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa East County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. While inviting my colleagues to support this motion, I will specifically address the issue of local content. As the prime mover has already intimated to you, this is a project of over Shs 7 trillion; but how much of it is coming back to the country? 

We have steel manufacturing companies; however, can you imagine that all the steel that is being used on the Karuma and Isimba dams is wholly imported from China? There is no steel being purchased from the steel manufacturing companies in this country. Of course the consequences on taxes and job creation are all in the negative.

There is an allegation that actually the steel being imported from China is even inferior to the steel that is manufactured from here. (Applause) Therefore, we believe that if Members support this motion and a committee of Parliament is constituted, all this will be brought out.

The human resource: we have over 2,000 Chinese at Karuma and over 1,000 Chinese in Isimba who are truck drivers and foremen among others. Can’t these jobs be done by Ugandans? Do we need Chinese to drive trucks? Do we need Chinese to be foremen?

Recently, you heard that one of them committed suicide and he was a mere water quality engineer. How many water quality engineers do we have in this country? Concerning cement for construction, you cannot believe that all the cement being used in Karuma is imported from Kenya, from a company called Savannah Cement Limited, which is hardly 10 years in existence yet we have Tororo Cement, which was used in the construction of Kiira and Bujagali dams and is well tested for its efficiency and proficiency. 

Why should we spend money to import cement from Kenya? Moreover, from a company which is hardly, 10 years old? Of course you can see the connection between those involved in the contract and commissions. This is the corruption we are talking about.

On sand; recently, the Minister of Water and Environment came here and gave us the list of the companies mining sand in Lwera. You cannot believe that these companies mining sand in Lwera are Chinese companies selling sand mined from Uganda, to Chinese contractors on Isimba and Karuma dams, and of course some of it is being exported.

I am talking about the following companies: 
 
    i) He Shs Duo Company Ltd
    ii) Pankso Hongkong Investment
    iii) Zou Yun Yunyan
    iv) You Jing Shu
    v) Wakoney and AB General Trading Chinese Companies

I will lay on the Table this ministerial statement following the companies involved in mining sand, including Chinese companies, which sand is mined from Ugandan lakes and rivers and sold by Chinese to Chinese contractors. We cannot even get money for our local people from our own sand? Where is the local content?

Unfortunately, the ministry is aware of all this but they have decided to keep quiet. I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial statement on mining of Sand in Kalungu and Mpigi districts, by hon. Minister Mary Gorret Kitutu Kimono, showing the companies which include the Chinese companies that are reportedly mining sand in our wetlands and selling it to the contractors, on Isimba and Karuma dams.

Madam Speaker, issues have arisen from whistle-blowers concerning the environment protection. We have been told – and I believe the committee will find out - that there is no sewage treatment plant both in Isimba and Karuma. All the human waste after being collected in drums is poured into the water. That has been raised by whistle-blowers and we believe that the committee should be able to investigate and come to the crux of this matter. If it is found true, then remedial action should be taken against the companies involved.

The Community Development Action Plan

Karuma has a trading centre - some of us who have frequented it in our other businesses - it used to have a population of about 1,000 people but now the population is over 4,000 people. However, money has been budgeted for under the Community Development Action Plan and is withdrawn annually to help in what would otherwise be a corporate social responsibility? No health centre has been built by any of these companies and no one knows where the money goes. There is nothing favourable to the community apart from a poorly constructed and ramshackled market. It is the only community social responsibility these companies have done for Karuma.

Sincerely speaking, our local people need to benefit. First of all, we are borrowing money and it is money our people are going to pay today and in the future. If we do not benefit from it now and if no remedial action is taken, we will be blamed for not taking action. 

With those few remarks, I beg that the honourable members in this august House support this motion unanimously. I so pray.

6.59
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro South County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank hon. Ssekikubo and hon. Niwagaba and colleagues, for this very important motion. Every one of us that has visited any of these places or has heard from quarters as it may be, will agree with me that this is very important information and very important for our future and our grandchildren.

This dam is not yours; it is for your sons and daughters and their children and possibly, their children. Therefore, it is important that we take corrective measures now, not tomorrow. One thing however sticks out; I did allude to this fact last week when a similar issue was brought on the Floor of Parliament and I assured you that - actually even today, I have a copy of part of the report the committee is compiling. 

Today we met with officials from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development together with their ministers and we are coming up with a report. Ours will not be a motion but a report with recommendations and this will give us more information -(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just would like the honourable member to be clear and let us know which committee he is talking about and possibly be able to educate this House, what the terms of reference are such that this House can actually be convinced that what you are doing is critical and is going to answer these issues that are highlighted here.

MR BYARUGABA: Hon. Nzoghu, I am the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources and it is the committee responsible for this particular issue - Isimba, Karuma dams. All those issues about the President giving instructions and guidance, we have already gotten them. We are actually asking for permission today to be out of Parliament for the –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I have listened to hon. Byarugaba addressing himself to the issue of the Committee on Natural Resources. However, he should also know that this particular complaint majorly falls under the Ministry of Works and Transport and it would be fair for this particular issue to be handled by more than one committee and that is what we are looking at. 

If it were a particular issue possibly outside this scope, they could handle it but for this particular one, Madam Speaker, I feel that the Ministry of Works takes a larger percentage of this and therefore, the committee on Natural Resources cannot handle this singly.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, colleague. However, for your information, the Ministry of Works and Transport has nothing to do with the construction of dams. However, it does no harm whatsoever, for any Member of Parliament to participate –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my good friend, the chairperson of the Committee of Natural Resources, hon. Alex Byarugaba. I do not dispute what you are saying; however, the information I would like to give is that, on 20 April 2016, there was an Ad hoc committee that was formed. This committee was constituted as a result of the President directing that some officials of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, that had been suspended be investigated.

We agree that engineers are engineers and in energy, there must be electricity engineers, water engineers and civil engineers. We have basically had problems in Uganda because you will get the Ministry of Education and Sports, also constructing classes, yet, the construction work should be done by the Ministry of Works and Transport. The Ministry of Works and Transport comes at the tail end yet problems have long come up. 

Construction of water dams is under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, and you will need those technical persons in the field of engineering like in construction, civil works, and electricians to do it. Your committee is doing a good job, but you are looking at the same ministry, which is being implicated. We now need some additional hand –(Hon. Peter Lokeris rose_)– You cannot give me information; you are the people who have brought us problems. (Laughter)

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. You are my neighbour and when I stand up; you must say something to amuse us. Madam Speaker, when this matter came up about these defects, we all said it had taken us like a storm. Everybody wondered what was happening.

The President got the information - and we immediately commissioned a team of experts as a ministry, to go to the site and report back. We also invited all these other agencies - the generation and the transmission because they supervise work on behalf of the ministry and they have engineers. As we speak, a committee of expert engineers was appointed to go on site and the chairman is Prof. Badru Kiggundu.

We have a team of engineers from many sectors, including those from Ministry of Works and Transport. That team is there and it will be indicated when the report comes out. 

MR BYARUGABA: All that is good information, honourable colleagues. We only look forward to having a much enriched report to this august House, for us to be able to make concrete recommendations. This will not take long because we have already started.

Actually, had it not been for the Speaker’s guidance, that no committee should be - (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker and Members, I do not know the future of such motions in this House. You remember this motion was presented to the Clerk on 24 August. The previous week when you chaired, this matter had been on the Order paper. However, the responsible minister was not in the House and we had other business. We eventually got in touch and he said, “No, hold fire; I need to be in the House to give explanations.” That is why we left the week to pass and now I am happy, we have had a light of day.

However, you cannot tell a colleague - because we never wanted to proceed by way of ambush; these are matters of public concern, on which everybody should contribute. Whereas this one is on, you then want to run ahead of the committee so that at end of the day by the time the motion is read, it is already overtaken by events.

I had at some point shared with hon. Byarugaba and the chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and I told them that we have such a matter. I am rising because this matter was not done to pre-empt but even the responsible sector was in the know. I do not know how they got a copy of our motion much earlier and what you see now is that they are trying to run and circumvent –(Interruption)

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, in view of the fact that we have been handling this matter, as the chairperson of the committee has mentioned today, we invited the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. We also invited the electricity generation company. As a result, we have eliminated issues that we need to investigate and I can see that these issues are clearly in line with what the honourable member is talking about. We were concerned about the issue of supervision of the project and that is what the Member talked about.

We are concerned about the issue of implementation of the Community Development Action Plan and local content. These are the issues that we are actually investigating. Is it in order then that the honourable member should insinuate that we are just jumping on now yet we have been handling the matter for some time now? 

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, we have been seeking for your permission to visit this project. Is the honourable member in order to say that we are just jumping in?

THE SPEAKER: I do not think he was talking about the committee but the ministry, which he was worried about.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. After the mover of the motion introduced it, the seconders were supposed to come in but I did not see their names. 

Madam Speaker, are we proceeding right when we, the seconders of the motion, see a different person who is not even seconding the motion making a contribution? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I know the names of the seconders. I think 90 per cent are not here and that is why I allowed the chairperson of that sector. Only you and hon. Nzoghu are here. Hon. Magyezi, hon. Ssewungu, hon. Tinkasimire, hon. Oseku, are not here. 

Anyway, honourable members, if you think that we need to investigate this matter now, address the prayers. The prayer is that we have a joint committee, that Government does a, b, c, d. If you are convinced that we need to inquire, address the prayers.

7.12
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to second the motion moved by hon. Ssekikubo. I might be the only Member of Parliament who has been on site. How did I get on site? The Rt Hon. Speaker of EALA invited us – a group of young leaders – to move with him on a site visit and see what Government is investing in Karuma. I was very disappointed with the on-going construction work in Karuma. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, with due respect, let us take this as a matter of national concern. (Applause) If we really love this country, we must get serious and look at what is going on in our country. For instance, in regard to the issues raised by hon. Ssekikubo, we met a team of engineers from the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited in Karuma. There are young people in this country who love their country but are frustrated by a team of corrupt officials in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. (Applause)

Honestly, it is a shame to my ministers. It is a shame even for hon. Peter Lokeris to come here. He should have come to tell us what actions he has taken on the directive of H.E the President if he were a serious minister. It is a shame that the chairman of a board can write to a ministry highlighting issues which are affecting a dam in our country, but someone can afford to refer to him as “just a chairperson of the board”.

Madam Speaker, I can give evidence here. I would like to read part of the letter which was a response to the chairman of the board who complained. Listen to the part of the response which I want to cite on paragraphs two and three – I request that you give me some time. 

The letter is from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to the Executive Director, Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited. It was written on 10 February 2016 by a one Engineer Paul Mubiru, the accounting officer of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Is he the one or not, hon. Lokeris?

The subject of the letter is “Inadequate supervision at Karuma 600 MW construction site by Owners Engineers and inadequate supervision at Isimba 183 MW construction site by Owners Engineers.” I would like to quote, specifically, the response so that you understand how bad our civil servants can be.
 
“In the said letter, you tactfully instructed me to do a number of things regarding the two projects of Karuma and Isimba. First of all, I wish to take this opportunity to advise you that in my capacity as accounting officer, I am neither answerable to you nor do I get instructions from you. I am, therefore, responding to your letters here for the same reason that these are public documents, which you gave wide circulation.” You can imagine! A chairman of the board who is concerned about the future of Uganda has written to you highlighting areas where there is a problem but you can see the response –(Interjections)– I don’t need information from you, hon. Lokeris.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, we read that letter and the officer has been suspended because of that letter.

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I am raising this issue because I want you to direct the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, to come here and clarify on how far they have gone with the implementation of H.E the President’s directive.

Secondly, there are issues hon. Ssekikubo has raised concerning fake engineers. I would like to inform this august House that there are 4,000 and not 2,000 Chinese working in Karuma. How do you talk about the local content and you have 4,000 Chinese? In addition, the fake engineers we are talking about are there and are not accredited by the Uganda Engineers’ Association. The minister can prove to me whether it is correct or not.

Another issue on the ground is that of sewerage. Honourable minister, if you love your country, can you tell me where it is? If you have been to the site like I have, can you tell me where it is situated? (Applause) -(Mr Peter Lokeris rose_)

THE SPEAKER: We are not going to have this back and forth.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Those are the matters under investigation. (Laughter)

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that, Parliament must assert itself. With due respect to the Front Bench and particularly hon. Muloni and hon. Lokeris – and I don’t have anything personal against these ministers – I don’t see the reason for this to go on at your watch. 

We must exert our power. We have the mandate to move censure motions against these ministers. They are the ones failing the country. Our grandchildren will come and pay. (Applause) Your children will be in other countries. Where are you going to take us, as Ugandans? 

Madam Speaker, there are young people who are working in those tunnels. They die and are buried privately and their families are not compensated. I want to declare an interest that I have an in-law working in that tunnel. He tells me a lot about how they are suffering. Nobody is helping them. They even asked me, “You people, what are you doing to help us as members of Parliament regarding this project?” We have ministers there -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had asked you to address the prayers. If you are convinced that we need an investigation, say so for the record and we move. Is it our position that we should investigate this matter in the terms proposed by hon. Ssekikubo?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes, with some amendments. 

7.21
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you very much for this opportunity, Madam Speaker. By the time the President decided to take action, we wonder where the ministers were. They should have been the ones to feed the President with what was happening. However, it is the President waking up the ministers. I would like to agree with my colleagues and associate with their views. 

This matter has been going on for a long time as a result of failure by the supervising ministry. I am of the view that a select committee be formed to specifically do this work. (Applause) This is because the committees on physical infrastructure and natural resources have a lot of work. We need a dedicated team to handle this matter. The power is in your hands to constitute a select committee of professionals from amongst Members of Parliament, to address this matter. Whatever work our colleagues have done, we thank them; however, pass that work to the select committee to conclude. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, we can give the select committee two or three weeks and they conclude the work, because our committees have a lot of work to do – [MR BYARUGABA: “Clarification.”]- Please, I never interrupted you. Don’t make Members think that you have personal interests in this matter. Don’t make us think that way, please. 

The sessional committees have a lot of work. We need this to be done expeditiously and it can only be a select committee that will – and some Members will be picked from your committee; in fact you are a suitable candidate for the select committee, because you have some information. Therefore, we shall have you in this committee but we need a committee to be delegated. It is not the first time we pick a select committee. This does not mean that it is a vote of no confidence to the sessional committee. We only want work to be done - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Madam Speaker, thank you. I would like to thank my brother, hon. Elijah Okupa, for giving way. 

Madam Speaker, I recall when you were Deputy Speaker, I sent you a book titled, “Economic Hitman.” I hope you read it from the first page to the last one – (Laughter) - It is a very interesting book. If it is true that the President is really for “Operation Hakuna Mchezo”, then with this April issue, I do not think these two people should still be in the ministry by now. They are the people who were appointed after the President had raised a flag. I am worried. Is it really “Operation Hakuna Mchezo” or is it “Yiko Mchezo”? The President wrote to Irene Muloni on 5 April 2016 and I am sure they appeared before the appointments committee in June.

I would like to agree with hon. Elijah Okupa on his proposal for a select committee, because the higher the cost, the higher the tariffs and the higher the tariffs, the poorer we become. You may assume today that you have benefitted something small, but you are killing the future of your grandchildren. 

I would like to support the view that we need a select committee so that it addresses even issues of the future generation.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Honourable colleagues, in the last Parliament, we had a select committee that handled the energy sector, and it was not a vote of no confidence to the Committee on Natural Resources. I implore my colleague to take it in good faith, because we do not want to delay the way the ministry delayed after the President raised this matter in April. Moreover, the ministers in that ministry now, were even the ministers in the last Parliament. So, they should have known. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to beg Members that we recommend a select committee to be put in place to investigate, address these matters and report to this House within three weeks from the time of appointment. I beg to move.  

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I beg to concede to the amendment of hon. Elijah Okupa. 

7.26
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

Madam Speaker, this motion is beyond the shoddy work hon. Ssekikubo is telling us. Three weeks back, I tried to move a motion, in line with what we are trying to discuss here. According to the title, if you would allow me: “Motion for a resolution of Parliament to investigate the illegal power sales agreement between the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited, Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited and UMEME for the distribution and supply of electricity to be generated from Karuma and Isimba Hydro power plant.”

I am on the Floor to basically make amendments that when this select committee begins work; it should not only look at the shoddy work. We have other issues to do with the legality of these agreements. These agreements were actually even entered into without the authorities consent.

Madam Speaker, from this report, we need to investigate the ministry thoroughly. Why didn’t the Uganda Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) participate? The minister gazzetted that ERA is prohibited from issuing any permits or license for the purposes of conducting any studies on Karuma, Isimba, Agajo hydro power sites, since these have been concluded by the Government of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, hon. Nandala-Mafabi just told us that this is going to have higher consequences to the future and the current generation because even the tariffs were not looked into and these agreements were not guided by the regulatory authority. My prayer is that a select committee is needed. 

However, I beg that we incorporate this report that I have. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, all the illegal power sales agreements; the agreement which was signed on 15 June 2015, another illegal agreement signed on 17 November 2015 and another on 24 November 2015. I beg to lay.

MR PETER OGWANG: I would like to support the amendment moved by hon. Elijah Okupa. With due respect to my Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources, I personally came back after that visit and I told him that there was a red flag in Karuma. Honourable, didn’t I discuss this with you? 

Why do we need a select committee? Like hon. Okupa has said, the matter we are discussing is a matter of urgency and the select committee should be given terms of reference, maximum time, resources to do this work within a period that this Parliament will decide. Hon. Mbwatekamwa has a point but I would request that for now, we first concentrate on Karuma and Isimba and then those other issues can be handled by the committees responsible for this Parliament. They can be able to follow up the issues and call those officials to come here and tell us – these illegal agreements they have signed. That is what I wanted to propose, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, I do not want to be misunderstood, as the honourable colleague tried to allude. I am not that type. We have been in Parliament for the last three terms and you know my ways. I told this august House that we did get into these positions not more than two months ago. I talked to him in the corridors of Parliament about this. 

About two weeks ago, you informed me about something like that. No, I had not been appointed a Member –(Interjections)- for goodness sake, a select committee would have been perfect and the proposals here would have been perfect. However, I am only saying that look at the 33 members of the Natural Resources committee; they are very efficient and even some of you, Members, are on the committee –(Interruptions)- just give me a moment –

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MR BYARUGABA: I would like you to look at the moral, look at what we have done so far and I would like you to look at the programmes they have drawn. You just gave us permission to go out today. I would like you to look at all these so that at the end of the day, we know what we are trying to do. What are we trying to cure that the Natural Resource committee is not doing? We need almost the same time you are trying to allot this select committee.

MR MUHEIRWE: We are discussing a motion raised by hon. Ssekikubo. When the committee brings a report, we shall also discuss it. Can we proceed and discuss the motion and not the committee’s report, which is in speculation? (Laughter)

7.33
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Tenth Parliament for being able to internalise and discern that matters of national importance and energy threaten national security.

Honourable colleagues, when I was a fresh MP in the Eighth Parliament, as a Member of the Committee on Natural Resources and the Committee on National Economy where I have been active for the last 10 years, we found there was a problem with Bujagali.  We were equipped by the party.

Hon. Bahati is there. Today, we are being told there was a mistake and nobody got to know. We stood up as the committee and said there was a problem. What we wanted was power but affordable to the citizens. Today, we are lamenting but if we had been listened to, we would have solved that problem.

Again, in that Parliament, we had a motion of Parliament here to raise -

THE SPEAKER: What is your proposal?

MR MUKITALE: We had a motion here to liberalise the oil; people mistook it but at the end of the day, we achieved the law. Cabinet moved it and it passed.

Therefore, I would like to support the proposal for a select committee. I would like to plead with my fellow Members of the Committee on Natural Resources that you have a lot on your plate. Some of us intend to move here that this committee and the ministry should be split into two. 

The Committee on Natural Resources now is handling a sector, which is going to have $25 billion investment of oil and gas and $7 billion investment in energy. Can it still be the same ministry and committee making some of these decisions?

The committees of Parliament have been making recommendations after recommendations. When you go further into this, the Ministry of Energy and Minerals is having a consultant in Karuma but another arm of Government is spending millions of dollars for a generator consultant. What is a generator? What is a ministry? 

Therefore, the fact that they have so much as the energy sector, it is itself a problem. The committee has a lot of work to do in minerals. Breach this company’s licence which will never take us anywhere. I expect the committee to be fast-tracking the oil and gas development. Oil companies have got licence but has Parliament got the development plan? We do not have it. The Committee on Natural Resources has a lot on your plate and I am even surprised you still want more tasks. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, if I challenged the Minister of Minerals, hon. Lokeris, to lay on the Table details of procurement on how the contractors got those projects, he will never bring them here. If anybody argues with me, we can put in place an inquiry if he accepts to resign, because I know you do not have the procurement details of how that contractor in Karuma and Isimba got those projects. There are many problems in the energy, mineral and gas sectors and the earlier we move, the better.

Therefore, the select committee must have a timeline. Can we then, as a ministry, move faster to bring Parliament on board before we bring another resolution of Parliament to tell you to bring a development plan and local content? Honourable minister, the last reason I am justifying the select committee is because as the Committee on National Economy, when we passed this loan, they undertook to give us local content. I can tell you they are not buying Ugandan steel. They are disguising as if they are importing steel for the dams and yet they are dumping steel in the Ugandan market.

How much do you want us to speak as citizens to understand that you are killing this country? If we miss on all these projects, which by the way are on a macro level, is frontloading. We are getting all these loans because we are expecting money from minerals, oil and gas. If this country does not achieve a bit for national construction companies and does not help Roofing and others to sell, you have killed this country. We are not going to have another chance in the next 20 years. This is the only chance to have local engineers, contractors and companies making some of these instead of giving all these to Chinese without regulations on how much local content we get.

7.39
MS MARY BABIRYE (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that our Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources does not appreciate the effort hon. Ssekikubo and others are bringing on board. 

Last week, Members of Parliament went to Lwera. Today, as I travelled from Masaka to Kampala, I met a line of 15 yellow trucks with new number plates heading to Lwera. Some were coming and others were going.

The Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources has a lot to do. We have exposed this small country to the Chinese. I am always wondering, and when I tried to investigate, they told me that the Chinese are good at giving bribes. People outside there have been bribed. They need to be investigated. We are handing over our country to the Chinese.

Let me give you another example. Last year in 2015, Uganda made orders for graders and roaders to the Local Government. It was a loan, not a donation.

THE SPEAKER: It was passed by this House.

MS MARY BABIRYE: It was passed by Parliament. All the machines that went to our district couldn’t do the work. Now the Government has gone to Japan to get other machines. How are we going to explain that loan when the loan is going to be paid within 40 years from now?

As Ugandans, let us leave everything aside and look forward to seeing the future of our children. We are responsible for that. Therefore, I strongly second that a select committee that is independent goes to the ground and give us the information that we need. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should take a decision on this matter. I put the question that a select committee be established.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Should the numbers be five or seven? What do the Members say of the composition? Nine Members?  I now put the question that nine Members be appointed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We have agreed that the select committee to be established with nine Members. I think that we can then work on the draft of the terms because a lot has come in. I would like to ask the honourable why we do not deal with the issues of the agreement, the shoddy work, lack of local content – I think we should do that and then let the committee deal with the issue with the agreements, which hon. Mbwatekamwa  brought. I do not think that we should mix issues as time is of the essence. If all the things are going to come from China, then by the time we wake up, there will be nothing for the Ugandans and our factories are going to close. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think that Ugandans who sit in offices are the ones ‘killing’ the others. Let us give an example based on what hon. Peter Ogwang said about there being 4,000 Chinese. If they are each paid $3,000 per month, it equates to $12 million going to China every month. 

But if you employed Ugandans, and for simplicity, you paid them Shs 2 million which is about $600 – the Ugandan working at the dam will employ someone to till his garden, wash his shirt and all the –

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, we have taken a decision to establish the select committee and what we are now going to do is draw out the terms of reference to include the local content. All the Members agree that we have to include the local content.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Exactly. Local content should be number one, in such a way that, if we are buying cement from Tororo, then we are beneficiaries –

THE SPEAKER: Those are the things that everybody has agreed upon. So what is the duration for the select committee – can we make it one and a half months.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I know that we wanted this yesterday but practically, a select committee can only deliver after six weeks and that is close to our rules that say 45 days.

THE SPEAKER: If we wanted the matter yesterday, then that would mean we allow the committee to work during recess. Is that okay?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: We have taken the decision and we shall formulate the terms of reference and composition. I will discuss with the Government Chief Whip and the Opposition Chief Whip and the Independents on the composition of the select committee.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to thank you on behalf of the seconders and myself.

Allow me give some information to the Members. Last Tuesday, there was a meeting in Khartoum attended by officials from Ethiopia, Egypt and Sudan. Now they do not regard Ugandans as serious contenders for the River Nile. We were not even represented in that critical meeting that talks about the waters of River Nile. 

In the Khartoum meeting, they talked about a grand renaissance dam built by Ethiopia with capacity of 6,000 megawatts. They are already building interconnection lines to Kenya and Tanzania to allow for power export and yet we, who even have the bigger potential, are just looking on.

THE SPEAKER: So what has that got to do with our motion? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: This goes to show Members that if we continue “sleeping” and do not take charge of our country, there are others already determining the future of this planet on our behalf. I would like to thank Members who have seen the urgency of this matter and irrespective of the political divide, we are all Ugandans at the end of the day. I thank you so much.

THE SPEKAER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I have some sad news; hon. Kenneth Soyekwo Cheborion, the Member for Tingey County has lost his mother. I do not have the details of what is going to happen but I thought that I should let you know. Let us stand up for a moment of silence in her honour.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no more work as we have done everything on the Order Paper. We have directed the committees to write their reports so that we can have something to discuss after this week. So make use of today, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday and Monday to compose your reports. The House is adjourned to Tuesday next week.

(The House rose at 7.48 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 4 October 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
