Thursday 22 September 2005

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in Chair)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s Sitting. As we indicated yesterday, we will make an effort to handle all the outstanding reports as quickly as possible.

2.46
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Two days ago, the Minister of Constitutional Affairs and Attorney General promised to make a statement today, regarding a question I put to him on elections.  I am very glad to see him in person, but I do not see him on the Order Paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, ordinarily if a minister wants to make a statement, they notify me at about 11.00 a.m. so that I can put them on the Order Paper. However, as for now, I do not know. Are you ready, Attorney General? You did not contact me, so I cannot know what you have for us.

2.47
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I have the statement but I am waiting for the copies for the members. In the course of the afternoon, they will be here.  I will then be in position to make the statement.

2.48
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira):  Madam Speaker, you said we would use this period to look at some of the reports. I remember the Attorney General promised to formally make a statement on the referendum. I remember you were the one chairing the sitting, and he said he would report on the results of the referendum on the political system.  I would like to know what happened. 

I am also concerned that we never debated the report on the humanitarian situation in the north that was made by hon. Alaso. There was also the status of the camps and the Government plan to decongest and dismantle some areas. These are extremely important reports to some of us. I suggest that we include these issues on the Order Paper at an appropriate time so that those ministers be reminded to come to the House and tell us what to expect.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we will try to squeeze in as many of these reports as we can. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE AND THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 2000.

2.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Dr Okulo Epak): Madam Speaker, I will depart a little from what should have been the practice of presenting a report. This report was presented to this House on 7 April 2004, and the motion moved by hon. Mwandha curtailed the debate.  I think it is necessary to update the House on what happened then and so that we see how to proceed.  The report itself is a huge document, which honourable members had at that time. I do not think they have carried it now.  At that time, I presented a summary of the report, which is now being circulated. It is also extracted from the report.  

Therefore, I beg your indulgence and that of the honourable members, to allow me make this statement as guidance on how we are to proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please proceed.

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you.  Statement by the Public Accounts Committee on the report of the auditor general concerning the public accounts of the Government of Uganda for the year ended on 30 June 2000.  The House will recall that on Wednesday, 7 April 2004, the Public Accounts Committee presented its report on the public accounts of the Government for the financial year 1999/2000. 

The report was presented and debated until some members queried the consideration of the report before Government had responded to it or even responded to the 1999 report. Hon. Mwandha then moved a motion to curtail the debate until Government had responded on the 1999 report. The motion was carried despite the clarifications given by the chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee.  I wish to read part of the motion to remind you.

“Therefore, I wish to move formally that debate on the report of the Public Accounts Committee for the year 2000 be suspended until we have discussed, adopted and pronounced ourselves on the Treasury memorandum from the minister explaining the actions taken on the report of the Auditor General for the year 1999.  I beg to move.”

This is part of the motion that curtailed the debate, which had already gone on for sometime.  Although this concern was legitimate, it had serious procedural and constitutional implications on which both Parliament itself and Government are to blame.  

Procedurally:

1. 	Government cannot respond to the report of PAC as soon as it is presented in the way it is done with the reports of other committees, because the report covers all departments of Government who must be given time to respond to the Secretary to the Treasury on the way each accounting officer has dealt with the recommendations of Parliament. These responses are compiled and published in form of the Treasury Memorandum.  The Minister of Finance responds by tabling this Treasury Memorandum to the House within 40 days of Parliament’s approval. I should add that this has not been happening.

2.	The Treasury Memorandum is then referred to PAC who after considering it, reports to the House on how its recommendations were implemented and this could take a long time.  There are so many Treasury Memoranda up to 1998, which have not been dealt with by PAC due to lack of time.  In other words, the minister never responds or submits directly to the House.  If the House so desires, this procedure could be modified to get the minister to present rather than table the Treasury Memorandum, then debate on it would ensue. 
 
	Members are anxious to get response and if we are to follow the established procedure, it will take a very long time.  If the minister could respond within 40 days, by presenting rather than tabling, then members would have the opportunity to debate the minister’s response on the background of the report, which was presented to the House.  The committee recommends that because of the interest of Parliament to follow up and ensure Government compliance, the House may adopt this procedure.  

3.	The Ministry of Finance published the Treasury Memorandum on the 1999 report rather prematurely.  Therefore, when Parliament rejected the request to write off the shs 108 billion difference debited in the consolidated fund, it was withdrawn.  The Treasury Memorandum for 1999 was ready and was about to be tabled, but when in the long debate there was no agreement on the writing off the shs 108 billion, it was withdrawn.  Now that this matter has been put to rest, the ministry could quickly correct that Memorandum and present it.

4.	Questions also arose that without the first two procedures above, there would be gaps in the accountability process.  The Public Accounts Committee wishes to assure the House that there can never be any gap in the process as all queries in each financial year are followed up by the Auditor General in all the following financial years until Parliament has decided to drop them based on the steps reported to the committee that have been taken satisfactorily to deal with the query.  Therefore, we should not get worried that delays in responding to the Auditor General’s report or in getting the Memorandum means we have lost sight of anything.  The Auditor General follows all queries that have not been disposed of until they are disposed of by Parliament.  There is no gap and nobody will escape in this exercise.  

Constitutional Aspect

Article 163, Clause 5 of the Constitution requires Parliament to consider and dispose of the Auditor General’s report within six months.  However, Parliament is in arrears of dealing with the reports up to 2003 and PAC has not presented the report to Parliament from 2001.  Our last report to the House is the one we are dealing with today and the Auditor General is up-to-date with his work. Parliament therefore has a constitutional obligation to dispose of the Auditor General’s report within six months regardless of lack of response by the Minister of Finance or timely presentation of the Treasury Memorandum.  

Our obligation is to deal with the report within six months.  Now if the Government or the Minister of Finance does not respond within 40 days, we should proceed according to our constitutional mandate and let the ministry or the Government compile up the report.  Consider what happened last time when Parliament refused to continue debating and disposing of the 2000 report, could therefore be wrong.  PAC recommends that with or without further debate of this report, Parliament should approve this report today.

In any case, the question of arrears on the timely disposing of the Auditor General’s report has reached the attention of the IMF and World Bank who are now expressing a lot of concern.  

Major recommendations

The present practice where PAC is not given sufficient time to deal with audit queries, or even time in the business of the House to present its report makes Parliament breach the constitutional requirement.  PAC recommends that these anomalies be rectified; and specifically: 
a)   PAC should be allowed to meet regularly during each session. You see we have a problem.  When the Sessional Committees are meeting, PAC cannot meet and therefore we have very limited time in the course of the session to deal with the audit queries and yet they are enormous.  

b) 	Reports of PAC should be given priority in the business of the House.  You will have noticed on many occasions, that business to follow always contained the report of Public Accounts Committee, but the business never followed.

c) As said earlier, the minister should present rather than table the Treasury Memorandum to be followed immediately by debate of the presentation.  I think this might solve the problem of the members’ anxiety 

d) The House should approve the 2000 report today.  

I thank you for your attention.  I beg to state. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson.  Honourable members, the Chairperson has updated us. The report was indeed presented and debated, except that it was halted because of the Treasury Memorandum. The chairperson has eloquently explained the implications of our not concluding debate on this report. He cannot proceed with other reports until we have disposed of this report. I would like your views on the recommendations and the way forward.

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I thank the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee for the report.  I also want to thank him for his diligence to have the backlog of accounts that we presented which had not been analysed by the Public Accounts Committee to be covered.  

We have been in arrears as a country for several years and this is neither exclusively the blame of Parliament nor exclusively the blame of Government.  

The Chairperson has endeavoured to propose ways in which we could from a procedural point of view expedite the deliberation and conclusion of those deliberations that relate to accounts of Government.  I, however, have a problem with the proposal that when a Treasury Memorandum has been prepared, the Minister should present it and not lay it on the Table. Because, Madam Speaker, in all matters of auditing we know that queries are raised, in fact the person being audited has a right to be heard.  In this case who is being audited?  

Public Accounts Committee is the committee of this House that examines the public accounts. Therefore, if the Public Accounts Committee has raised questions relating to the accounts and these questions require further clarification, it is my belief that the job is not completed until the Public Accounts Committee has heard an explanation from the person being audited or whose accounts are being examined.  

Now for me to come here and start giving a response to a Public Accounts Committee (PAC) Report on the queries that have been raised in the PAC Report before the PAC has had time to look at them and integrate them into the final report will be negating that principle of a fair and comprehensive hearing of the person whose accounts are being examined.  

The reason the Minister should not come here and start exchanging details with the Public Accounts Committee Chairperson, with all the members participating, is because details of these examinations may beg even further details, and those further details cannot come to this Floor; they go to the committee.  

Therefore, in my view we must stick to the time frames that are set by law as a process. But the new proposed procedure undermines the principle upon which a committee of this House is mandated to explain public accounts and report.  

We cannot come here, 300 Members of Parliament, and start discussing with the Chairperson- (Interruption)- no, but if that receipt is somewhere, bring it.  It cannot be done here; it can only be done in the committee.  

So, it is my submission that I agree with everything else, except I would beg that the recommendation of the committee takes the view that I have just expressed.  Unless there is something else, I have nothing against this very elaborate and concerned approach as a work method expediting the process in which our public accounts are being reviewed.  

However, just one statement that I did not agree with the Chairperson. The Chairperson said on page 2, the last sentence, that “The Minister of Finance responds to the audit queries by Tabling this Treasury Memorandum to the House within 40 days of Parliament’s approval”. 

And then he says - the Chairman added – it is not on the record but he added that this has never happened.  I am yet to find out whether in fact this has never happened.  But I know that we have laid on this Table Treasury Memoranda; I did that myself. If it was not within 40 days it is because even the Parliament was out of time in giving its approval; we can only respond to something that has been reacted to.  

So, I am not sure what the Chairman meant by saying this has never happened; what has never happened?  The laying of memoranda, we have laid memoranda here; the 40 days, neither the Parliament, nor the Government, nobody has ever been in time on these public accounts matters right from the Sixth Parliament.

However, it is a new approach we are now starting and we will be happy to oblige.  For us in Government we are almost there because of our Integrated Finance Management System (IFMS) that has been put in place and has enabled us to keep account or track of our income and expenditure.  We will be on time; I have no doubt about that.  Again the ball will remain in your hands, Madam Speaker, in the hands of Parliament to examine these accounts expeditiously.  I thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, as the Minister said that the Public Accounts Committee interfaces with the Auditors, I would like to know if the management report is very exhaustive otherwise the Auditors could not forward those queries to the Public Accounts Committee in Parliament.  There must be something which we do not understand. Is there laxity within the ministry? Because I am finding it procedurally wrong that an Auditor raises a query, it goes through all that, there is a management report and then it comes to Parliament.  

As the Chairperson has stated, this Government has had the problem of transparency and accountability to meet the millennium challenge goals.  These are development partners who contribute almost 40 per cent to our budget expenditure, but why is the management report not exhaustive to the extent that those queries from the Auditor can be sent to the Public Accounts Committee. What is the problem within the ministry?

3.13
MR HILARY ONEK:(Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee and his committee for the report and their recommendations that are before us.

I am only disturbed, what is the significance of actually these queries and the response from Public Accounts Committee?  I thought these are intended to correct the management of our finances or our resources and it can be effective when their reports are timely and their responses to them are timely; not six years afterwards.  

Now we are looking at the report of financial year 1999/2000. It does not make sense to me, Madam Speaker.  I feel that this can be the reason why maybe occasionally we have to call for censureship because the problems are not corrected and the management behaviours are not corrected in time.  If there were early responses to queries, then the Executive will have to behave better and know that here there are problems.

I would wish that in future we have a system that can check excesses, that can check and control our meagre resources.  There must be respect for this Public Accounts Committee.  From this, I see that the Executive does not respect the Public Accounts Committee. They are not responding in time, they are not giving the due attention to the concerns raised.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, the recommendations given by the committee follow two ways.  One, such recommendation is that PAC should be allowed to meet regularly during each session to give PAC time to examine these reports in depth and also cover a wider period within a short time.  I would think, therefore, that we should provide in our Rules of Procedure membership of PAC.  Members of the House who join PAC Committee should not join other committees.  This would give chance to PAC to have quorum or to have meetings more regularly.  The main reason why PAC does not meet quite regularly is because members are involved in other committees. 

Secondly, as regards specifically to the PAC report in question, this report was presented long ago - over one year ago. I am sure members cannot, as the Chairperson put it very clearly, quickly recapture what has been put in the report. 

So for that matter, it is only prudent that we adopt the recommendation of the committee that the House should approve the 2000 report today. In so doing it would also be necessary for Government to present to us the Treasury Memorandum with respect to this particular report so that a debate could come thereafter because that would then be something, which will be more concurrent.  Otherwise, if we now go on with this thing, most members I am sure cannot recall effectively what was contained in that report.  I thank you.

MR SABIITI: The information I want to give relates to recommendation (c), which the Minister tried to dismiss.  If you look at Article 164(3) it states: “Parliament shall monitor all expenditure of public funds”.  That is what gives Parliament the powers to investigate and when we look at other laws, Parliament is supposed to know how these funds were spent.  

Now the recommendations of Public Accounts Committee to the effect that the Minister must present rather than table Treasury Memorandum is in conformity with this.  Because the Treasury Memorandum is not supposed to go back to the Public Accounts Committee anywhere in all governments I have studied.  Once that report comes on the Floor of Parliament, that is, the Treasury Memorandum, that the Executive is supposed to respond in detail why such and such omission or commission did take place. So in this case, the Treasury Memorandum must be presented to Parliament and Members of Parliament are supposed to quiz the Minister why such and such a thing happened.  

But for the Minister to say it is not necessary, we just table, then you will have started another cycle.  Because if it goes back to the Public Accounts Committee, we discuss, we again bring a report here.  It does not work because we are going to be doing the same work.  It is now the Committee of the whole House to actually quiz the Minister and even make drastic decisions.  That is the way I understand it.  

So I feel the Minister should explain this further so that we know whether we should extend. If it is a policy maybe of Government that we should now extend to the Public Accounts Committee then we start afresh. We shall continue debating this cycle.

3.20
MS AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My clarification is partly answered by the former Speaker who was trying to inform the House.  I believe he is a member of the Committee.  

On page 2, procedurally, when the committee stated that Government couldn’t respond to the PAC report because as soon as it is presented in the way it is done in other committees, it must go to other governmental departments which is compiled in form of Treasury Memorandum; I believe that by the time the report comes from the Secretary to the Treasury, it is already a summarized answer to the queries. 

Given the information presented to us by the Minister, honourable Speaker, the Minister stated that it is wrong for the Minister to present the Treasury Memorandum and thereafter the Parliament debates on it.  He would not advise the House to commit itself in that debate.  

I wanted to know from the Minister the difference between the Treasury Memorandum and the original PAC report.  I do support the committee’s recommendation because the work seems to be shortened up that after the PAC has had queries and answers, it is sent to the Secretary of the Treasury, which comes up with the answers on how they accounted or how they implemented the funds. 

Treasury Memorandum is now in a complete stage, which will actually be debated by the House immediately after the Minister presents it other than tabling it; it will take more time.

I wanted the Minister to allay our fears that due to such longer bureaucracies of receiving PAC report, submitting it to the Secretary to the Treasury then receiving it in form of another memorandum, then tabling it for another 40 days, going back to PAC and then PAC presents it again to the House, in such a process, I believe it could take like even two to three years.  That is why the finance sector is receiving a lot of queries, which we cannot answer; a lot of queries PAC is receiving and they could not answer because by the time they are reporting in this House it is history.  

Madam Speaker, you take a similar example where somebody mismanaged funds ten years from now and such a person has died. Who is held accountable for such delays?  That is why I believe the PAC committee is now recommending to us that let us shorten the procedure and the Treasury Memoranda is directly presented by the Minister and the House debates and that comes to the end of every query, which comes through the PAC.  

I want the minister to allay my fears so that I would support his concern. Otherwise, I believe that the Committee report is such a good report that this House can resolve itself and adopt it and the country works on it.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming pupils of St. Catherine Day and Boarding Primary School located in Bukoto-Kawanda, Wakiso District.  You are most welcome! (Applause)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Guidance. Madam Speaker, I am not very much conversant with accounting procedures, but I want to be helped by the Minister or the Chairman of the Accounts committee.  When the Auditor-General raises queries, he first sends his report or his queries to the ministries concerned before he sends it to the Parliament not in the form of a booklet or what, but that is what I think.  Then the ministries reply to him. After replying to him he compiles a report to Parliament and those queries, which come to Parliament, in my simple way of understanding accounting, those are the queries, which were not answered satisfactorily by the ministry concerned. 

Now when they come here, then PAC invites the ministries concerned. They go through the report and they make their report.  After making their report, the minister concerned is supposed to present a treasury memorandum to this Parliament and that treasury memorandum should go straight for debate.  Why again give it to the Accounts Committee to go and scrutinize the second time? 

 According to my understanding as a layman or as an engineer and not as an accountant, I see that really this memorandum should be presented. We debate it and we finalize there and then.

3.26
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The issue of the work of the Public Accounts Committee and the Auditor-General in general is of crucial importance in determining the way we manage our business as a country. As a parliament, we have a role to facilitate the process, which brings me to the recommendations of the committee that I find very useful. We need to come out and assist this committee to be efficient in the running their mandate.  

When you look at recommendation (a), I get a bit of the problem the way it is worded. Because when you say, “ PAC should be allowed to meet regularly during each session.”, it presupposes that it is not allowed, which I do not think is the case.  They should be meeting more regularly and this goes into – maybe we will have to look into the constitution of the membership. Because the business that we get at a particular point in time of our session is in such a way that when you have multiple membership in committees it is not made possible for this committee to sit.  

So we need to look at that aspect and assist this committee.  Otherwise this backlog and the concern of the chairperson are really genuine in my view and to find that we have a backlog of up to 2000 really we create that inherent problem and it rolls over to the next financial year.  It is a problem and we need collectively to come up with a solution and make this committee relevant.  Otherwise in the eye of the public, the committee may appear to be window dressing and it is not relevant to the needs of the people; if people who have not done right are given so much time before they are really brought to line using our reports and recommendations.  

So, Madam Speaker, I support the committee and I believe that we need to come out as Parliament collectively and find ways of making it possible.  We have not disallowed them to do their work, but our programme makes it inconvenient for them to sit.  So, we need to harmonize those aspects and make it possible for them to do their business and be up to date.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, honourable members, I think I need to make clarification on this matter.  Actually Parliament has never prevented the PAC committee from sitting regularly. It is only that between June and August when we were generally dealing with the policy statements and the budget, the Sessional committees was sitting almost everyday and the members of the Sessional committees are also members of the Public Accounts Committee.  So, that has been the problem on our side.  

The second one was a question of staffing. We have solved that one. There are enough clerks to run all the Standing Committees and the Sessional Committees.  So, actually PAC has the rest of the year ordinarily in which to sit. 

You are right those who proposed that we should look at the membership.  This means we will have to liberate some of them from the Sessional Committees so that they can concentrate because there is usually a clash.

3.30
THE Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (Dr Okulo Epak): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank those who have responded.  

The honourable Minister, you see there is - I think it is a question. I agree people must be given the opportunity to respond to the queries or to the accusations for that matter.  But they would have already been given this at the time we were considering the Auditor-General’s report. Where they did not respond satisfactorily that is when further queries are made on the report of the Public Accounts Committee. Where they responded satisfactorily the queries are dropped.  
So when the report, which Parliament adopts is sent to the Treasury, the Treasury once again asks those accounting officers to have the last chance to respond.  Actually it is the last chance for them to respond. It is in that last chance that the Treasury reports in the Treasury Memorandum. Obviously, there are two possibilities as we said. If they always respond satisfactorily up to the time of publishing the Treasury Memorandum, it would mean as we were saying that when it is tabled here, PAC again calls them together with the Auditor-General to quiz them. 

I think this a futile exercise. You see somebody who has been so wanton - and in fact this is where now if it went to PAC, my view would be that PAC would now prescribe the dismissal of such accounting officers because - I was going to respond to the process. 

But on the other hand, if the minister responds here, Parliament will now know who the most irresponsible accounting officers are. If I explain the process, you will realise these people should never be given a chance at all because they are given so many chances and when they fail, I think we should proceed to impose penalty without wasting time. So, Parliament would then express that strong view on the intransigency of the accounting officers.

The final point here is as I said, although the Treasury memorandum is supposed to be the last in the cycle of the accountability process, any other matter, which was not disposed of by the accounting officer in the Treasury Memorandum is followed up again by the Auditor-General. So, it will reappear in the next audit report, it never disappears. 

What I would suggest is that to save time, let what has not been dealt with up to the time of the Treasury Memorandum be given time to reappear in the next audit report and the accounting officer be given the chance at that time so that we really do not over-indulge in this exercise. After all this is really a compliance audit, it is not as serious as the other method of audit where you are very much concerned with the report. 

I am appealing to the honourable minister - I tried to explain this thing last time but despite that, the motion came and the debate was suspended. I am appealing to you that we change this method because we have up to 1998 Treasury Memoranda, which we have not even sat to deal with and we would probably have to decide on a cutting point -(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, when we come here, we are in the hands of these people. We present the memorandum to you and if in the wisdom of the Speaker, he says, “Let this memorandum be looked at by the Public Accounts Committee”, who are we to contradict him? This is the last stage in the accounting cycle. 

If on the other hand the Speaker says, “Yes, we have seen your memorandum. Can you speak on to it”, then we will speak on to it. It is neither legislative nor is it in my view a matter in our hands. It is in the hands of this House. We have given you our memorandum, which lists the compliance, what we have done about what the Public Accounts Committee made reference to in the report and which the House had adopted. Thereafter, Madam Speaker, it is not in our hands. It is a report to this House.

DR EPAK: Madam Speaker, I think the two words are very clear that there is a difference between tabling and presenting. We either decide it is presented or it is tabled. If it is tabled, obviously the Speaker refers it to the appropriate committee. If it is presented, debate ensues. 

I thought that is the practice, and in my view, the honourable minister was actually now coming to agree with us and if the House so decides, I think Madam Speaker will also agree that it becomes a presentation. It is not defined anywhere even in the regulations that it should be tabled. At that point, it is no longer a regulatory requirement. The regulatory requirement stops at responding within 40 days and neither Parliament nor Public Accounts Committee is obliged to dispose of the Treasury Memorandum within any specific period. 

There is a lot of laxity and I think Parliament should be given the opportunity to talk at that point -(Interruption)

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened very attentively and tried to understand whether there is a problem. An audit is carried out by the Auditor-General after which he makes his report. I believe during the auditing, he asks so many questions. Some are answered satisfactorily and you do not see them in the report and others are not answered satisfactorily, and they end up in the report with queries. That report is presented before Parliament and passed on to PAC. PAC looks at that report and interviews various officers concerned and then makes a report on their findings. That report comes before this House. 

With various recommendations after that report, it is only then that the Treasury Memorandum can be prepared and in that Treasury Memorandum, there are mainly two sections. One is telling you what actions have been actually taken by Government to put into effect the various recommendations and the other tells you what has not been handled. Basically, that is what it is.  

Madam Speaker, I therefore, want to understand how one can produce a Treasury Memorandum before PAC has reported to Parliament. I am a bit lost at that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not what he said.

DR EPAK: I am not surprised that you are lost because you were not here at the beginning, but you have done a good exercise. I do not think we are debating your misunderstanding. Madam Speaker, hon. Kakooza asked a very interesting question. In fact that is what the honourable minister explained. 

The Auditor-General goes to every department, examines the accounts, comes back to the office, identifies issues on which there are queries, writes back to the department saying, “We found you have not yet responded properly on these issues”, and gives them another chance. There was a chance in the office and now there is a chance in the correspondence for the accounting officers to say, “Yes, it was a mistake or at that time, we had not yet received receipts for accountability. We are now enclosing them so that you may examine them and forget this query”. Or they may say, “We are not yet able to dispose of this query”. 

That is now the stage when the Auditor-General writes his final report on issues which the accounting officers failed to deal with twice; at the time they were still at the office level and at the time when they were asked to respond. What we get here in Parliament is where the accounting officers had failed to respond satisfactorily to the Auditor-General.

When the Speaker tables the report here, which I do on his behalf, it is referred to PAC. We invite all these accounting officers and quiz them once again on those queries and we give them the benefit of hearing and responding before we pronounce ourselves on them. Where they have responded satisfactorily in this third stage, the committee recommends that the query be dropped. Where they have again not responded satisfactorily, the committee recommends the appropriate measures to be taken. 

Some of the measures are that the accountabilities be provided, the Solicitor-General prosecutes the individuals, the advances should be recovered from the officers who did not account for the money, and some are really disciplinary. They are numerous as you will find in this report.

When you have debated that report here, it is those subsisting queries, which are referred to the Ministry of Finance, which again does almost what the Auditor-General does right back to the same accounting officers saying, “You still have these queries outstanding. What have you done to them since you appeared before PAC or since Parliament passed the PAC report”? They will respond as departments and sometimes the cases are with CID or sometimes it is the Solicitor-General who is prosecuting and saying, “The case has not yet been closed or the culprit has not yet been found”.

After they have responded to the Secretary to the Treasury, that is when the Treasury Memorandum is compiled as the honourable minister explained.  That is the constitution of the Treasury Memorandum; what has been disposed of and what has not yet been disposed of. 

What has not yet been disposed of, we may debate here; but still the Auditor-General will raise the same queries. We may debate here - you know it is like a talking point but in essence, what remains outstanding in the Treasury Memorandum, the Auditor-General will pick it up, or would have picked since these are coming late. The Auditor-General would have picked those which arose in 2000, pick them up in 2003. 

Those which arose in 2003 since we have not reported to Parliament, the Auditor-General will pick them up in 2003. Those which arose in 2003 since we have not reported to Parliament, the Auditor-General will pick them up in 2004 and it continues. This is why I am saying, “Do not ever worry that there is anything lost in the process, or that there is a gap left in the process”.

On the question of late dealing with the audit report and some people having died and you can no longer pursue them and so on, we have two categories of decisions concerning the culprits. One is a disciplinary measure, which normally conforms to the standing orders, or the commitment control system. With that one, the officer can still be disciplined as long as he is in the Public Service. He can still be written to and the attention of the officer concerned is drawn to the fact that he misbehaved. 

Then there are those offences, which are of criminal nature. Those do not expire. Even if the individual is dead, where it is possible, the assets will be pursued particularly if he was a public servant. The Administrator-General is still in charge and the culprit can be pursued for the Administrator-General to make those recoveries on behalf of government.

For those who say it is a postmortem, there is nothing like a postmortem. You will never escape any commitment of accountability by simply duration of time. After all, crimes have no time limit.

MR KAKOOZA: What I was trying to say about the criminality and the penalties - I think it is clear and proper within the accountability law we passed with the public fund, that even a discipline action is no longer - because there is a tool whereby there is misuse of funds and chief accounting officers who have refused openly like in the audited report, will have to be taken and assets are disposed of their property because they have to pay. 

This is where the Uganda Government has a problem to meet the millennium challenge goals. It is upon us and even the Government to be committed and ensure that our donors and development partners’ concerns are considered and we are practicing what we mean. Otherwise, we might not have headway.

DR EPAK: Thank you for your concern on the millennium strategy. Madam Speaker, postmortem in any case is never bad. It is useful and in some cases it leads to other things. We do not die like insects whose postmortem becomes unnecessary. You do not know the cause of death exactly, and we simply go guessing. I think postmortem is still good.

I think hon. Onek’s concern also was the question of timeliness questioning the purpose of dealing with these issues late. I think I have answered his concern that it does not matter whether we deal with it today, tomorrow or next year; nobody will escape the net in the accountability process.

Hon. Eresu, I like the proposal to put in the rules that members of Public Accounts Committee should never belong to any other committees including Standing and Sessional Committees. But I think that is a bit too much because as you are aware, many members are very much interested in the Sessional Committees and if you stop members of PAC from being members of Sessional Committees, you may find that we cannot even have members of PAC. People will stop offering themselves to be members of PAC.  I think let us look at other ways of improving the attendance of PAC.

The problem is not only –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: I proposed this in sympathy with the concern you have expressed. The Chairperson of the Committee expresses a serious lack of time and frequency for the meetings to discharge committee duties, especially, to examine what is before them and that is one of the reasons why there is a delay. But he is saying that members will not be present and members will not offer themselves. It puts me at a loss because I thought we come here to discharge duties on behalf of our people and would really be a sacrifice to take up that challenge. But now when you try to retract it, unless you clarify to us what other alternatives you have in mind, we find ourselves confused with the recommendation you are putting across.

Could you clarify what you have in mind that could be adopted to increase on the frequency of meetings?

DR EPAK: Madam Speaker, I think everybody will agree I am retracting nothing. I am just trying to respond to the honourable member’s proposal and suggestion and I cannot be retracting his proposal. I am appealing - I mean this is what I imagine. 

There is usually very low response on some committees by Members of Parliament. If you say once you are a Member of Public Accounts Committee, you cannot belong to any other standing committees and any other sessional committees, there are two possibilities; either people choose not to be interested in Public Accounts Committee or there are Members of Public Accounts Committee but will take off time because they are not debarred from attending any other committees. That restriction in itself is virtually useless because all committees are open-ended and any member can leave his committee and go and sit in another committee. 

I think hon. Awori is famous for attending all committees, except I do not know how he finds time to do it or whether he belongs to any committee at all. But he does that. So, even if we restricted them, still a member interested in Social Services Committee when you have called Public Accounts Committee today, will go to sit there and you cannot punish him.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Epak, I think the honourable member should not really put you in a corner to design a solution. You have raised a problem, we have heard it and it is the work of the Commission to sit down and find out how to work, give the committee time to sit but also allow members to relate in various committees.

DR EPAK: It is not only the members but the accounting officers themselves. Most accounting officers fail to come to attend PAC because they are always claiming other commitments. The two most offending ministries are Finance and Defence. They are always out, committed on other work. PAC was intending this time and in future to recommend that such accounting officers should not be appointed Accounting Officers. Let them be busy and concerned with those extraneous duties elsewhere because every accounting officer is obliged to appear in person before Public Accounts Committee. They cannot send a representative. 

This is also the cause of delay and our solution is that we are going to start recommending that they are not appointed accounting officers. Because the Secretary to Treasury is free to appoint any Under Secretary or any other officer in any department to be accounting officers. We are looking at that solution.  

To make PAC more attractive to Members of Parliament, I do not know whether there is a possibility of offering them a little more sitting allowance. The other one is -(Interjections) What I am saying is true. When the sessional committees are meeting, particularly considering the Budget, all standing committees are told and a decision is made in the House not to meet. That is why I am saying that decision should not be there. Let PAC have a free hand and free way to meet rather than prohibiting at this time all standing committees meetings and they are actually the victim of this decision. 

Hon. Aanimu Angupale and hon. Byabagambi, I thank you for your strong support. I think that is all. I want to thank you very much for your comments. I thank the minister for conceding that a presentation in a debate is better than prolonging the process, which in fact becomes impossible to handle. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Epak.  Honourable members, as you will appreciate, we have been dealing with a report for 2000 and we debated it although we did not conclude. But that was one year ago, in April 2004. Now if we are to have another debate, I do not know whether I would really find the time. 

I would like to appeal to members that we adopt this report of 2000 and liberate the committee to continue dealing with other reports and having listened to the submissions of the Chair and the tribulations they have, it will be incumbent upon our office to re-organize the way we work and give them the opportunity to complete within the usual six months that are required under the Constitution. Do you mind honourable members?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Public Accounts Committee 2000 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, earlier we had said that we may have to amend the Order Paper when the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Attorney-General, comes with his statement, which I now see. I now alter the Order Paper and under No.4 we receive the Statement from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.58
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, you will recall that on Tuesday, hon. Aggrey Awori wondered whether it was proper for the Electoral Commission to announce nomination dates before Parliament had enacted relevant laws to deal with the next cycle of the elections. 

Madam Speaker, I committed myself to make a statement today. At the moment when you called, I was waiting for the copies because the rules require me to supply copies to the members. Now, the copies are here and they are being distributed. 

On 16 September 2005, the Electoral Commission announced nomination dates for different categories of elections in the forthcoming electoral cycle.  Article 103 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, provides among other things, that “The election of the President shall be held during the first thirty days of the last ninety days before the expiration of the term of the President”. 

Technically, this means that the election of the President shall be held between 12 February 2006 and 12 March 2006. This position was not amended by the just concluded Constitution review process. It is therefore, the constitutional basis for announcing the nomination dates. 

This august House passed the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005 on the 18th of August 2005. The amendment of this Constitution has necessitated that the different categories of elections be conducted within the first 30 days of the last 90 days before the expiration of the term of the President.

Clause 13 of the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005 provides inter alia, that: “The Electoral Commission shall hold presidential, general, parliamentary and local government council elections within the first 30 days of the last 90 days before the expiration of the term of the President.”  

Clause 18 of the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005 requires among other things that public servants who intend to stand as Members of Parliament to resign 90 days before the nominations. The said provision provides that: “Under the Multi-party political system, a public officer or a person employed in any government department or agency of the Government, or an employee of a local government or any body in which the Government has a controlling interest, who wishes to stand in the general elections as a Member of Parliament, shall resign his or her office at least 90 days before the nomination day.”

Therefore, in order to give such public servants time to resign, the Electoral Commission decided to announce nomination dates. In light of the fact that the next cycle of elections will be held under the Multi-party political dispensation, the Electoral Commission is of the view that the political parties should be given time to identify and select candidates for the different categories of elections. Notification of nomination dates in good time is very crucial in that regard, taking into consideration the constitutional time deadlines, which I have referred to above.

The Electoral Commission is fully aware that details of the requirements for the nominations for the different categories of elections shall be provided for in the enabling laws. The Electoral Commission trusts that the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda will expeditiously pass the said enabling laws before the first nomination date in November 2006.  

Madam Speaker, permit me to lay on the Table a copy of the Electoral Commission’s press statement, reference: EC/04, dated 16th September 2005 on the matter of the announcement of the nomination dates.  I note that this press statement is attached to the statement. Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable members.

4.06
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Attorney-General for his terse statement to the point. However, I also seek clarification on a number of issues not only raised in his statement but also seem to be wanting in the general operations of the forthcoming elections.

One, could the honourable minister confirm whether the recent constitutional amendment on the Act has been assented to by His Excellency the President?  I would just like to satisfy myself that since we passed it and passed it on to State House for assent, it has indeed been attended to and we wish to confirm that it is the law of the country.

Two - Madam Speaker, could you protect me from my honourable colleague, the Minister of Lands? He is heckling me that if it has not been assented to, am I prepared to do so? I am saying, constitutionally not yet. The second concern again pertains to the recently amended Constitution Bill No. 205, which is now an Act but not yet assented to, I assume. 

This question of the deadline for the members of the public – let me qualify my remarks. I am not calling for immediate recall of the Act but I am just questioning that there being a lot of pressure from the general public and accusations that the incumbent Members of Parliament are very selfish to impose a 90 day deadline to public officers – Madam Speaker, again could you protect me from Her Royal Highness Princess Kabakumba, who is heckling me that it was there during UPC days? UPC was a very respectable government –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected. Hon. Awori, if you are not comfortable, you come and speak from the podium here.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, even from the distance I am sure you will continue to protect me from those who think UPC can never come back to power; we intend to do so. This matter of 90 days has raised a lot of concern and I am just wondering if it is not the cause of holding back the assent to this Act. We debated it, we passed it, but it is still raising concern.  

There is no law that cannot be amended by this august House; it does not matter whether it is constitutional or otherwise. This august House through the due legislative process can amend every law, so there is no question of saying we passed it and cannot look back. If there is a concern from the general public, it is indeed our duty to respond to the general public that we passed this law but it needs to be revisited. So this issue is coming up, a lot of people are putting pressure on us, especially the civil society and I would like to remind the Attorney-General to be stand by on this particular matter. We would like to look at it again. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to support the idea of hon. Awori by giving the information that we are gathering from the public that the law, which was made in regard to the civil servants resignation while standing for political elections, is unfair to them and the country at large. That is because a lot of potentially good civil servants would fear to stand for elections because if they lose they would be unable to return to their jobs. Because of that –(Interjection)- sorry, I have enough information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But she is giving information.

MS NAMAGGWA: So a lot of good civil servants may not join politics because of the fear that if they lost in the elections they would not be able to go back to their jobs. One was wondering whether there is a clause that would allow them to go back to the civil service in case they lost during the elections, otherwise –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let her finish the information.

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Otherwise, the country is likely not to get the best politicians if civil servants do not get a leeway to decide between joining politics and staying in the service or losing and going back. Also, the Parties themselves definitely will not get good politicians if those people are not given that leeway. I wanted to give that information to hon. Awori.  

MR ERESU: I would like to give the following information. It is true 90 days have been stipulated and to some extent part of our society is complaining, but the principle is that the civil service is part of the Executive and imagine a Chief Justice withdrawing to stand for a political office then he loses against someone who will have won then he goes to dispense justice! It would be contradictory and would bring a lot of confusion. That is the reason we recommend and propose and have made it a constitutional mandate that once you join politics you must leave, you must cease being a civil servant. I think that is the principle.

Secondly, while you remain a civil servant one is supposed to discharge duties, which are handed over to him by the Government of the day irrespective ones political affiliation. If you are now a civil servant who once stood for elections and lost because you are now in government how will you respond in discharging those duties? This is a principle, which exists the world over.

MR RUHINDI: This is important because the Constitution amendments we passed in this House were legislating for a Multi-party system. In a Multi-party system, by the time your party fields you as its candidate you would have long ceased to be a public servant because you cannot be a member of the party, advocate its policies, campaign for it, hold a party card and be a public servant. In fact what we are actually talking about is maybe to take care of the people who may want to stand as independents, that kind of thing, but everything goes with its own risk. So, ideally in a Multi-party state that controversy does not arise at all.

MR AWORI: Thank you very much, honourable colleagues for your useful input.  

Another point I would like to raise to my honourable colleague the Attorney-General is item No. 7 of this statement. That is the question of the timetable. It is not the first time this august House has had a very congested legislative timetable. What is the guarantee? Can we get the assurance from the Cabinet that indeed they will be here on time, from time to time and especially pertaining to the four cardinal Bills that are relevant to free and fair elections? 

We do not want to rush through some of these Bills. I for one as a Multi-partist I am particularly concerned with the Bill pertaining to the Police Act -(Interjection)- yes, I do understand we are all Multi-partists in substance but not in form. 

Why do I say so? You have heard already a lot of people are still arguing that we are still under the Movement System. In practice we might be but constitutionally we have had a referendum. The dice has already been cast. However, I am just trying to find out from the honourable colleague in charge of laws: what is the fall back position in the event that the programme gets to congested? One thing I can say on my own, with the Madam Speaker in the Chair, we can go through the programme but under very strenuous circumstances.  

Madam Speaker, for us to go through the budget we sat here sometimes until 8.00 p.m. Some of us decided maybe in future there should be temporary accommodation on the third Floor so that we can do a lot more. However –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, please wind up.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, it is a genuine concern, but not least it may be a para-legislative issue but this question of the Electoral Commission, I am still concerned that essentially in content the Electoral Commission is still a very much Movement oriented commission and at this material time when we are about to move from the Movement System to the Multi-party system under a Multi-party election. I am expressing concern.  

I would have said this but it is a matter, which is coming up in the Appointments Committee. I see that the Electoral Commission is still being revamped, new appointments are coming up and this does not even reflect the forthcoming evenness in the change of the governance or system of governance. I think these are issues that even before the right organs of the state meet to determine that a minister responsible should consult the appointing authority to look into. We are really concerned.  

The Police Act, Madam Speaker, it has been Tabled but now I am appealing to you as the Speaker who determines our Order Paper that it is more urgent for us Multi-partists than any other Bill. I really would like to see it going through because already we the Multi-partists some of our parties are suffering under the hands of RDCs and DPCs. 

In principle we are supposed to conduct our campaigns for elections unhindered. Indeed up to now if you look at Soroti for instance, I can give an example of the RDC in Soroti, he has been putting a lot of pressure on FDC, UPC and DP members. This kind of situation, we are saying we need the protection of the state after the amendment of the Police Act. I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I hope the honourable minister will respond to my concerns.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, concerning whether to move forward the Police Act or any other, you know our rules require that when a Bill is read for the first time I commit it for at least 14 days. I cannot shorten the time. So the Bills will be committed as and when they arrive and when the reports are ready they will be debated by this House.

MS NAMUSOKE: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from the hon. Attorney-General –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you wait? Let me finish here and I come to your side and then you can make your submissions.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Of course I appreciate that the Electoral Commission came with these dates so that we are sure of what we are talking about and we can make our own timetable. My clarification has been partly touched on by hon. Awori, that is, bullet No. 7. For parliamentary elections the requirements are almost set, but if you look at the LC V and the sub-county elections, the requirements for example we are under a Multi-party system of course in next elections.  

Will the LC V candidates also be required to resign and – no, hold on a bit - LC V aspiring candidates, will they also be required to resign? Because if you fit this kind of timetable and given that we do not have the laws before us, we will get time barred. Can I be clarified when the Attorney-General intends to bring all these laws so that our people out there as they calculate their chances here and there could be assured at least of what to do and when? Thank you very much.

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Mine is also related to hon. Kabakumba’s observation because we did pass in the Constitution amendment, clause 18 regarding aspiring candidates for parliamentary seats resigning if they are civil servants. Is that going to apply to only those who are aspiring for parliamentary seats? 

What happens when a civil servant wants to lead this country as a president, what happens when a civil servant wants to be the chairman LC V? I think we need to clear that because the impression out there is that this will only apply to Members of Parliament and yet the party arrangement or the partisan arrangement will apply at all levels, be it at LC V, councilor and LC III.  

So, I think this needs to come out clearly. Who resigns? Is it a civil servant who is aspiring for a parliamentary seat alone or any other political office, since we are under a Multi-party political dispensation? I thought that this should be clear and we give the right signal to our people. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MS SARAH NAMUSOKE (Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to ask the Attorney-General to clarify to me because I see in item 7 he talks about, “The commission trusts that the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda will expeditiously pass the said enabling laws before the first nomination date in November 2006”, and that is what he read.  

The nomination date that is given by the Electoral Commission is November 2005, so is this a typographical error or an extension? Please, clarify because your document seems – unless there is something I am missing to understand. Thank you.

MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is just asking the Attorney-General when the laws that will govern Presidential, Parliament and even local elections, when will they be presented to the relevant committee? As far as the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee is concerned, we have only one Bill with us, which is the Political Party and Organisations Bill, and I understand the presidential, parliamentary and all these will not be amended but will be brought as fresh and new Bills. I just want to find out when they will be brought to the committee.

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think let us commend the Electoral Commission for appearing to be competent and working very hard but honestly, can this roadmap be fulfilled? Honestly, the Attorney-General needs to direct the Electoral Commission. I cannot see this roadmap being fulfilled. But of course even if they are not fulfilled the Electoral Commission will still busy itself by proposing fresh roadmaps.  

These roadmaps are made - I do not think the Electoral Commission is aware of several other procedures in the Multi-party system –(Interruption)

MR KASSIANO:  Madam Speaker, it is not my intension to spoil the record of my colleague hon. Kigyagi, the former RDC of Kamwenge. However, I have noted that he has repeatedly crossed this Chamber giving us the impression that this is nothing but a local council meeting in Kamwenge where he was the Resident District Commissioner. Is he in order in accordance with our Rules of Procedure to unnecessarily cross and more so directly in front of the Rt hon. Speaker, when important issues are being discussed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, our rules do not allow us to cross from side to side so you are out of order. If you want to cross over, you get out and get to the other side. 

DR OKULO EPAK: Yes, you know, the situation where we are, parties have not even held their annual delegates’ conferences and, therefore, they have not even chosen what we call their flag bearers and nobody can tell when these meetings will take place. There are various party elections and primary elections. We have already suffered a bit of the experience in Lango now ­-(Laughter)- and I want to warn the others that it is likely to be anywhere in this country.  

So, you take a lesson from our experience and thank us for providing you with that experience so that you may not even repeat what we have struggled with. But that is beginning to walk in a Multi-party system after 20 years. You know if you have been locked up, you did not know how to exercise walking and now they put you out, no lights, every light is too big. So I think that is part of the cost for this, putting everything in abeyance, but this experience is likely to occur elsewhere. When we deal with the Political Organisations Bill, I think we should assist everyone by closing these loopholes so that these crooks have no escape route. 

If this is the timetable for Multi-party elections and considering that all other Multi-party procedures are not yet in place, I think this timetable is obviously –(Interruption)

DR MAKUBUYA: I am sorry to interrupt my very distinguished honourable colleague, Dr Okulo Epak but did I hear him correctly saying that these crooks should not be left with any loophole for escape? If he is talking about crooks then because I have to report this debate to the Electoral Commission and to the Executive I would like to know who these crooks are because I will be asked. May he clarify?

DR OKULO EPAK: I thank the hon. Attorney-General. You may report and say that I was referring to people with the inclination to behave the way we have just behaved in Lira. (Laughter)

Concerning this issue of civil servants, I was a civil servant for many years and I retired in 1990. Unless the Standing Orders, which are the laws governing the operation of the Civil Service have been amended, they are very clear. They prohibit a civil servant from participating in active politics. Even under the Movement System one was prohibited from participating in active politics and if anything we have just been abusing these Standing Orders. 

Since nothing new has been added to this law, if civil servants were disciplined and understood these Standing Orders they would have known that giving them three months was a way of merely assisting them to have enough time to undergo the primaries of the parties, to be elected to branch offices of the various parties and to start campaigning. If somebody gives you three months to prepare yourself and you go on to say he has done you an injustice then you are not serious. 

Suppose you had been given 30 days? I can assure you that if anybody was given only 30 days by the end of those days the party primaries would be over. Then what sort of candidates would they be? As it is, the regulations in the Standing Orders are very clear and I think three months –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, with due respect to my colleague and chairperson, does the law in this country prohibit a public officer from belonging to a political party?

Secondly, obviously before a person has been nominated he cannot stand on a platform and campaign to stand. The argument we are putting across is that since a public officer has the right to belong to any party and is allowed by law to vote, is it fair to say that a public officer must resign within 90 days simply because you fear he or she might use public assets yet we are allowing other officers of government who have access to these same public assets to continue using them? I request my colleague to explain the rationale behind forcing a public officer to resign before he is nominated.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you honourable for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give the honourable member holding the Floor regarding what happened in Lira is that in 1980 when we were going to hold elections some of the candidates delayed and reached the registration centres late. Actually one of them was hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere who is now a Member of Parliament here. This was during the UPC regime so it is not a surprise that this happened in Lira and –(Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Speaker, let me start with what hon. Mutuluuza raised. First of all I am not debating the 1980 elections. 

Secondly, we have records and we have also carried out inquires into electoral malpractices. We have known times when people went to polling stations only to find votes finished, the voting centres closed and their names ticked. So, please stop seeing what is in the eye of your friend when you have a big log in your own eye. 

Let us not justify something simply because somebody else did it. A bad deed is bad as it is and should be condemned irrespective of who committed it. Do not tell me that because somebody did something wrong in UPC in 1980 someone else is justified to do it somewhere else, no. Please, let us stick to the principle of justice.

Hon. Jack Sabiiti has posed two questions and I do not know which is which, that is requiring a person to resign or asking them to resign within three months. As far as I am concerned, a civil servant is already prohibited by virtue of the Standing Orders from participating in active politics. Please underline the word “active politics”. You have just left the service recently and you should be able to remember that. 

Even if a civil servant has not resigned but gone ahead to stand for elections, he has already taken part in active politics. By virtue of the Standing Orders even during the Movement System, this person should have never gone back to the service. In fact the Public Service Commission was sleeping.  

As regards the three months, I am quite sure that I really don’t care. If anything they could have been given three days to resign and how would that help them? Would they be able to move from Oyam South to all the villages and take part in branch elections if they had to resign three days prior to nominations? How would they be able to use their office time to participate in this clandestine political process if that is what we wanted? Obviously we might as well have given them only three days.

I think it is very generous to have given them three months so that they have enough time to participate in all the processes. I am assuming that hitherto or fore, they have never been known as political activists and that three months would give them time to justify themselves to the voters. They should not think that they can emerge from nowhere and expect people to see their brightness. They will need some time to prove themselves and they should accept this. So these public servants must first resign before going on to contest on an NRM or UPC ticket. Irrespective of the results, they must have resigned from Public Service. What then are your options? This is the nature of politics.  

When we went to Rwakitura during the Constituent Assembly, we asked President Museveni whether it was true that he appoints basing on proven loyalty and he said, “Yes. How else would you demonstrate proven loyalty to either the President of a party or to the party itself except by standing by that party? If you can’t do this then that means that your party cannot depend on your royalty because it is not there.”  These are the imponderable things that we should be able to deal with instead of saying that, “Members of Parliament wanted to close the way for us so they forced us to make a choice between politics and the Civil Service.” There are no two ways about this!

I retired in 1990 and that is why I am now involved in politics. Before I retired I was not taking part although I used to vote for and support UPC. Of course you would not see me singing Nyamurunga like hon. Kefa Sempangi here in the field. That is the situation and I think our civil servants must learn to live honestly and make clear choices in life. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.39
MR GEORGE WILLIAM WOPUWA (Bubulo County East, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I have looked at the press statement from the Electoral Commission and I wanted to seek clarification from the Attorney-General. When you look at programme No. 1, it states the schedule for sub-county, city and municipal council elections. A city council is equivalent to a district but there is no clear indication that district councilors will also be handled at that level. 

In programme No. 3 you have LC V chairpersons but it is also silent on district councillors. I am seeking clarification from the Attorney-General whether this was an omission.

Madam Speaker, I did not want to discuss the issue of civil servants resigning in detail. However, for hon. Jack Sabiiti I recommend a book by Abraham Kiapi on civil laws in East Africa, which is very informative. 

I would also like to say that the word “resignation” is different from applying for leave. It is assumed that when you apply to resign, the resignation will have to be processed. The appointing authority will sit, consider your application, accept it and only then can you resign effectively. Therefore, if you had to resign in three days, you would only have time to express the interest to resign but the resignation itself would not be effective until it has been handled by the appointing authority.

I believe the effect of this amendment is to give those interested in standing an opportunity to go through the required processes of resigning so that by the time they come for nominations they already have a letter of resignation with a minute attached because only then will their resignation be considered effective. This is because simply applying to resign is not legally resigning. In fact I think this was done in their interest. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.41
MR TOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to comment on the statement by the minister. On page 3, I am intrigued with the way the minister has coined paragraph 7. The second sentence reads, “The commission trusts that the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda will expeditiously pass the said enabling laws before the first nomination date in November 2006.” 

Members of Parliament are here asking the minister to give us assurance about the feasibility of this timetable. But now the minister is saying, “The Commission trusts…” I know that the minister is also responsible for these laws we are talking about. I would have thought then that the minister would tell us that the Bills are ready and that he is bringing them tomorrow. Instead according to him they will be finalised within the necessary dates. 

However, he is now talking about the commission entrusting the Parliament. Madam Speaker, I do not think this is the correct way of handling things. I wish that the minister could tell us exactly what his plan is and when, according to him, we will have this matter finalised.  

We have just had elections, UPC branch elections in Lango, and I want to report that there seems to be lack of understanding of the new political dispensation on the part of some government agencies. In my sub-county even after the elections the GISO has been harassing some people to give him the names of the people who were elected in the parishes. This to us is harassment because we do not comprehend the role of the GISO in these elections. 

As far as the people on the ground are concerned, this presents a very serious and ugly face to the new political order which we are going into. Therefore, I ask government to take note and take steps to ensure that this is done away with.

Madam Speaker, the minister is responsible for elections and I am also sure that through government he is responsible for the maintenance of order and free and fair elections. We carried out an investigation into what happened in 2001 but unfortunately we have not been able to discuss the results of the election violence report -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should not make these statements. We discussed that report, what is pending are the resolutions.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Sorry, I beg your pardon. We needed to have concluded the report. We need to have come out with recommendations for government to consider and unfortunately this House has not had the opportunity to do that but I want assurance from the minister that we are now going to have free and fair elections because without that we are bound to have a repeat of what happened, and maybe worse. 

Hon. Awori mentioned the issue of the Electoral Commission’s composition. I had thought that since we are going to have Multi-party elections, the composition of the Electoral Commission would reflect the political order of the day. 

I sit on the Appointments Committee of Parliament and I have noticed that most of the members appointed to this commission basically come from one political spectrum. This worries me because these must be people of trust and integrity, but politics operates on - if people perceive these people to have come from one political section, there is a small problem that something would be - they have been instructed or because of their own interest they have acted in a certain way and this is most unfortunate. 

I wish this could be corrected. It is unfortunate. I hope we are going to have this electoral law coming here and I hope this will be handled. Let the appointment of the Electoral Commission be handled by the President together with the political parties, to avoid this situation. If this is done I am sure we shall have confidence and trust in this important commission.  

The minister should quickly present to Parliament the roadmap because they are groping in the dark and we have started speculating. People are now saying that we want to extent the life of Parliament; I do not want. I think it is necessary for us to calm the political waters of this country, by the minister coming with a definite roadmap, which we can consider in this Parliament and inform the population accordingly. Otherwise, living in this traumatized time with this speculation and so on without clear government programmes is most undesirable. I appeal to the minister that this must be done quickly so that our people can rest in peace and move on with the new order, which we are trying to create. Thank you.

4.48
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, first of all I would like to thank hon. Aggrey Awori for having raised this issue and the issue is whether it was proper for the Electoral Commission to announce nomination dates for the next cycle of the elections at the time when it did; on the 16th of September. The central theme of my statement today is that it is proper for the Electoral Commission to announce nomination dates at the time it did. 

I thank the members who have been able to make contributions. First, at page 3 of the statement in item 7, the date is November 2005. It is not November 2006. I apologize for that typographical error but I must congratulate myself, if nobody else will do it. I must congratulate myself that on Tuesday I said I was going to make a statement in Parliament on this matter and I have made it. (Laughter).

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues I would like to congratulate the honourable minister. (Laughter).

DR MAKUBUYA: Now –(Interruption)

MR RUZINDANA: Will the laws and regulations governing elections be there by November?

DR MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all I would like to remind ourselves of an important provision in the Constitution, which we left standing even when we went through the recent amendment process. Article 91 of the Constitution, clause (1) says: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the power of Parliament to make laws shall be exercised through Bills passed by Parliament and are assented to by the President.”  

Clause (2): “A Bill passed by Parliament shall, as soon as possible, be presented to the President for assent.”  

Clause (3): “The President shall, within 30 days after a Bill is presented to him or her –
(a) assent the Bill; or 
(b) return the Bill to Parliament with a request that the Bill or a particular provision of it be reconsidered by Parliament; or 
(c) notify the Speaker in writing that he or she refuses to assent to the Bill.”  

There are subsequent directives as to what will happen in case one of these three options is exercised. Even if you start to count the 30 days from the day we passed the Bill here, 30 days have not passed and I am sure that the Bill was not presented on the day it was passed here. It had to go to the press. I sent copies to be prepared and so on and the constitutional timetable, which we are applying in other areas, should also be applied on this and as far as I know His Excellency the President has not yet exercised any of these options.

Madam Speaker, I could say that what my colleagues have been saying here is very important and we will study it and plug it back into the system to produce the kind of answers they want because most of it goes beyond the question I was asked.  However, there are some things, which I need to comment on very briefly. How can I be asked for a fallback position? What fallback position? We came here and spent a lot of time debating these provisions and the question of fallback position was never raised. How does it become an issue now? Hon. Aggrey Awori was here and he was saying no to most of the provisions. Now before the statutory timetable has been fulfilled, how can he stand up and give me orders? But this is a fact: on most of these things he said no.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I do enjoy debating in this House, especially on matters of legal nature that fall within the purview of the Attorney-General. But is he in order to imply that I come to this august House with a negative mind, that whatever comes for amendment on matters pertaining to a Bill that is of political nature, I say no? Can he produce a record to prove his point? Is he in order? 

Only yesterday I overwhelmingly supported and caused the august House to support a very unpopular measure, which the Government was putting in place. It was due to my support that the Ministry of Finance got the support that they did from members. Is he in order to imply that I always say no, when I hold him in the highest esteem as a lawyer and colleague?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, to my mind the minister was talking about the recently concluded constitutional making exercise, which has a bearing on the elections about which you are asking for a fallback position. He did not talk about your general performance. I think you are a very good Member of Parliament; he talked about the constitutional making process.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, hon. Aggrey Awori has gone a very long way to support the Attorney-General that he only supported an unpopular position that government was putting a 12 percent tax. So the Attorney-General is right.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, hon. Aggrey Awori is an esteemed colleague of mine in this Parliament and there are some matters, which we can sort out at the end of the session between us, rather than bogging down Parliament. Let me give this information that the Political Parties and Organizations Bill has been read for the first time and is already with the committee. Cabinet has cleared three Bills and they are with the UPPC. These are the Presidential Elections Bill, 2005; the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 2005; and the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2005.  

Many of the issues you are raising are actually covered in these Bills and, God willing, these Bills will be presented here for first reading next week and the committee will have time to go through them. The committee will report back here and these things for which you seek answers today in advance of these laws will be answered on this Floor.

This is obviously outside my statement but it is an important point made by my very distinguished colleague, hon. Anang-Odur. It is outside but I think it is better to comment on it since it applies to me as part of the Government and taking responsibility for elections: 

One, there are certain elections for which I am unlikely to accept responsibility beyond ensuring that there is law and order. The Government will ensure that there is law and order when the parties are organizing themselves internally. But frankly, in the Multi-party dispensation we expect the parties to handle their affairs pursuant to their constitutions. 

For example, some constitutions of the parties, which I have seen, provide for primary elections within the party democratically. Others do not provide for primaries. They provide for the central executives to identify and select candidates. If I was to insist that it must be done in a particular way, I will be interfering with the ground rules of the Multi-party dispensation. We have agreed that the parties register pursuant to their constitutions and that they manage themselves pursuant to these constitutions internally. As far as we are concerned, these constitutions stand unchallenged. 

So to some extent there is no way I will take responsibility for what happens internally within the party to the extent that it does not violate the national Constitution, or breach the rules of law and order. That is for the members of that party to sort out.

Two, I have to take your word for the time being on the prima facie case that this GISO went and asked certain questions. I have to find out, did this GISO move himself or did some members of the party who were complaining move him? At this point in time I agree that in the new Multi-party dispensation, sensitisation is necessary so that the parties are left alone to run their affairs to the extent within the Constitution and the law; with assurance of free and fair elections. 

Yes, the question of elections is a government programme. Hon. Members of Parliament, presidential elections, parliamentary elections and LC elections are all government programmes. These are programmes of the Government of the Republic of Uganda. They are not programmes of – frankly, we all want to live in a peaceful and stable Uganda and this is what we are striving for. 

I would like to assure you that the extent that it is within government ability we will ensure that there are free and fair elections and the contribution is that we enact these laws and enact them quickly so that we can go ahead and implement them. As I said, many of these things, which have risen, were outside my statement. We are going to be dealing with them in the next few days when these Bills are reported on by the committee and some of the fire will seem to be premature because this is the body, which is going to pass these laws. There is no other body, which is going to pass them. So, hold your fire until the laws are here. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Attorney-General, especially for giving an indication when the important laws are going to come to the House. Of course we will be prepared to receive them in the usual way. Honourable members, I want to thank you for today’s meeting. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.08 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27 September 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


