Wednesday, 29 September 2010

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you but I want to remind you that your work as Members of Parliament will end in May next year and therefore you are expected to attend to your work as mandated by your constituents. I note some relaxation these days and I think this should stop. 

I told you yesterday that on my table I have a letter from the African Leadership Institute asking a number of things about you. I do not want to make adverse reports against you that you do not attend. So, I appeal to you that you come and attend to parliamentary work and maybe after October, we shall see what to do with your personal problems in the constituencies but not now. Thank you very much.

2.47
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance, which is urgent in nature and calls for Government attention. It is about people being arrested and detained at the Joint Anti-Terrorism Headquarters at Kololo. 

In my capacity as the Shadow Attorney-General, I have received several reports and complaints from a number of lawyers and members of the public who have failed to get access to their loved ones and clients who are being detained in un-gazetted detention centres on account of being accused of participating in terrorism activities. 

I for one have a particular case arising from my constituency involving a leader in the Democratic Party in Kisenyi II Parish. He is called Basudde Sulaiman Kiggundu and he is a resident of School View in Kisenyi II Parish, Kampala Central Division. He was arrested on the 24th day of this month, that was Friday, at around 8.30 p.m. when he was coming from prayers at a mosque called Swidiq, which is within the same locality. 

The plain-clothed security operatives who arrested him were moving in vehicle registration number UAN 359S, a double cabin, green in colour. There is a gentleman called Musa Lubega at the nearby clinic, the Doctor’s Clinic, who had earlier on warned Mr Basudde that he was going to be arrested. This gentleman told the relatives that when Basudde was arrested he was taken to JATT.

I made efforts personally to see if I could access him at JATT but all my efforts were brought to naught by the security operatives there. I tried that very evening. I called the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, hon. Matia Kasaija, who assured me that he was going to help me but up to now I have not got any solution. I tried CPS, the Commandant of Metropolitan Police and others but we have not been helped. The relatives, friends and all the leaders there are concerned but we cannot trace this person and the reports we have are that he is being detained at JATT offices. We cannot access him.

Mr Speaker, it is coming to a week since he was arrested and the Constitution clearly spells out the rights of an accused person. Even if he is accused of any case, he has got a right to legal representation; he has got a right to get attention from his loved ones and so on and so forth. So, I feel like this matter calls for the attention of this House and everybody in Government. And it is not only for Sulaiman Basudde but many others who are languishing there. 

How do we handle the issues of detentions in un-gazetted centres? We used to have a chronic problem of safe houses and we thought we would do away with it. So how do we deal with this problem?

THE SPEAKER: I think you have made a point.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business.

2.51
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Lukwago has raised very serious issues. We shall be interacting with hon. Lukwago so that we can be able to get more information with the view to following up this particular case and others. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I have the photo of this person who was arrested. 

THE SPEAKER: Ok.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you. I beg to pass it on. 

THE SPEAKER: Table it.

(Mr Lukwago lay the photograph on the Table.)

MR EKANYA: I have a matter of urgent importance. I should have come to your Office but we have been in a committee meeting.

THE SPEAKER: You have not. You cannot start - hon. Anywar.

2.52
MS BEATRICE ANWYAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance but before I go on to that, I would like to really take this opportunity to thank you most sincerely for responding to a request that I made to your Office about creating a health club for Members of Parliament so that our life is complete. As we get stressed and as we are overworked, we have a place to relax and probably cater for our health. I sincerely thank you, Mr Speaker, for making that dream a reality. (Applause) Members, you have not appreciated! (Laughter) We are really so appreciative. (Applause)

I also rise up on this issue of a crippling fuel crisis in the country. It is now running to two weeks since the fuel shortage hit our country. And it is not the first time that we are going through this experience yet the prices are unmanageable! 

As a person who represents the ordinary Ugandans, I would like to ask the responsible minister to give clear information on the status quo in regard to the situation to this honourable House and the country at large. I also would like to ask that minister to ensure that these continuous shortages of fuel in the country, where our people are left to the whims of the business community, stop.

As I talk, a litre of fuel in my place and Karamoja (I was told) is at Shs 4,000. My people are not able to meet that cost! This problem is not only hitting that part of the country but also throughout the country. I request that the minister brings a written statement to this House to inform the country about the escalating fuel shortage and the rising prices. Fuel is the backbone to our development; it is a shame that we are keeping quiet while our people are suffering! I would like this to be responded to. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Beatrice Anyway for raising this very important matter of fuel shortage and its escalating prices and those of its by-products.

Yes, it is true that in the space of the last two weeks, we have been faced with a problem of escalating fuel prices arising out of intermittent supplies. I would like to say that this has come about mainly on account of some problems in Mombasa in Kenya, but also on the account of rising piracy.

I will be requesting the hon. Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to come up with a comprehensive statement on this very important matter. Given the seriousness of this matter, I will try to see that tomorrow we provide a statement to the House on this matter. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, on the issue of the health club, I would like to inform you that we now have got another donation of US $3,300 to add more items down there. Thank you. (Applause)

2.57
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I thank you so much. I would like to state that I just came out of the committee meeting handling the Income Tax. So, I could not come to your Office. Anyway, I have got one issue of national importance over which I would like the Minister of Agriculture and Animal Industry and Fisheries to make a statement.

It has come to my knowledge that Government land worth 80 hectares for former UTRO and now Livestock Research Institute (LRI) is likely to be grabbed by a group of Ugandans who are purporting that by 1950, when the East African Government acquired it, they were not compensated. I got this information yesterday and I would like to inform you that the management of LRI has written to the responsible ministry – and this research institute, which has, on several occasions, received loans appropriated by this Parliament to control sleeping sickness in the region, is very important.

So, I would like to request that the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries makes a statement to this House on whether this Government property is still safe from the grabbers or not. I beg that the statement be made to the House tomorrow.

3.00
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Ekanya for raising this matter concerning UTRO land in Tororo on the Floor of the House. I would like to say that this information will be passed on to the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I also will be briefing him on the issues you have raised –(Interjections)– yes, he just walked in as you were sitting down. So, in order for him to be in a position to give a satisfactory response to that matter, we will have to first brief him. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yeah! But, hon. Ekanya, as a leader from that area you should advise those people who did not get compensation in the 50s that their claim is now stale; it is time barred and they have no legal claim.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my brother, hon. Ekanya, that he should advise his voters to desist from grabbing Government land. Otherwise, we shall arrest them – that is public land –(Interjections)– no, we have chased people who had camped in Ishara and we shall effectively chase them.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to seek some clarification from the minister as he answers hon. Ekanya’s concerns. There are some premises of Government especially those that fall under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and former Uganda Fisheries Enterprises, where I happened to work as a manager up to 1992 that after I left my office, which is found somewhere as you go to Luweero, the premises have never been used up to now. I would like to seek clarification on what Government does with those premises that are left unused. A good example is about those Government premises that used to be for former Uganda Fisheries Enterprises with the headquarters at Masese in Jinja – they have been idle since 1992! Thank you.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, some of the issues like the one just raised by hon. Beatrice Anywar would best be attended to, if they are raised in form of an oral question. That way it would be easy for us to be able to pass them on to the relevant ministers. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, as hon. Lukwago was raising the issue in regard to Mr Suleiman Basudde Kiggundu, the relatives from Kisenyi were in the gallery. Join me in welcoming them. You are welcome and your matter will be handled. (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 19 MILLION EQUIVALENT TO US $30 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK FOR FINANCING EAST AFRICAN AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY PROGRAMME

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: I think yesterday the chairperson gave us the report on that. Now it is up to you, if you have any point to raise, to do so.

3.04
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee for their report. However, I would like to say that this loan is relevant, like the chairperson said, to improve the agricultural sector basically focusing on cassava.

The problems we have with our research centres is that the technology that they released to the population cannot enable our people to develop what we call parent stock and our people have been turned into beggars.

Every season that our people want to replant cassava, they have to ask Government to distribute cassava cuttings. This has been going on for the last ten years and you find that money, which is meant for NAADS for other activities - some people who want to undertake large scale planting cannot obtain parent stock. So I want to seek clarification from the chairperson and the minister: what system do you have in place to ensure that our local farmers can have the type of cassava that can enable farmers have parent stock that can be available instead of relying on handouts from Government season in season out?

Secondly, the type of cassava tubers that develop out of the cassava stems that are distributed from these research centres take too long to mature and cannot dry easily. Therefore, I want clarification from the chairperson that if we approve this loan – because, Mr Chairperson, I believe you have analysed the project implementation document. There will be a difference.

I was in the village over the weekend and my mother told me she spent Shs 50,000 to grow cassava and after drying it, the people who buy wanted to give her Shs 5,000. I told her, “Mum, why don’t you stop growing or store until another season?” She told me, “You see my son, if you store cassava in a granary, it will turn into flour and that flour will not be of good quality because of the kind of cassava stems that are distributed nowadays.”

That during those days, during your times, Mr Speaker, the type of cassava tubers then would be dried and could easily be stored in the granary but this type of cassava being distributed and the tubers that people get cannot be stored.

Furthermore, the price is very low. The chairman was convincing us yesterday that once you approve this loan, companies like Ugachick and bread companies are now shifting from cereal to cassava. Mr Chairperson, I am a farmer myself. If you use a great percentage of cassava content and you add this in animal feeds, the output, for example, in poultry, will be very low and of poor quality. That is why farmers focus on maize and other types of cereals. So please you may have just been given information when you are not in the practice. Some of us are practising; I have over 10,000 birds and I deal in layers.

In addition, what plan does Government have to ensure that our farmers get a reasonable price like my mother and others? When is Government going to establish silos? When is Government going to establish cassava starch factories like in South Africa, Botswana and other countries instead of just coming up with a loan request to do more research? 

To our disappointment, if you look at the sharing of the revenue here, the total budget is US $30 million. If you look at how the government is going to spend the money; strengthening regional centres of excellence is US $6.7 million. This is basically consumption. There is a component called project management and co-ordination, which is at US $2.3 million. Then there is a component called support to business development and harmonisation of policy, which is at US $3.8 million. There is training and dissemination, which is at US $3.7 million. 

Our farmers are only going to benefit from technology generation, which is at U $8.7 million and improved availability of planting material and breeding stock or materials, which is at US $4.8 million. If you add this, it comes to US $13.5 million. That means the greatest percentage of the loan that the Government is requesting us to approve, over US $15 million, is going to be consumed by bureaucrats. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, I want to move an amendment -(Interruption)

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: You are reading wrong figures.

MR EKANYA: It is in the report.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I will respond.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to move an amendment that technology generation should take US $10 million and improved availability of planting materials, seeds and livestock should take US $15 million so that our people can take US $25 million and administrative work should only take US $5 million. Otherwise, I will not support this loan because it is just going to be a loan for bureaucrats in office to consume and yet at the end of the day, our people are the tax payers in terms of VAT and with high prices of fuel like my mother who spent Shs 50,000 and can only sell cassava at Shs 5,000.

Mr Speaker, it is my request that the percentage of this loan that is going to go directly to benefit our local people should be Shs 25 million, administrative work, capacity building should be $ 5 million. I beg to move. Thank you very much.

3.13
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank Government and the committee for the work done towards this loan. I would like to support the loan application because it is one of the best projects that have been proposed by Government. Cassava is one of our staple foods especially in Buganda, Masaka where we eat cassava and matooke. As such, it meets the millennium development goal No. 1, which deals with poverty and hunger.

Cassava does not only serve as a staple food but also serves as a cash crop, as such I am very encouraged and I wish to call upon Government to ensure that almost every household plants as much cassava as possible. 

I would like to agree with hon. Ekanya who is saying that the list of industries that are highlighted in the project is very minimal. Actually, the starch industry should be one of the basic industries that we should target in terms of plantations because the raw material is easy. I think the starch industry is not very complicated to implement by a developing country like Uganda. The pharmaceutical industry is another industry that can be implemented in the cassava project. 

I see cassava with multiple purposes, which could help us to implement the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Cassava is a tree as such it is very good for the environment especially for reducing soil erosion as it serves to control the running of water when it rains. It also serves as vegetable that can be eaten throughout the year because the leaves are not very seasonal as other vegetations are. Therefore, cassava is actually a very good plant and I call upon Government to ensure that every household plants as much cassava as possible. 

I also want to praise the way the project was formulated. When you look at page 9, there is a demarcation of components. This makes financial management easy because you can trace how much is allocated to that component and how much has been spent on it. Therefore, I would also like to call upon Government to ensure that all project loans be given that approach of demarcating how much is specified per component. I wish to thank you, Mr Speaker.         

3.16
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you. I wish to make a rejoinder to submissions of my colleague, hon. Ekanya, in regard to the viability of this loan. We have raised concerns here before about this culture of borrowing all the time. 

When you look at the particulars of this loan request, you can see that in addition to what hon. Ekanya said, there is even duplication of certain provisions here which are already catered for in the national budget. Look at all these components on page 12; when you are strengthening the regional centre of excellence, the specific component here is support to research infrastructure. We already appropriated funds for NARO and other research centres and therefore they are already provided for – 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The first piece of information I want to give is that borrowing is part of budget financing. You have a budget this year which gives you a percentage of well over 30 percent borrowing and this is part of financing that borrowing. 

Secondly, you are talking about the activities but you also need –(Interjection)- I want to give information to members. There is another project called ETASS. They were complaining that this loan is very small and they were asking about the other areas of agri-business. There are loan requests for ETASS which came late. If members could look at it, it covers other areas. I thought they were on the table and you got them last week; they should help you.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Mukitale, for that information. However, the point I was clarifying here is about the various components given here and the issue of the component of a loan in our budget. The 30 percent hon. Mukitale is talking about needs further clarification so that we get to know that at one point we have exhausted the percentage for the loan so that we get a clear picture, otherwise we are piling up loan requests. We are actually mortgaging our country and that is a fact.

The other aspect I wanted to emphasise is the productivity of this loan. Hon. Minister and chairperson of the committee, is this surely a productive loan? Is it? This is a consumption loan and not a development loan – largely. 

When you look at it basically - I needed to get particular information on how you are going to disburse this loan away from these components of capacity building, infrastructural development, training, seminars, workshops et cetera. Tomorrow we are just going to get accountability on that - we held a seminar here, 30 people attended and we spent such an amount - and the loan goes. Productivity translating down to the common man – to my mother down in Kabungo in Masaka, Mr Speaker back there in Kyanamukaaka –(Laughter)- how many people are going to benefit from this loan? That is the issue because this is a workshop loan and not a productive loan.

Looking at the components as they are spelt out, I would request the minister to help us adjust the components. If you could do this and help us adjust the components, we could support you. With lots of reservations we have about continued borrowing, at least we would support you if you increased the components which –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): First of all, this is a regional project. 

Secondly, I think it is better for people to read before they raise issues. Look at page 9, component 3, for which you are asking; I want to read it so that maybe you can argue otherwise: “This component will support multiplication of planting materials.” So, when you are multiplying planting materials and availing them to the population, you are actually enhancing production and productivity. You can go on and on.

I also want to explain the distortion of facts on page 12, which hon. Ekanya was referring to. If you look at component 1, 6.7 does not stand alone. You only break it into two - that is support research infrastructure which is 4.3, human resource capacity building 2.4, and that is what makes 6.7. 

Equally, where you are referring to improved availability of planting materials, it is about 8.7 but it is broken into three parts: one is 4.8, the other is 0.6 and the other one is 3.2. When you go to human resource which you want thrashed, if you look at component 4, the project which you are referring to as the money going to the bureaucrats has only 0.8. The 1.5 is for research infrastructure. So, you need to read and appreciate the structure and the figures.

MR LUKWAGO: Just briefly, we are talking about a loan of US $30 million and when I come to page 9 which you made reference to, component 3 is about improved availability of planting materials, seeds, livestock and it is US $8.8 million. However, look at component 2 which is basically consumption and it is US $12.4 million. Why should a component which directly affects the people take the smallest percentage?

THE SPEAKER: My understanding is that you support the loan but you have concerns about the sharing between different components. I think this concern should be taken care of to make sure that they cater for the right needs. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): I want to inform the House that generation of technology is not consumption. Let us be rational.

MR WADRI: The views that I am going to give are very objective because I have served on the agriculture committee for four years. I am very conversant with the reasons for which this loan is requested. I am also convinced that this money is going to be a burden to the future taxpayers and therefore we must be very thrift about the manner in which we use it. This money should benefit taxpayers such that they will be able to pay it with ease. This has been the view of my colleagues, hon. Ekanya and Erias Lukwago. 

In principal, we do support the idea of borrowing this money in order to generate production in the agricultural sector, but our concern is that when you look at the manner in which this money is being broken down, very little is going to the person who needs it most. We want improved seeds and stocks to get to these people rather than having these capacity building undertakings. Go and readjust the manner in which the money is going to be utilised. We are really saying it in good faith.

MS NANKABIRWA: I am seeking clarification; we would like to see our people benefiting and therefore we are trying to spend on technology and research vis-à-vis giving seeds and cassava cuttings to farmers.

What value do you attach to the development of technology and research? At what stage does the mother of hon. Ekanya benefit? Is it at the stage of technology development or when setting up a centre of excellence? Is it when the varieties have been developed in the nursery beds and therefore his mum can get the cassava cuttings? 

I want to request that we allow this loan, which is regional. In Uganda we are going for cassava, Ethiopia will take wheat; we are sharing. We would like to see the people of Kiboga get these varieties as quickly as possible but where do we begin from?

THE SPEAKER: I think the point here is that the amount is ok but the allocation should be looked into so that we get the maximum benefit out of the loan. We may not work on it here but these views should be taken care of and emphasis be put where it is supposed to be.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): I wish to plead that we pass this motion because there is a misconception. You cannot multiply things that you have not researched on. We are looking at improving technology.

I do not want us to mix issues; for example, hon. Ekanya is saying that when you have to plant cassava, you have to get new ones every year. That is applicable to cereals like beans, which are affected by pollination of other species that reduce the properties of those improved ones. Cassava and banana continue on the line once they are developed.

MR EKANYA: I respect hon. Bright Rwamirama but I stood up on a point of order because I am a farmer. I spend most of my money from Parliament to support people in my constituency. The NAADS Secretariat distributes fresh cassava stems to the population because after harvesting cassava, it cannot be replanted. If you replant, the yield is only 20 percent and that is why the NAADS Secretariat redistributes fresh cassava stems. Is the hon. Minister, therefore, in order to lie on the Floor of this House?

THE SPEAKER: What you have done is to inform the minister. 

MR EKANYA: I have informed the minister that his statement is not true. You cannot have parent stock out of the cassava stems that Government distributes to the farmers.

THE SPEAKER: The point has been taken because it is in good faith. I think those concerned should look at it so that we do not have to argue.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): I concede on facts that can be verified. 

MR MUKITALE: As a committee, which does business on your behalf, we had a similar position earlier when we found that this was a research loan. Because it was a research loan on a regional assignment where Uganda is a member, I thought that I should bring this out so that whatever decision is made we do understand the context. 

Ethiopia is handling wheat as a centre of excellence and our report states that Tanzania is handling rice, Kenya is doing dairy and Uganda is doing cassava as a regional centre of excellence. The following is not only for Uganda, the other countries are already proceeding. So I would like us to first understand that this is a regional project and Uganda had been assigned cassava as a centre of excellence. 

Two, we also found out that most of the research –(Interjection)- hon. Lukwago, you went out yesterday when we were presenting this loan so you were not around. 

The committee also found out that these research institutions are supported mostly by grants. Parliament and Government have put very little money in research. So Parliament should bear that in mind. We are giving very little money to research. The Ministry of Agriculture informed the committee of another loan of US $140 million for which members became very concerned. The problem is that at Cabinet, they approved the research component first and this came to us in the last hour. So we actually have US $140 million for agri-business. The committee followed up this matter and it was taken to Cabinet to address most of the issues that members are concerned about. 

I also want to add that research is US $30 million and US $140 million for the farmers; all that is with us. However, we received research first and that is what we brought. So with that, Mr Speaker, you can guide the House.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we cannot work out the details here. The principles have been set. I think they will definitely guide those people when they get the money; they will use their judgement to distribute the money fairly to achieve the maximum results. However, the arithmetic cannot be done here. Let me put the question. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow SDR 19 million from the International Development Bank.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2010

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I understand the relevant committee has not done much about that Bill. I understand the chairpersons are in Munyonyo for another meeting. They want to meet the minister to discuss some of the details, so it seems we are not going to have it even tomorrow. Since we have disposed the first item, I have nothing to do.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the Chairperson of the Finance Committee assured us that we are going to deal with the Appropriation Bill today. I was in the House but we are now receiving information that they are unable because of other engagements and that we are going to do it tomorrow. I request that we do it tomorrow because as you are aware, we have a timeframe. We are remaining with very little time to handle this matter. So I request that we fast-track this so that we do not get caught up.

THE SPEAKER: No, the latest information I have received is that tomorrow is when they are going to discuss it with the Minister of Finance. Personally, I do not think it is necessary to do so because what they should do to that Bill is proof-reading, but this is the decision they have taken. I have nothing to do other than to adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. to deal with that Bill. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 3.38 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 5 October 2010, at 2.00p.m.)

