

Thursday, 14 September 2017

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, we amended our Rules of Procedure to shift Prime Minister’s Question Time from 3 o’clock on Wednesdays to 4 o’clock on Thursdays. Therefore, today, the Prime Minister’s Question Time will commence at 4 o’clock for an hour. 

Honourable members, on a sad note, hon. John Chrysostom Muyingo has lost his mother, the late Victoria Nakiwala Ssekidde. The Requiem Mass will be on Saturday, 16th September at Rubaga Cathedral at 10.00 a.m. and burial will be on Sunday 17th September at Kakoola Bamunanika at 2.00p.m. May her soul rest in eternal peace. Please let us rise to observe a moment of silence. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE POISONOUS CASSAVA PLANTS IN THE DISTRICTS OF TORORO AND BUSIA

2.10 
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This statement is in response to the concern raised by hon. Frederick Angura the Member of Parliament for Tororo South County and hon. Silas Aogan the Member of Parliament for Kumi Municipality on 21 June 2016. They are both Members of Parliament from eastern Uganda. 

The districts of Tororo, Bugiri and Busia had been fatally affected by the consumption of a poisonous type of cassava and investigations revealed that: 

    a) In Tororo District, two subcounties of Merikit Parish and Merikit Village and Rubongi Sub County (Papel Village, Panyangansi Parish). Two families were affected - two children died and other family members hospitalised.

    b) In Bugiri District, five subcounties were affected including: Buluguyi Sub County (Butema Village, Muwayo Parish) Buwunga Sub County that (Nawandhuki Parish and Nawandhuki Sub County), Budhaya Sub County (Bukatu Village, Bukatu Parish), Budhaya Sub County (Buwangu Village, Budhaya Parish) and Kapyanga Sub County (Buswiriri Village, Bugunga Parish). Sadly, a total of seven young people died and 14 adults were hospitalised.

Tororo and Busia districts are among the leading cassava growing areas in eastern Uganda. 

Tororo District has acreage of 27,000 hectares under cassava. Production is estimated to be 174,000 metric tonnes per annum. Busia District has an area under cassava of 15,137 hectares producing 90,822 metric tonnes. The average yield per hectare is six tonnes per hectare. 

Varieties of cassava grown in these affected districts 

Close to 80 per cent of the total cassava grown in Tororo and Busia districts is a local bitter variety known as Magana and 20 per cent is of improved varieties. Magana is widely grown in the Tororo-Busia area and it stretches over to western Kenya. The variety is also found in Tongolo in mid-western West Nile and northern Uganda in Rutuga and Kalinga in western Uganda. 

The improved high yielding variety is grown in the districts include NASE 3, which is popularly known as Migyera, NASE-14 and TME 104. 

Cyanide content

Cyanide is a non-nutritional element found mainly in cassava but it is also found in other things. At high levels, it can be poisonous. 

Magana is a bitter cassava variety with high cyanide content in the range of 200-300 ppm (parts per million.) at the period of 6-12 months in case it is harvested young. The cyanide content reduces to about 150 ppm at around one and a half years. It reduces further to 80 to 200 ppm at three years. 

According to the Codex Alimentarius food standards, the safe limit for presence of cyanide in food is only 10 ppm. 

Processing 

If the Magana cassava variety is to be processed into flour, it must be peeled, sliced and heaped for five to seven days to allow fermentation to break down the cyanide content to a safe range of 10 ppm. 

After seven days of fermentation, the moulds are scraped off the cassava slices and sundried to 13 per cent moisture content and then milled into flour that is safe for consumption. 

Cassava poisoning

Cassava poisoning can occur when Magana is harvested as fresh roots and then boiled for consumption. This is lethal and for this reason, sell of fresh roots of this variety on the market, is not recommended. It is advised that this variety be processed into flour at household level before putting it on the market.

However, even with processing, the levels remained higher than the required PPM, especially in young cassava and during the dry season. These, when consumed without processing or after poor processing will result into cyanide poisoning, disturbance of thyroid function and neurological disorder. 

In addition, improper fermentation of Magana for one to three days is also the major cause of slow cyanide poisoning, especially in periods of hunger or food shortage. 

Cyanide poisoning can lead to goitre, paralysis of the legs and presence of deep yellow-red urine in affected persons. 

Symptoms of cassava poisoning

In humans, the signs of acute cyanide intoxication include rapid respiration, drop in blood pressure, rapid pulse, dizziness, headache, stomach pain, vomiting, diarrhoea, mental confusion, twitching and convulsions. 

They tend to affect those individuals who have regular long term consumption of cassava with poor nutrition status. This is especially during the periods of hunger and famine, food scarcity and drought, when farmers desperately resort to immature plants of these bitter local varieties or wild plants which resemble cassava.

Death due to cyanide poisoning can occur when the cyanide level exceeds the limit an individual is able to detoxify. The acute level dose of hydrogen cyanide for humans is reported to be 0.5 – 3.5 milligrams, per kilogramme of body weight. If you use the PPM, then it is 50-350 PPM. Children are particularly at risk because of their smaller body sizes. 

The events leading to poisonous cassava deaths in Tororo, Bugiri and Busia

Mr Speaker, it should be emphasised that the poisonous varieties of cassava have been in the country for a very long time. 

Methods of preventing poisonous effects, including fermenting as earlier said and processing have long been known to farmers. However, the long drought period that Uganda experienced could have pushed the communities to the edge, therefore, ignoring the long known and used procedures.

The affected families consumed the cassava before it matured which contained high levels of toxins that are very dangerous to the human body. 

Specifically, the investigations revealed that:

    a) The affected households uprooted immature cassava tubers, the Magana type – which is a local cassava variety from their gardens.
    b) They hurriedly peeled the cassava and crushed it into small pieces to hasten the drying period to less than five hours.
    c) Finally, they ground the cassava into flour hurriedly, thus jumping the critical steps of soaking or guided fermenting that could have reduced the toxins levels, call it cyanide, leading to the household poisoning, thus eventual death and hospitalisation.
 
Steps taken by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

The ministry followed up the report and found out the following:

    a) Reported death and illness were as a result of consuming poorly processed fresh tubers of Magana cassava variety that is high in cyanide levels, up to 300 PPM when still young.
    b) The pre-disposing factor was the prevailing food shortages in those districts that forced the affected victims to harvest Magana cassava variety, when it was still immature and all forego the normal processing methods traditionally well known in those areas, and scientifically proven to reduce the cyanide levels to the safe limits of up to 10 PPM, as recommended by the Codex Alimenterous, the international food standard. 

	The common processing method involved peeling, slicing, heap fermentation for five to seven days, scrapping off the moulds, drying and pounding and grinding into flour.

    c) The affected households were in Tororo and Bugiri districts. One family in Tororo District lost two children. Bugiri District was the most affected; in Buwunga Sub County one child died and two were seriously affected but later recovered. 

	In Butema village, Buruguya Sub County, one child died and three children were seriously injured but later recovered; in Budhaya Sub County, two children died; in Namukongu Parish, Kapyanga Sub County, one child died. Nabukalu Sub-County also had cases of affected households.

    d) Up to eight per cent of the cassava grown in Bugiri, Tororo and Busia districts is of Magana cassava variety. Other districts that grow this variety are found in the West Nile, Lango and Bunyoro sub-regions.

The reasons for growing this high cyanide content cassava variety include the following:

    1. People know that stray animals cannot  easily destroy this variety.
    2. Thieves cannot easily steal it as it needs a lot of time to process and utilize.
    3. Some farmers believe that poisonous varieties produce a lot of flour which gives them more cash thus earning more income.
    4. The flour from poisonous varieties is believed to have better cooking qualities in some communities.

Interventions by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to rectify the situation
The ministry has identified immediate, short term and medium-long-term actions to rectify the situation including among others:

    1. The immediate actions to create awareness and sensitisation about the risks involved in growing and eating bitter/poisonous cassava varieties without proper processing through radio talk-shows, field days, monitoring visits, farmers meetings and training sessions on appropriate processing methods. 

    2. Under the short-term actions, we are going to use the extension staff and Operation Wealth Creation in the affected districts, to provide planting materials for low cyanide or sweet cassava varieties for planting in the second season, 2017. In fact, we have started loading these varieties to these districts.

NAADS or Operation Wealth Creation will provide Shs 2.4 billion for provision of low cyanide cassava; which is high yielding planting materials to all districts in the country and to make special arrangements for the affected districts. 

For Tororo, Busia and Bugiri districts, they will receive 2,000 bags of cassava planting materials of NASE 14, NASE 19 and NAROCASS 1, for planting 250 acres of cassava in each district. The initial plan is to have at least 10 acres of cassava mother gardens, for the sweet cassava varieties in every parish for the affected districts. The host farmers will establish mother gardens and will be closely monitored and followed up to ensure proper establishment, crop growth, inspection and certification of planting materials to be produced - we have started and I have been on the ground in this regard. 

It is estimated that 30, 000 bags of stem cutting materials will be produced after 12 months of planting ready for distribution to the farming communities to reduce on the acreages of bitter/poisonous Magana variety.

The 30,000 bags of cuttings per district will produce an additional 3,750 acres of cassava after one year.

The mother gardens will be raised for two ratoon crops to give an additional 30,000 bags in the second and third year of the crop.

Operation Wealth Creation and NAADS must buy off this planting material from the certified mother gardens for the affected districts of Tororo, Bugiri, Busia to progressively increase the acreages of sweet cassava varieties.

By the end of the third year, this intervention will provide an additional 11,250 acres giving a total of 33,750 acres for the three districts of sweet cassava varieties in these affected districts. This will remarkably reduce the available acreage of bitter/high cyanide cassava varieties. 

We work with stakeholders notably Office of the Prime Minister to strengthen food security surveillance and undertake timely remedial actions including awareness creations, and timely food relief to extremely affected households - it has already been done. 

Medium long-term actions as part of the Agricultural Cluster Development Projects (ACDP), the ministry will support farmers, small and medium enterprises to engage in processing of quality cassava flour.

The ministry will develop and engage with other stakeholders notably Ministry of Health, Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives on strengthening food safety control systems in the country.

The ministry will backstop the District Local Government to develop ordinances and byelaws on growing, selling and processing, consumption of cassava varieties.

We shall continue with the food security surveillance countrywide to identify vulnerable communities in the country and timely implement remedial actions to reduce recurrence of similar incidences.

Research is ongoing to continuously develop low cyanide levels of cassava varieties, which are also drought and disease resistant.

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, the purpose of this communication is to update Parliament on the steps undertaken by the ministry to rectify the situation concerning the consumption of poisonous cassava varieties.

The communication is meant to also inform colleagues that the problem being raised was a symptom of a deteriorating food security situation in the country, and indeed that was part of a copying mechanism that unfortunately turned out negative for those households.

Furthermore, I request all Members for the support in implementation of a comprehensive food security action as suggested by my ministry. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, this was a question without notice under our Rule 39 raised by the Member for Tororo County South and hon. Aogon Silas of Kumi Municipality. If they have supplementary questions in response to the answer, it would be okay.

2.3
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report that he has given. I might not rise a supplementary but just make a very serious observation that may not only help Tororo but the rest of the country.

I know most of our communities are cassava-eating communities. For us in Tororo, whereas people may have died, our own interrogation about this matter led us to find out that the cassava that killed people is not home grown cassava. We have some wild cassava that people were forced to secure during the times of difficulty that our country went through.

Never the less, we also want to agree that the cassava mosaic disease that attacked cassava led most of our people to start eating immature cassava.

Therefore, we are now wondering whether it is the immature cassava or the cassava that is not home grown that might have led to this problem. However, I thank the minister for visiting us. I moved with him and visited many cassava plantations that we have now tried to open up to see how we can improve on the multiplication. This is going on well.

If we can continue with this because we now have rain, whatever has been supplied is not adequate. I have convinced many people to spare gardens in order for us to have as much plantation as possible to multiply for the betterment of the community at large and even the neighbourhood.

Honourable minister, I think the cuttings that were supplied are not enough for our people. If we can just improve on that a little, we should be able to arrest the situation so that people can be able to have something in their pockets.

Lastly, cassava NASE 14 and NASE 19 that has been given is good but our people are complaining that the atapa (tapioca) mingled out of that cassava is light. I do not know whether those who are doing research can improve on that so that they can be able to partake of something that can be good to them. 

If you are to mingle what a family can eat, you need almost half a basket. That is what is causing complaints and making people wanting to go back to the old cassava, which is causing us problems. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssengo, I have guided on these matters; are we going to debate it? This was an urgent question asked.

2.34
MR EMMANUEL SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Mr Speaker, we are not debating this issue. However, I come from an area, which eats a lot of cassava. 

First, I would like to thank the minister for his detailed presentation and the steps taken. However, I would like to appeal that we set up a quarantine in this area so that this bad cassava does not come to these other areas. 

Normally when we move around and find good cassava on the roadside, you buy it and take it to the house not knowing that it is poisonous. This is a bit dangerous for people who travel in those areas.

Secondly, I do not know whether it is because Government does not have enough resources, but why don’t we have an exercise of destroying all those types of cassava that are poisonous so that we get rid of them in the whole country then we start afresh since the ministry has started on the process of supplying good cassava? This is my submission, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

2.35
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in appreciating the minister’s report. However, I have two specific concerns. First, the minister has told us that there is a very elaborate plan to ensure that the new cassava varieties are well distributed thorough out the country.

Honourable minister, how long does it take in order for you to replace Magana, which is a high cyanide cassava and yet we are very much aware that the project under which these new cassava varieties have been funded was not a Government of Uganda programme. 

The World Bank had to inject money to ensure that this research was possible through the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) and this project is about to close. 

Can you tell us, as a ministry, what plans you have to ensure that this research will continue and to ensure that the promises you have made in this report regarding the systematic distribution and multiplication of new varieties becomes a total success, so that we do not see a repeat of Ugandans dying not only because of hunger but also because of poisonous cassava. 

I think this is a shame and disgrace to us as a nation that thinks that it will be attaining a middle income status in the next three months. Can we get to see that business is – as the President has ever said Kisanja Hakuna Mchezo. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we close this matter, honourable members? Are we debating it?

2.37
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Mr Speaker, from the minister’s statement, 80 per cent of the cassava grown in Tororo and Busia is high cyanide cassava. When you look at the cuttings they are sending there, they are too few to even present to this House.

The perspective I am raising on the Floor, Mr Speaker, is that nine deaths have been acknowledged by Government. Nine citizens of this country have died. He has not mentioned this but in the press we do read about similar deaths in Kasese. Isn’t there need for Government to come out with a robust response to this to stop these kinds of deaths where we have Government in place and we are only talking about massaging the problem – “We shall discourage, we shall send Operation Wealth Creation”? Operation Wealth Creation has its own problems and it cannot be offered as a solution here. 

What robust measure is Government taking? Some of us at times pass through Corner Kamdini and Bweyale and there is always sweet cassava there. However, unscrupulous traders might also bring Magana and sell to the unsuspecting public. Isn’t there need for an immediate intervention so that we do not come here to lament the loss of lives of Ugandans who may not be there to defend themselves? We are here to impress it on Government to take action rather than the way they are taking things – business as usual?

Mr Speaker, shouldn’t we request the Government to come up with some other ways rather than trying to sensitise? You cannot be sensitised when you are hungry. You can eliminate the crop altogether but you do not say it is very difficult for thieves to break in at night and steal that cassava and that is why we encourage it to remain. That is not giving sense and direction at all. I thank you.

2.40
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kibaale): What I wanted the honourable minister to tell us at this particular time is that people are eating this cassava out of desperation. They are eating it as the last option. They have nothing left other than going for that high cyanide cassava – the Magna. 

At this particular time, when it is the only thing they have and you are saying they should not go ahead and eat it, what are you providing as Government that cares about the lives of Ugandans to make these people move from this disaster and reach the time when your cassava that takes two years will mature and they start enjoying normal meals? It did not come out clearly and I think you need to tell us.

The other thing is that you highlighted on some hectares of cassava in general. You did not tell us the exact hectares of this Magana cassava in this country. You are the manager of edible plants in this country. (Laughter). Tell us the hectares of this bad cassava in this country and what you plan to do, particularly, to make sure that we move away from it. 

How does it look like? Personally I do not know it. You are describing Magana but what does it look like? It is cassava but how can I identify it? Have you provided this information, particularly to ordinary people to tell that this is Magana and you should not touch it? At least we need that information. Tell us what it looks like. I had expected, for the record of the House, other than coming to describe Magana, you present a piece of it and say this is Magana. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To lay it at the Table? (Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Yes, you lay it at the Table. (Laughter) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.42
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from a district from which 90 per cent of the people consume cassava as food. 

Whereas we are discussing an issue related to cassava poisoning in Busia and Tororo, in Teso it is a different phenomenon that I would like the minister to respond to. When I was growing up in Teso, Igola Research Institute used to bring cassava cuttings and we used to have very good cassava for home and for sale. 

However, today as we speak, through the Operation Wealth Creation under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the cassava that we get in Teso is not viable. People plant and it does not germinate, yet we are talking about addressing food insecurity in the country. 

Mr Speaker, I remember last year when we addressed the issue of food insecurity on this particular Floor, the minister in charge of agriculture committed to this House that they were going to bring a food security plan for Uganda, including mapping the country and looking at which food products are viable for particular regions in order to address food insecurity. 

I would love the minister to give a brief comment on that. Thank you.

2.44
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my brothers who raised this issue and I would also like to thank the minister for responding to the issues that were raised. This was a crisis in Tororo, especially in Mirikit subcounty and parts of Mukuju – Akadot Parish – where we buried a number of people because they had eaten poisonous cassava. I am glad that the minister picked out and attempted to respond to this issue. 

However, I am concerned with the response of the minister. He said that there are 2,000 bags of cassava cuttings to be distributed to the people. If you listen, you may think these bags are many. However, if implemented, this is nothing yet in Tororo you know that most of our people depend on cassava. There is no matooke or rice but we depend on cassava and millet. Because of the long drought in Tororo, there is a high demand for cassava cuttings.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request the minister to reconsider and at least add onto the number of bags he has given. Our people died because it was a desperate attempt to survive.

My request to the minister is to increase the number of bags. I know he has the capacity to do that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to pause this here. I had already picked the member from Kioga. I will stop with him.

2.46
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, there is a type of cassava eaten in Lango, particularly in Amolatar. I do not know its name but probably, the minister knows. The minister has talked about the poisonous cassava that causes death. However, when you eat this particular type of cassava, it causes a lot of headache. At worst, you can either vomit or develop diarrhoea.

Mr Speaker, I would like to know from the minister whether this type of cassava will eventually result into death like those he has talked about. My people are suffering; they constantly eat this cassava but develop serious headache each time they eat it. I am wondering how the ministry can assist us.

In addition to that, even the variety of cassava that is supplied by Government under the Operation Wealth Creation is quick maturing but it does not last long. Once you wait for it to take a year or two, you will find rotten tubers. It is actually not meeting the purpose for which it was supplied; it does not give food security because it gets rotten. Once it matures in six months, you should consume it very fast – (Interruption)

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, my colleague, the Member of Parliament from Amolatar is raising issues surrounding the type of cassava. Where I come from, we received the cassava cuttings but when we planted it, it could not go beyond 16 months in the garden and it also rots faster after harvesting. Even when you are mingling the kalo, it does not seem to be very strong like the previous cassava we had. (Laughter). For us from the east, north and West Nile, we believe in the kalo that is strong. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is kalo?

MR OCHEN: We can call it the millet bread. Nationally, if you went to any part of the country -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the record of Parliament, please be clear.

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, once the mama is mingling, it tends to cover the entire saucepan - (Laughter) Please allow me to withdraw the word and say, when preparing this bread in a saucepan, you keep on adding the flour and it does not become thicker. It continues to swell and fill the saucepan. This is the problem we have sighted with this cassava. 

The honourable minister needs to help the people of this country by asking the scientists to do further research and find out what the problem is because it has affected most of the families.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on information, honourable member.

MR OCHEN: That is the information I wanted to give to my brother. It was necessary that that information goes to the minister. I thank you for giving me the time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is an expert opinion. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Indeed it is. I would like to thank you, honourable member, for the information.

Lastly, my people are now regretting. We had old varieties of cassava. The type of cassava we had in the 1960’s, 70’s, 80’s and 90’s was called “bao”, “ichil-ichil” and “jaribu”. 

Mr Speaker, we could have this cassava in the gardens for three, four or five years but it is no more. How can Government help us preserve the old type of cassava that we used to have against these that were supplied recently? Thank you.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Members for those very educative conclusions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please wind up quickly. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: I would like to inform Members that under Agriculture Cluster Development Project (ACDP), cassava is one of the five crops, which has been prioritised; it is going to be handled in a wider perspective under ACDP. I think it will certainly help us cover the whole country to get enough planting materials. Specifically for Tororo and Busia, this is what we came up with. However, all the same, we are going to consider increasing it.  

I would like to request Members to take interest in the new varieties of cassava that we have mentioned in this report. They are supposed to be for multiplication. The amount that comes from the breeder seed is small. When it goes for multiplication, this is when we expand. 

However, we are giving out almost the original seed from the researchers, which we would like you to monitor and ensure that it is multiplied. Next season, we shall give it to everybody. I would like to request Members to take interest. It has taken us a lot of work to come up with these varieties that I have mentioned in this paper.

Lastly, on the issues of research, we are going to request at some stage researchers to indicate the good aspects of the new varieties. 

Yes, the old varieties were long lasting but now they cannot because things have changed. They are susceptible to pests and because of this, we can no longer use them. We have to go with the new varieties, which have been tested. 

We also know that land is not elastic. It is very scarce these days. When you do planting in six months, in the eighth month, the cassava is mature and in one year, you can uproot and then dry and store it. It gives an opportunity to use the land for other things because we are now commercial. We cannot use those old styles of keeping idle land for years. 

Mr Speaker, I take the ideas and inclusion from members very seriously. We shall use them for the benefit of this country. Thank you

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have youth from Kasangati Child Development Centre, represented by hon. Robert Kyagulanyi and hon. Rosemary Seninde. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Dr Ambrosoli Primary School in Agago District represented by Prof. Ogenga Latigo and hon. Franca Akello. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Ngora Day and Boarding Primary School, represented by hon. David Abala and hon. Jacquiline Amongin. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause). Next item. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION FROM THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TO THE CONFERENCE OF THE 12TH SESSION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY UNION OF ISLAMIC COUNTRIES [PUIC] AND STATUTORY MEETINGS HELD IN BAMAKO, MALI, 23 TO 28 JANUARY, 2017

2.56
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the 12th Conference of the Parliamentary Union of Islamic Countries and Statutory Meetings held in Bamako from 23rd to 28th January, 2017.

Mr Speaker, this meeting -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are laying the report.

MR AGABA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table the report of the Conference of 12th Session of the Parliamentary Union of Islamic Countries (PUIC) and Statutory Meetings held in Bamako, Mali from 23rd to 28th January, 2017. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. Honourable members, we amended the rules to provide for time when these kinds of reports can be debated.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT ON THE 4TH ORDINARY SESSION OF THE 4TH PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT HELD IN MIDRAND, SOUTH AFRICA, 4TH TO 19TH MAY, 2017

2.57
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table a report by the Pan-African Parliament delegation to the 4th Ordinary session of the 4th Parliament of the Pan-African Parliament held in Midrand, South Africa, 4th to 19th May, 2017. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, as I guided, that report will be handled accordingly.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT ON PARTICIPATION AT THE 46TH SESSION OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE (SBSTA 46)AND THE SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION (SBI 46) AS WELL AS THE THIRD PART OF THE FIRST SESSION OF THE AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON THE PARIS AGREEMENT (APA 1.3) OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE HELD ON 7TH TO 19TH MAY, 2017 IN BONN, GERMANY

2.58
MS WINFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay at the Table a report on participation at the 46th Session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA 46)and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI 46) as well as the Third Part of the First Session of the Ad hoc Working Group on the Paris Agreement of the United Nations Convention on Climate Change that took place from 7th to 19th May, 2017, in Bonn, Germany. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, it will also be handled appropriately.

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My point of procedure arose from one of the Members’ attires today. Going by the information we have got from around Parliament and threatening words because of the discussions about the age limit, my mind and heart skipped today in Parliament when I saw the Government Chief Whip entering Parliament in army attire. 

Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker because when you look at the buttons, they are the same like those of Gen. Pecos Kuteesa? (Laughter) Therefore, are we safe procedurally? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the first place, it is not a point of procedure. If you are challenging the dressing conduct of a Member, that would be a matter of order. Secondly, if you observe carefully, the two structures of dressing are very different. (Applause) Therefore, it is not just a matter of buttons because those wearing blazers also have the same shining characteristics like the ones worn by the army. I do not know whether you also would like to say blazers are military uniforms. Please, let us get serious with business. (Applause)

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Prime Minister’s Question Time comes at 4.00p.m. according to the new rules.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 01/01/01 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

MR LUBOGO: Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the rule is you do not read the question. We just call the question, you rise to confirm you are there and then the minister will respond to the question. Thereafter, you ask a supplementary question.

Where is the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? He was in the House? We cannot have plenary discussions from the lobby. Can we deal with the next question while we wait for the minister?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, by the time a minister agrees with your office -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we will just waste time. Let us deal with the business that is there. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: However, we express displeasures as well-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, once we have come back to that and there is no response, then we will deal with it. We have business. The next question is for the Minister of Health.

Next question - 

Mr Prime Minister, this is a matter of grave concern to this House. It is part of why Members resort to raise matters of urgent public importance even when they are not urgent. The structure of the rules that allow us use parliamentary questions to deal with specific issues is to help facilitate the business of the House. 

Now, we have questions whose answers we have received but at the time of answering, the ministers opt to abscond including the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who was in the House. What do we do with this, Mr Prime Minister?

3.06
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, the Leader of Government Business agrees with your position and it is his intention to take the necessary measures to ensure that the responsible ministers are handled appropriately. Really, this embarrasses the House, Government side and definitely the ministers who are absent when they are supposed to be present.

We, of course, may need to work on improving some communications. That is why Government has appointed, for every ministry, a parliamentary liaison officer to make sure there are no excuses of ministers not getting to know the programmes or Order Paper of Parliament. 

Therefore, we join you in fighting against this absenteeism of people who should be in the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we post the Order Paper online. Therefore, nobody has to be called. As long as you have the equipment given to you by Parliament, you have access to the Order Paper.

Why should we proceed this way? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, each time questions are lined up for answer and the minister responsible does not show up, I will suspend that minister from the House. (Applause) I will. Oh yes.

A minister whose question has been listed on the Order Paper and does not show up, I will suspend that minister from today. (Applause) It is not right, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

Therefore, in the circumstances, we will have Prime Minister’s Question Time for two hours today because it was supposed to be for one hour; we do not have any other business except the Prime Minister’s Question Time. Right honourable, we are going today with you for two hours and allow the Members to ask you questions because we have no other business.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I informed you that we changed the rules.  Prime Minister’s Question Time is at 4 o’clock on Thursdays but because of the circumstances, we are starting it right now.

3.08
DR JAMES NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, between the year 2014 and 2015, the East African Institute of the Aga Khan University conducted a survey and results of which were reported in the New Vision of September 2016. The survey’s intention was to set out to understand the values, attitudes, concerns and aspirations of Uganda’s youth.

It may be worthy to note that Uganda is the most youthful country in East Africa with 80 per cent of our youth under the age of 35. Given that, is the Prime Minister aware that the reported findings do contain a very disturbing picture namely, that 56 per cent of the youth believe that it does not matter how one makes money provided they do not end up in jail. That 55 per cent of all youth admire people who earn money by hook or crook and 33 per cent believe that corruption -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question honourable member? (Laughter)

MR NSABA BUTURO: Yes, Mr Speaker. Thirty three per cent believe that corruption works. Does the Prime Minister agree, therefore, that these findings are an example of crisis of integrity in this most critical segment of our population?

Furthermore, does he agree that these findings deserve or merit consideration by Government? If he does not finally, what is the intention of Government as solutions and policy option to mitigate this disturbing situation?

3.10
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, hon. Nsaba Buturo has raised a very important issue affecting the biggest chunk of our population - the youth. If his statistical findings are correct, they are obviously of great concern to Government.

All along, I must say Government has fully realised the importance of the youth and that is why Government has concentrated its investments among the young people. This has been particularly in the field of education and health.

In fact, the explosion of the segment of the youth in our population is itself very good testimony of the successful programme of Government to improve the health of the young people, and to reduce infant and child mortality rates.

However, back to the issue of ethics and corruption being admired is a collective responsibility. We as parents, as most us are or grandparents for that matter, have a responsibility to shape, nurture and help bring up children and youth who have values and appreciate the critical values in society.

Of course, these days, our young people spend more time in schools and with their peers. Therefore, apart from families, educational institutions have a very important role to play in shaping the destiny, morals and giving emphasis to values to these young people.

Therefore, a combination of schools, parents, cultural and religious institutions need a grand coalition of parents, Government, educational, cultural and religious institutions to combine efforts to highlight to these young people the importance of values, standards and moral standing so that they can in return put them in practice.

We know there is a challenge but Government is ready to work with other segments of society that I have made reference to to ensure that young people are an asset other than being a liability for the development of our country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.13
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi County East Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Right honourable Prime Minister, the national radio Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) is still off in most areas of this country. The western channel section that has transmission sites in Hoima, Masindi, Kabale and Kisoro have been off for two years now. Even the channel that goes to the eastern called UBC Butebo has also been off in several areas there. The channel that broadcasts in Acholi for the northern region has also been limping for some time. 

When the President was in western on the land campaign, the radio was put on very shortly. When he left, it was switched off again. 

Therefore, Rt hon. Prime Minister, our people are not getting information from the national radios. What plans do you have, as Government, to work on this radio to enable our people to access information? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, information is power and I agree with hon. Twinamasiko for raising this point. It is true that UBC has had quite a number of problems and I will ask the Minister responsible for Information, ICT and Communications to come in course of next week and brief this august House on steps being taken to ensure that UBC is indeed UBC and is listened to all over the country.

MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My question is about the women entrepreneurship programme that is overdue. In this financial year, all districts in Uganda were supposed to receive the women fund money. As I talk now, some districts have received it but most of them have not received it inclusive Rakai. I wonder the criteria the Government used in selection of the districts because some have already received the money while others have not. 

This has put a lot of questions in my mind; are those districts, which are left out not important like others and were the women lied to because we passed the budget on the Floor of this House and all districts were meant to receive the money?  Why are some prioritised? Thank you, Mr Speaker.    

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the women fund like the youth fund is supposed to be a resolving fund and the money is made available to districts depending on the state of preparedness and also other administrative issues.

Therefore, I expected that Rakai would have already received its money. If it has not and some other districts may not have done, we will find out and inform this august House. This is the fund meant to boost the capacity of women to play their rightful role in the economic transformation of our country. 

3.17
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is derived from the state of health centres in Uganda. A case in point is Kiruddu Health Centre, which today, is used as a referral hospital nationally, as a wing of Mulago Hospital. I had an incidence a month ago, where residents in Makindye wanted to strike over the broken sewerage system of Kiruddu Hospital. 

The breaking of this sewerage system has led to many negative health incidences in this area because the place is now turning into sewerage itself due to the problems caused by the hospital, which lacks proper sewerage manage system. When I talked to the hospital administration -    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, would you like to ask the question, please?

MR SSEWANYANA: This is the question. When I talked to the hospital administration, they assured me that they would correct this system as soon as possible. However, it is now a month and nothing has been done about the situation and instead people have continued to suffer. 

Therefore, my question to the Prime Minister is what is the progress of correcting such a problem in my area? I have waited for your administration to correct it and they are yet to do it. Maybe, if you say something on the Floor of this House now, I will get contented and report the same to my community. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
  
DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has raised an important point concerning sewerage in a heavily congested area on Salama Road where our hospital, Kiruddu is based. I saw in the media, hon. Ssewanyana with the wanainchi trying to get the matters brought to the attention of those responsible. However, it is true that the Ministry of Health is caught with this problem and is taking the necessary measures to have a sustainable solution to this problem.

We really join you in working for a speedy solution so that we can have a normal functioning sewerage system for this new hospital.

3.21
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is that Article 4(a) in the Constitution states that “The state shall promote public awareness of this Constitution by –

    a) translating it into Ugandan languages and disseminating it as widely as possible.”

Therefore, my question is how many local languages has the Constitution been translated into since its former promulgation in 1995?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, I have not seen any significant translation of the Constitution in our local languages. I think this is where we are lacking and lagging behind. Indeed, this is a responsibility that Government is determined to ensure that it is actualised.

It has taken longer than I would have expected, but Government will embark on it. (Laughter)

3.22
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Personally, the worst corruption in Uganda, is a circumstance where Government spends money, invests and then the facility or investment is not given to the beneficiaries to use. For example, we have got a fish handling facility in Amolatar, which has taken over 10 years constructed with the taxpayers’ money and it has never been utilised because Government has never commissioned it.

Secondly, we also have a grinding mill in Amolatar constructed and well-furnished but because of some few nuts that are missing, it was under presidential pledge, it has never been handled over to the women or used. We only have about three army men who operate there illegally, making money for themselves. I believe this is the worst corruption we are doing to our country. 

Therefore, my question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is that, do you people have the data of some of these facilities? Do these investments really come from you or it is just a birth and doom project? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I have taken the advantage of sitting next to the former Minister of State for Fisheries, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. She has told me that during her tenure of office, she went to Amolatar, commissioned the facility and handed it over including the manual and other gadgets required. I think that the honourable member should work closely with Government so that we can identify the cause of the problem that is currently there but the commissioning was done. 

Nevertheless, Government will work with you to ensure that the facility is serving the purpose for which it was put up. 

3.25
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to thank you so much for including Busolwe Hospital in the renovation programme.

My concern is about referral. We all agreed in this House that Government rolls out the programme of providing ambulances in all referral hospitals. However, to date, we have not received any response from your office. May I know how far you have gone with this issue?  Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the issue of ambulances is essential for hospitals and indeed, for rescuing our patients. However, it is true that resources have been lacking to be able to actualise this.

Therefore, as soon as resources are made available, the ministry responsible for the health sector will provide the ambulances.

3.26
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We were informed that LC I elections might take place on 21 November of this year. However, we have highly contested areas like Ewang. May I know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister which districts will take control of the election for the LC Is in such areas? 

Time and again, they have promised that they will sort out the boundary issues but to no avail. They have secretly written a letter to the other districts to make the highly contested areas operate, especially under Arua so we are not happy. 

Therefore, can we know where the LC I elections will take place? Will they take place in Yumbe, Arua or Moyo?  Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I agree with my sisters that there is a contentious border situation; an area that she has made reference to. The honourable Minister for Local Government is handling the matter and we expect that a solution will be found before the LC elections. 

Therefore, for the question where the LC elections will be held, on which Gombolola or district will be clarified. The Minister for Local Government is pursuing the matter and will get a solution. 

3.28
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the question I would like to pose to you is in relation to the operationalisation of the land tribunals. The Land Act came into effect in 1998. Section 74 establishes the district land tribunals whereas section 76 provides them with the mandates on how to resolve land disputes. 

Mr Speaker, this country is facing one of the fundamental outcries with the land disputes. I would like to know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are we waiting for more 50 years to operationalise the land tribunals? What plans do you have in place to operationalise the land tribunals? 
I rest my case. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I share sentiments with the honourable member that we have not moved as quickly as we should have done to operationalise the district land tribunals. This would actually solve many of the issues that we are dealing with. Nevertheless, the Ministry of Lands is coming out with a clear policy on the functionalisation of land tribunals and we expect them to be in place in due course. 

3.30
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that we have people in the Sebei sub region, who were evicted from the national park and have never been resettled. The last time you came, you promised and actually instituted a committee led by Brig. Oluka. He started work in Bukwo and in less than a month, he had already left the region. Up to today, we are waiting for a response. We have been trying to follow up and they have been telling us that there is no facilitation. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when will the people of the Sebei sub region be resettled? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I confirm what my sister is saying. It is true that Government made land available to the displaced people in the region. Unfortunately, after people getting their pieces of land, a number of them decided to sell it and became landless again. 

It is also true that when we went to the area, we decided to set up a team under Brig. Gen. Oluka. The team is doing its work but it is true that it was delayed because of facilitation. However, they are coming up with very positive reports on how to bring a lasting solution to the displaced people in the Sebei region.  

3.32
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is that what kind of criteria is used to identify the beneficiaries of the presidential initiative on the skilling of the girl child programme? By the way, when are you introducing the programme for the boys? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I do not have information on the question that has been raised by my brother. (Laughter)

3.33
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, one of the key strategies in the policy objectives of the national policy of East African Community Integration is the provision of training facilities to Ugandan producers and the business community to increase their skills for doing business in the region. 

Mr Speaker, can the Prime Minister inform the House on the progress made towards establishing training facilities for Ugandan producers and business community? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the question of building capacity of our people to be more efficient and competitive producers in business and other areas is a high item on Government’s agenda. In fact, if you go onto different directions, arms, sections, ministries and agencies, you will find many relevant programmes and trainings assisting people in business and other technical fields to acquire skills. This is in order for the Ugandans, with confidence, to be able to be more productive, efficient and catalyse the growth and transformation of the economy. Therefore, the programme is on course in many directions and a number of ministries are involved in this programme in a coordinated manner. 

3.34
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am asking you this question and I need a very strong answer. I have read in the papers, specifically the New Vision and I have heard and watched on radio and Tv that Israel is deporting refugees to Uganda. 

Under what arrangement and policy are they doing this? Isn’t this illegal under the international law? Lastly, as a country, what preparations do we have to accommodate those people? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I believe that hon. Nambooze needed an answer and that is why she asked this question. The strength will be assessed. On a serious note, I have seen those reports and they are of concern. The Minister of Disaster Preparedness, Relief and Refugees is going to be asked to make a statement to this House so that the matter can be finally clarified. (Interjections) I expect him to make a statement in the course of next week. 

3.36
MR OTIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama North County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Through you, Mr Speaker, may I know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister how far the Government has moved to implement the parliamentary resolution to recover corporation taxes that Government had paid to some companies that include but not limited to Steel and Tubes, Aya Hotels, Quality Chemicals, Bidco and several others? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: The finance minister who is responsible for tax collections will give us a statement and, as I had said before, I expect this to be done in the course of next week. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.37
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, one of Uganda’s roadblocks to economic development and service delivery is corruption. Today, you can hardly get a Government service without a “brown envelope”. Isn’t Government threatened that if this continues, it may be a roadblock to the song of the President of “Kisanja Hakuna Muchezo” and uplifting the economy to the middle income status?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I share the view of the honourable member that corruption is a threat and a roadblock to development. I must say that Government is using all the institutions available and sometimes uses extra measures apart from the formal institutions in place, to ensure that those officials of Government and their collaborators that are involved in corruption are dealt with as quickly as possible and as you know, there have been some fairly level arrests. This time it involved His Excellency the President himself leading to ordering arrest of some people who are involved in corruption.

We, therefore, take corruption seriously and let us combine all our efforts in this House, members of the public and the media, to make sure that we converge our forces in defeating this monster of corruption.

3.39
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Lugazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Hon. Prime Minister, I thank you. We used to ask almost on a daily basis when the LC 1 elections will be. The Electoral Commission has finally released the dates. When I am traversing through my constituency now, those campaigning always put me in a corner and ask me that, “We are campaigning, but what are our benefits?  Is there any remuneration for us?” I need some clarification on this. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: I salute the honourable member for saluting Government for coming out clearly on the time table for LC elections. With regards to the benefits, the essential task in my view is service to the people. Secondly, where feasible, some small and simple ways and means of enabling LC leaders to serve the people may be found. However, the principle task is that these are patriotic Ugandans, committed to serving the people of Uganda as we advance forward in our development process.

3.41
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A number of town boards were upgraded to town councils and they were to be operational by 1 July 2017. Up to now, nothing much has been done as there is no development at all. My question is, what is the progress of town boards that were upgraded to town councils? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I have received reliable information from our sister Namuyangu, the Minister of State for Local Government. She has said that her ministry is gazetting these town boards and councils so that they become operational. The process is ongoing at the moment.

3.42
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a policy of Government to create secondary schools in every sub-county, and where it cannot create one the community adopts the schools there to become Government secondary schools. Unfortunately, in the Ministry of Education, there is very unfair and discriminatory system through which they select these schools. There are many schools that have been lying in the system over 10 years and they have never been selected, but new applicants come and jump the queue and they are selected. There are many examples – my colleagues have many schools. I have Nyakashenyi Secondary School; I have Rugarama Secondary and others. The question is, what are these schools going to do in order to be selected by Government so that they can be Government aided in such a system where the competition is not favourable?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there should be clear and transparent criterion that is used in upgrading or adopting or taking over schools as Government schools. I believe that there are there, however, the responsible ministry for education will be asked to come next week and give this clear criterion, and also give hope to some of the schools that may have been hanging around for a long time, not knowing what is happening.

3.44
MS STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, I represent the people of Kyegegwa and they have been asking me two questions that I need you to answer. One, it is about the money for UWEP (Uganda Women Entrepreneur Programme). We submitted 21 groups in last financial year but the Government released for four groups only. They are asking me when the rest will be catered for. 

The second question is about the road equipment unit. We only got two pieces and they are wondering where the rest are. They would like to know when they will be delivered by Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are only entitled to one question.

DR RUGUNDAB Mr Speaker, on the question of road equipment, it is true we have received them for the districts. However, this has been first phase, more equipment will be coming. My sister should settle and know that the whole idea is to have proper units being in place. 

Secondly, concerning the question for UWEP, I think that this is a matter that should be sorted out with the ministry responsible – that is the trade ministry. You can get the answer more directly from them.

3.46
MR MBABAALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto South County, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what plans do you have to resurrect agricultural research centres in Uganda - because when you introduced the crops supplied by Operation Wealth Creation, some regions started losing their indigenous crops in terms of life expectancy and quality? What plans do you have to resurrect regional agricultural research centres countrywide?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I do not think the honourable member is right to talk of resurrecting these research centres, they are definitely not dead. There may be need to invigorate them or to put more resources in them. 

The point about some of our indigenous species disappearing is a good point and indeed these research centres should help in the preservation of some of our useful species. Therefore, the point is well taken and these centres will be given more support. We need them in order to promote our production especially in the area of agriculture.

3.48
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that the President has made numerous pledges to different parts of the country including tarmacking the road from Kaliro to Namwewa via Saka connecting to Pallisa. 

The people of Bulamogi still believe that the President did not lie. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, don’t you think that it is appropriate for you as Government to come up with an implementation schedule on how and when these different projects are to be implemented. In addition, if you think it is right, when will it be brought before this House? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I do agree that H.E the President has made many pledges and these are indeed pledges in manifesto, others on behalf of Government; they are not lies. There may be delay in implementation, however, they will be implemented.

I do agree with your view that responsible ministries should give a tentative time table on when some of those pledges will be fulfilled especially the question of roads. As you very well know, it takes quite a bit of time to work out the process of upgrading roads including mobilisation of the resources. 

Therefore, I will ask the minister responsible for the roads, who fortunately is alert and in the House to make available the tentative road programme that she has so that colleagues can confidently be able to talk to their constituents as to when their roads may be upgraded. The Kaliro road you are talking about will be one of those whose information will be made available and whose timetable and programme the minister responsible for transport will make available.

3.50
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have observed the President on several occasions supporting youths’ associations in Kampala while neglecting under privileged youths in the rural areas of Uganda. What exact policy governs presidential donations to youths so that our youths are not left out?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the President is not ignoring or neglecting the youths in the different areas of the country. However, the President has in his own assessment seen certain problem areas where young people are doing a great deal of work but lacking certain key inputs and he has come in and provided some of those key inputs starting with Kampala.

There has to be starting areas - you cannot start all over the country just like that. Therefore, take it that Kampala is a starting area but the aim and focus at the end of the day will be the entire youth of Uganda.

3.52
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that Uganda Prisons Authority suffers a big deal when it comes to transportation of inmates. The case in point is when four prisoners died walking from Bushenyi - they were from court in January this year. Prisoners in Nebbi also walk 32 kilometres. These are just a few examples. What interventions have been put in place to ensure that there is safe transport for these inmates and then what compensation measures are there for the families who lost their loved ones in this accident? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the point made by my sister about improved transport for prisoners is a very good point. We share that view and with more resources, we would like to see clearly better and safer transport for our compatriots who are prisoners.

Secondly, the other issue of compensation, the law will be followed and they will be compensated in accordance with the laws of the land.

3.54
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I saw on 25 May 2017 on NTV that 1,200 medical workers were rushing to a job recruitment agent to get their documents cleared for them to work as doctors and nurses in Benghazi, Libya.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, medical workers are highly needed in Uganda especially in my district Amudat, which is understaffed by 75 per cent. Why does Government allow this and yet it already employs most of these medical workers? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I share the same views that we need the medical workers and many of our institutions are not adequately staffed. Of course the main reason has been the wage issue where not enough resources are available to allow 100 per cent recruitment.

Therefore, let us continue to improve our own recruitment and our capacity to pay wages for our workers so that as many of them as possible can remain working and serving the people of Uganda. 

Having said that it become almost impossible to put a roadblock and say, “You are doctor or a nurse and although you are not employed by Government, you cannot look for a job elsewhere.”

This nevertheless is a matter that the Ministry of Health should study more closely so that it can advise the Government and the country more clearly on how best to handle this matter. The point is very well taken.

3.56
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County South, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, you are the Leader of Government Business and I would like to ask you in this area. In the financial year 2015/2016, Parliament of Uganda resolved that as a country, we develop a vaccine-processing facility in the country. This country is continuing to lose millions of dollars importing vaccines into the country. How far have we gone with this issue which was budgeted for in the 2015/2016 financial year?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the point of locally-produced vaccines to serve our people and animals is very well taken. Actually, measures are in place and progress is being made. Perhaps, there may be the need to inform the responsible committee of Parliament on the progress the country is making. However, I can assure you that good progress is being made. In fact, there are already some trials in local production taking place.

3.58
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Tuberculosis has become one of the dangerous diseases that we have. On 24th March 2017, during a function to mark World Tuberculosis Day, the prisons authorities reported that in 2016 alone, a total of 296 tuberculosis cases were registered in prisons. Mr Prime Minister, what has Government done to reduce the rate of tuberculosis infection in prisons?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is right that tuberculosis is a serious problem. It not only a recent serious problem but it is a historically and globally very well-known serious problem. It is true Government is taking measures to contain this problem and one major preventive step that we are taking is vaccination of the young people against tuberculosis. However, in congested areas such as the prisons, the chances of spread increase and the prisons health services has indeed highlighted this and in the same way it has embarked on vigorous measures to ensure early detection and treatment of tuberculosis in prisons.

There is a compounding problem that has come up and that is the appearance of a strain which is multi-drug resistant tuberculosis. Fortunately, the Ministry of Health, working with the international community and the Centre for Disease Control, has now also embarked on a vigorous treatment for the multi-drug resistant tuberculosis. Therefore, we are making progress and are on top of the situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon, we have teachers from Nyakabingo Primary School in Kasese. They are represented by hon. Jackson Mbaju and hon. Winifred Kiiza. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers from Alpha Primary School in Amolatar. They are represented by hon. Anthony Okello and hon. Doreen Amule. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers from Forest View Primary School. They are represented by hon. Reuben Paul Chelimo and Hon. Evelyn Chemutai of Bukwo. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

4.02
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, I truly need a satisfactory response about the new administrative units that were created by Parliament early this year. In my own district, seven sub counties were curved out and they were supposed to have been operational in July this financial year only for us to get a response that they are still being gazetted. 

According to plans, they were supposed to start operating not just gazetting them. My people need a response to this. It is four months down the road and nothing has happened. I need a clear response that I should be able to take to my people on why the new sub counties are not operational. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my sister should know that these sub counties started on the 1st of July. Secondly, it is town councils that we were talking about being gazetted.

4.03
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Mr Speaker, mine is on Kapchorwa-Suam road. This was one of the roads identified as joining the East African countries. Now, I think money has been provided and the road has started. Mr Speaker. When you look at the road as it branches from Soroti Road, it is worked on very well up to Sironko. However, beginning from Sironko going to Kapchorwa, the work is very shoddy. There is nothing that is done. The mistake they made the other time was putting the aggregate at the basement and the road is not yet five years old before it cracked off. What they are doing now is that the engineer is just scratching the road and compressing. Nothing is added on before they reach the other side of Kapchorwa-Suam.
 
Are you are aware that the work being done is shoddy? What can Government do to see that whatever money they put on any road or activity, must be used correctly? Are you aware that when some contractors are given a contract they also subcontract and those subcontractors are the ones who do the shoddy work? What can be done to see that the Kachorwa-Suam road is done and meets value of the money that government has allocated for it? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Chekamondo for carrying out her oversight responsibilities to make sure that shoddy work is exposed and the necessary corrective measures take place. We appreciate the information and will bring this matter to the minister responsible for roads to ensure that if anything has gone wrong the culprits are dealt with and that work on the roads meet the expected and required standards. I thank you for your intervention.

4.06
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, I hope you are aware that there is a project proposal by the Government under the ministry of health to renovate Yumbe and Kayunga hospital. We have not heard anything about these projects. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to be informed when these projects will progress.
There is also an issue concerning the road from Arua via Omugo to Yumbe. I would like to know the status of this road as well. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am informed that the Minister of State for Health has now arrived in the House. She said she was somewhere in the corridors when you needed her badly. However, on this very point, I am informed by hon. Sarah Opendi that the procurement process is going on. Therefore, my brother should be rest assured that after the procurement process, the work will begin in earnest. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Prime Minister has just made a statement that I needed hon. Sarah Opendi badly –(Laughter). I am wondering whether it was because I am in the chair or for some other personal reasons. You need to clarify this. Did I really need the honourable minister badly?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is right that the Speaker should be protected. However, in the interest of the House, the Speaker and the Leader of Government Business wanted some very urgent information from the Minister of Health.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the Order Paper that demanded her presence here.

DR RUGUNDA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

4.05
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, on Sunday 10, a story appeared on the New Vison front page, to the effect that there is an agreement between the Government of Uganda and Government of Israel – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That question was already asked and responded to. Can I have the member for Ora County?

4.09
MR LAWRENCE ONEGIU (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, if Operation Wealth Creation is managed properly, it should be able to usher Uganda in the middle income status. Under that programme, we have crops that are selected to be grown including tea, in the districts of Zombo, Kisoro and Kanungu. However, in most cases, NAADS secretariat pays contractors after delivery of seedlings before establishing that the seedlings supplied are planted. Why are we using that procedure? In most cases, the demands from the farmers are not taken into consideration. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I share the view that there has been some problems in procurement and distribution of seedlings, especially for tea in some of the areas. Government has asked hon. Kasirivu, the Minister for Economic Monitoring, to superintend the improvement of seedling distribution. I must say, there have been some improvements and we expect greater improvements to yet take place so that the tea sector can grow and expand and benefit the people without these problems that the honourable member has eloquently described.

4.11
MR SAMSON LOKERIS (NRM, Dodoth County, Kaabong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that we have a problem of tsetse flies that have spread to most of the areas in Kaabong and Kotido districts. It is a threat to livestock and the people. The Government of Uganda tried to respond under a project to get acaricides to reduce the number of tsetse flies. However, the breeding centre, Kidepo wild life conservation area has failed and the animals that are moving out of the park have added more tsetse flies to livestock grazing areas. What is the Government doing to ensure that tsetse flies are eradicated in the conservation area of Kidepo?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the point is very well taken. Tsetse flies have been immense in the country not only to cows but also human beings. This is a matter that Government will work on closely with the honourable Member of Parliament and the ministries responsible for animals and health so that this epidemic can be contained as quickly as possible.

4.12
MS PROSSY AKAMPURIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about the issue of Ugandans paying rent in dollars, which we have raised on several occasions. My question is: What is the Government doing to intervene for Ugandans that are paying rent in dollars because it affects traders from the high level to low scale traders? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister responsible for Lands, Housing and Urban Development has assured me that the Bill to manage that relationship between the tenants and landlord including details of rental payments and the currencies involved is coming. This august House will be debating it soon and this will settle the matter that my sister is talking about

4.14
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, we would like to thank the Government for setting 21 November, as the election date for LC I chairpersons. However, the LC I chairpersons who did not receive their bicycles have lost hope in Government for discriminating them and yet the Constitution emphasises equal distribution of resources. Therefore, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, what message do you have for the LC I chairpersons who have served for more than fifteen years, and have been patiently waiting to receive their bicycles? Some of them are retiring and not going to contest in the forthcoming elections. What message do you have for them?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I salute the LC I chairpersons who have served the country very well for a long time. Bicycles will be coming for the chairpersons and those in place to enable them to perform their duties very well.

As for those who have served the country, the country appreciates their role. However, I would like to appeal that we should not make false promises to them because the bicycles that are coming will be for the incumbent LC I chairpersons to enable them perform their duties.

4.16
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You are aware that the multi-party political system has done us more harm than good. 

Mr Speaker, the Constitution of Uganda was made 22 years ago and considering the fact that so many changes have taken place, I believe that the very Constitution should be amended to include some issues that have come up in the last 22 years. For instance, in the development of the country, even when we went multi-party, some people are NRM during the day but FDC at night. Others are FDC during the day but NRM at night and other parties as well.

Mr Speaker, according to some the observations, we are not seeing any staunch person in support of the political party they belong to considering the activities of the people. This has hindered our development and people have been affected socially, psychologically and economically. For economic purposes, for instance, I would like to give an example of the primary elections that we go through.

Mr Prime Minister, in the amendments of the Constitution that I think are coming soon, do you have plans of amending the Constitution to include among others, going back to the Movement system? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we do not debate in anticipation. (Laughter) It is a rule you know. Are you expecting a Bill tomorrow? Ask questions on policy issues that we can discuss. 

MS EGUNYU: Mr Speaker, straightaway, I would like to ask the Prime Minister whether they have plans of taking us back to the Movement System.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the matter my sister has raised, quite a number of people talk about. However, government intends to institute a Constitutional Review Commission and the people of Uganda will be at liberty to express their views as to how they would like their country to be better governed.

4.16
MR GEORGE NSAMBA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister: Is government having a deliberate action plan to graduate people in this country that can access employment other than sporadically graduating and leaving them “To Whom It May Concern” like it is today? Many people have graduated but they do not have jobs. Is there a deliberate move by government to harmonise employment and education of the numerous Ugandans?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that there have been gaps in our education system vis-à-vis jobs but government is doing whatever is possible to ensure that the people we produce from our educational institutions are adequately skilled and prepared to take up employment – or create jobs for that matter - in our economy. Therefore, that discrepancy is being rapidly healed by reform of curriculum and establishment of courses that specifically meet our national development needs.

4.19
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, in my constituency, there was an outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease and tick infestation. As a result, the markets were closed and the people are finding difficulty in obtaining school fees and yet the term is about to begin. I wonder what plans are underway to give us drugs to cure us of this problem. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true the problem of Foot and Mouth Disease is known to affect the areas near Tanzania and some areas of the Cattle Corridor. Efforts are being made to carry out vaccinations and assist people fight against Foot and Mouth Disease. However, I would like to say that the responsible ministry, because of the importance of this subject matter, should be able to come and brief the country on measures that have been and are being taken to control Foot and Mouth Disease so that the population can be alerted and prepared to fight the disease.

4.23
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, can the government assure us on how prepared we are to handle the crisis of the forthcoming Kenyan presidential election? As we speak now, we have very many Kenyans crossing to Uganda with their property to settle here with their families. More so, you realise that currently we are hosting very many refugees from South Sudan and other countries. Can you assure us how prepared we are in case of any eventuality that may come?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Uganda does not anticipate a crisis in Kenya. On the contrary, Uganda knows there is going to be an election in Kenya after the court’s ruling. At the same time, Uganda wishes our Kenyan brothers and sisters a peaceful election. 

Secondly, East Africans are at liberty to move in East Africa. Therefore, those brothers and sisters from Kenya who have come are in East Africa and they are welcome. If, however, there was need to take extraordinary measures because of new developments that are not anticipated, government is more than prepared. 

4.25
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, can you explain the circumstances and the arrangement under which the First Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali and the Minister for Northern Uganda went with a German to Olweny Rice Scheme in Erute South and introduced him as the investor? Can you also elaborate whether the original plan of the Olweny Rice Scheme being owned by the community has changed and is now being handed over to a private investor? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Gen. Moses Ali and the Minister for Northern Uganda told me they had a visitor who wanted to see the various agriculture-related developments in the country and that is why they did this. In my view, there were no hidden schemes to either take this or that. It was really an exposure to this German guest about what Uganda was doing in the field of agriculture.

4.26
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inquire from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister how safe and secure are our road reserves. In the recent past, we have seen UNRA destroying people’s property on road reserves that had been compensated for. However, because of laxity, people had started redeveloping them. 

At the same time, I would like to find out what plans we have to gazette all the road reserves on all the networks of the roads of Uganda and make them wider so that it is cheaper in future to redevelop the roads and make them wider? Otherwise, the road reserves are very narrow and in the future, it is going to be very expensive widening these roads when people have developed in those areas. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Ssempala is right that the country is spending a lot of money because of earlier errors of getting narrow roads with little or small space for expansion. Government is considering this and the works ministry is working on this. 

In addition, government is also considering the establishment of a utility corridor for various services like power, water, ICT, and the like to be able to be accommodated in one corridor instead of each of the parastatals, ministries or agencies going separately to negotiate to pay compensation for whatever facility they may want to establish.

Therefore, there is going to be more discipline and orderliness in terms of management and expansion of road reserves and will also include a utility corridor for various utilities.

4.29
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. To the Prime Minister, my question is: I am interested in finding out how your government decided to purchase eight bulls at Shs five billion. Where are the bulls?

Lastly, related to that, if you can find Shs 5 billion to buy eight bulls, when are you finding the Shs 3 billion required to set up a water gravity scheme for the people of Kyetekera, Mpeefu and Ndaiga which the President has been pledging for the last 15 years now?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Ndugu Tinkasiimire’s question about the bulls – I am also interested in details of that information and the honourable minister responsible for animals will be able to come and tell the House what the position is. Therefore, we are all interested.

4.30
MR MOSES ADOME (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Recently – and to be exact last year, Kotido was given a municipality and this comes with a position of Member of Parliament. Right now in Kotido, there is confusion, people are already campaigning and have come up with their own roadmaps.

I would like to interest myself to give them a very appropriate answer. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is: When is the roadmap for Kotido Municipality, and probably other municipalities, coming such that elections are very well prepared for? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the matter of elections and dates are a prerogative of the Electoral Commission and I would advise those people who are vigorously campaigning to hold on until an authoritative statement from the Electoral Commission comes out. Otherwise they may burn themselves out.

4.32
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime minister, Arua Municipality was among the 10 municipalities that benefited from an urban road project funded by the World Bank. 

As soon as this project was completed the government started digging around the same road they had built in a very expensive way in order to lay sewage and water pipes along the main junctions of the road. You have recently been in West Nile where you have enjoyed the quality of this road but I am surprised that the same government is digging water pipes and sewage lines on a road where they should have done that earlier. As head of government policy, programme implementation and coordination, what is your view on this kind of workmanship?

Secondly, do you think we are getting value for money especially knowing that we are borrowing from the World Bank at a very high interest rate? It is the same donor and government doing haphazard work. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the question the colleague has raised more or less touches on the answer I had already given that government has established a committee of Cabinet to look at utility corridors on our main trunk roads. These utility corridors will include sewerage systems and other related issues.

It is true that we have suffered substantial expenditure because of uncoordinated movement in terms of development and that is why government is trying to sort out this mess so that we do not have recurrence of such wastage in future.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had agreed we would handle the Prime Minister’s Question Time in an extended away up to 5.00 p.m. because the two ministers who were supposed to have answered questions were not in the House at the time they were called. However, they are both here and I expect them to render their apologies to the House and the Speaker before we deal with those issues.

I am drawing this to a close because we have gone way beyond one and half hours which is within our Rules of Procedure.

I would like to ask the Leader of the Opposition to make some comments and the Prime Minister to wind up and then they call the minister on another item.

4.35
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Listening to questions from honourable members from all the constituencies represented here, you can conclude that there is a problem with the government in providing social services to our people, especially in the areas of health, education and roads.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to emphasise on some of the questions which were raised by members and one which to me is serious. It is about the deportees who were taken from Israel under a commercial arrangement to this country. I keep asking myself these questions: Under what arrangement did government allow these aliens on its soil, because we are already over populated? Personally, this is a serious problem and challenge; I do not think it is the minister in charge of refugees to inform this country. It should either be the President or yourself as the Leader of Government Business.

Secondly, has the government accorded citizenship to these people? Before you started this arrangement as a government; you should have come and informed this Parliament. However, we keep reading this thing in the media.

Thirdly, when are these deportees expected to leave the Ugandan soil? 

Mr Speaker, another issue is about pledges by His Excellency, the President. We have got a challenge with the issues concerning pledges. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the President promised us a district referral hospital in Rukungiri Municipality. For the last 20 years, we have been waiting for this hospital, but to date – we do not know, maybe this time as you have said, we may get this hospital.

Concerning the issue of bulls, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are the Leader of Government Business, how can you tell us on the Floor of this House that those bulls were bought by the minister and you were not informed. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you in charge? Shs 5 billion used to buy eight bulls and you are not aware, yet you are the Leader of Government Business. Tell us if you are in charge because this is a serious problem.

Lastly, it is about the status of operationalisation of the public servants’ housing loan scheme in Uganda. What is the status? This is because to me, this issue is also very important. Mr Speaker, I thank you.            

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to make a few remarks concerning what my brother hon. Mugume has said. As far as social services are concerned, if there is one single area where government has performed well, it is in terms of roads. We have also done well in the fields of schools and health services in spite of some shortcomings, but the overall trend is positive and the government should be commended for these efforts.

Secondly, the question of the deportees that were reported from Israel, it would be perfect and in order for the minister responsible for refugees to speak. He is the official spokesperson on this matter and he will be speaking for government.

Therefore, I would like to call upon those concerned to wait for the statement – (Interruption)-       

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of procedure. Is it procedurally okay for a person holding the Floor to start taking over your powers and appoint people who wish to raise points of procedure? 

However, the procedural matter I would like to raise is: We all know who a refugee is. A refugee voluntarily seeks refugee in another country. Where a person takes refuge in another country and that country picks and deports him not to his country of origin, but to a third country, is that still a person we can call a refugee and categorized as that? 

Therefore, are we procedurally moving on well, when the Leader of Government Business continues to address this issue which is similar to human trafficking by one country to Uganda as a matter of refugees? He further continues to promise that this House will be receiving a report from that minister instead of government coming to the Floor of this House to address us about a diplomatic issue that involves Israel and Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is more of clarification for the Prime Minister.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, this was a grave matter and not merely refugees. These are Israelites of Farah origin from Ethiopia. They were in Israel with their families, but they were deported to Uganda under commercial terms for Uganda to benefit in terms of arms and equipment to hold these families who are 1,400 in number and they were promised homes here.            

Mr Speaker, as a country, these cannot be taken as refugees, but a certain country is deporting its own claimed citizens into Uganda and resettling them within the country without the proper procedures, citizenship and with no arrangement as to when they would be leaving this country.

Therefore, is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister procedurally right to misinform this House that what we are talking about are refugees yet they are Israeli nationals being relocated into Uganda? Under what circumstances are foreigners being relocated in Uganda and until when? Furthermore, is there a policy that guides this resettlement of foreigners by sovereign states; one where a country decides to lodge its citizens into another country and promises them jobs in that country for staying permanently without going back.

Can the Prime Minister address this matter and citizens of this country would like to know since when have we been invaded by aliens and for how long must we keep quiet when non-Ugandans are taking over our country? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have complicated this whole thing. I do not even know what we are talking about. Is it a deportation, relocation or resettlement? This is because all of you are talking about deportation; whether Uganda can deport its own citizens and this could be a matter that needs to be examined properly; whether a country has a right to deport its own citizens? Are we using the word properly? Anyway that is a brief from the Prime Minister.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this matter is taken seriously. Nevertheless, we should be orderly in dealing with it. That is why I said next week government will come with a statement about this matter so that colleagues can discuss the matter with information from government. At the end of the discussion, we will come to a position that will help the country.       

MR SSEKIKUBO: We think you need to give guidance and direction. When are we going to have this statement, Mr Speaker? Let the Speaker put it to you - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you think I need to give guidance and yet you have just risen like that. If you need me to give guidance, you either rise on a procedural point or something like that but they do not just show up and say, “Mr Speaker, you need to give guidance.” 

Honourable, you are a senior Member of the House; so please, respect its protocol. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural point for a number of issues the Prime Minister has answered. He has pledged that a responsible minister will come to make a statement. However, he has not committed himself when this is going to happen. 

Is it procedurally right for us to continue allowing the Prime Minister who is the Leader of Government Business to hold us at ransom? For instance, I asked him about the cost of -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, today, we are using words -  

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I asked him to tell me why his government decided to purchase eight bulls at Shs 5 billion. He said he was interested in the information and the responsible minister will come and explain. When is he coming? Is he procedurally right to hold us at ransom by just taking us to a sea of the unknown? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a structural problem in the way we are handling these things. During the Prime Minister’s Question Time, I do not actually expect him to defer questions. Why? This is because we have a legislative programme pronounced by the President as part of the business of this House. We have matters that are already pending before this House, such as Bills, motions, petitions, loan requests and things like that, which are already in the order of business of this House. The Business Committee has ranked the priorities. 

I was going to say this at the end; I do not think it is right for the Prime Minister to say, “The minister will make a statement next week.” This is because that means I have to alter the business of the House and accommodate statements that were not anticipated. Nevertheless, it comes back to us. The kind of questions we ask should be policy questions that do not require any further interrogation to be brought back to the House. 

If you ask the Prime Minister factual things such as potholes on a road, he may not know them and now he is directing the responsible minister to take up the issue. The questions that should be addressed to the Prime Minister should be practical policy questions that he can deal with because he chairs and sits in Cabinet.  (Applause) 

We should not ask questions that make the Prime Minister say “The minister will respond” because this is the Prime Minister’s Question Time. Honourable Member for Rukungiri Municipality, we could benefit from listening to this. (Laughter)

If you ask the Prime Minister a question he cannot answer, that may mean that he does not know what is in government. Those of you who have seen the Prime Minister’s Question Time in other jurisdictions know that in other places, the questions are not spontaneous like these ones. They are submitted in advance and the research is provided. Thereafter, the Prime Minister comes with a dossier on all those questions and he deals with them during the Prime Minister’s Question Time. 

However, we have made our circumstances different. We refuse to submit questions in advance so we find ourselves in this situation. I will not allow the Prime Minister to defer questions to next week when I have business for next week already full. Therefore, what is going to happen is that if honourable members ask questions that cannot be answered by the Prime Minister there and then, then they will not be answered. That means the kind of questions you should ask should be real policy issues that the Prime Minister can rise and brief the House about. That is the essence of it. 

For example, the policy on deportation or relocation; what is the policy? Why is it happening the way it is happening? Then like that, he would be able to answer them. However, you ask questions that start with “Is the Prime Minister aware?” suppose he comes and says “I am not aware”, this means that the second question will not arise. 

Honourable members, we have tried to adjust our Prime Minister’s Question Time to suit our circumstances so it should really work in progress. Let us therefore do things that do not turn round and completely jeopardise the business of this House. Please, I ask of you honourable members. Please do not defer any business for next week, Rt Hon. Prime minister; you are not the business committee of this House so you cannot do that. Deal with those issues that you can deal with here and now. 

DR RUGUNDA: Let me thank the Rt Hon. Speaker for his very good guidance, which I hope will be able to bring many colleagues on board, including Ndugu Tinkasiimire. 

Now, Mr Speaker, these are my last comments on pledges on a hospital in Rukungiri which has taken 20 years. I am fairly acquainted with this matter; the people in Rukungiri disagreed on where the hospital should be and I am aware of this. They did not know whether it should be in the municipality or in Kebisoni. This took quite a bit of time to sort out and this was one of the issues –(Interruption)

MR MUGUME: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think you got that information from the former Minister of State for Health, Dr Chris Baryomunsi. That one was passed. As a district, we do not have any problem with the location now. We even wrote to the ministry informing them of where this hospital should be built. Therefore, I do not see why you are telling us this because that was some time ago. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is no problem now and if you are ready, please come. The place is called Rwamahwa in Rukungiri Municipality. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we do not have to prolong this matter because as you might know, in my service, I spent sometime in the Ministry of Health and this matter was one of the controversial issues. By the way, this decision was taken about half a year ago but it is true there was a time lag because of that disagreement. 
Concerning the question of bulls, I have already made reference to it that we should get factual information because the Prime Minister does not have the details. 

Concerning the issue of the housing scheme for civil servants, this is something that government would like to do to support them to be able to put up houses. In fact, it started some many years ago when government sold houses where civil servants were living in to the sitting tenants. Subsequently, some money was put in Housing Finance Bank, essentially to continue assisting civil servants. I am also aware that the ministry responsible for housing is working on a fresh programme to empower civil servants to be able to afford houses. So I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: In your guidance, Mr Speaker, you said “Kigwelawo” meaning “It must end today”. I did not receive a response from the Prime Minister about the Israelis re-settled in Uganda - (Applause)- since you have guided that it won’t be next week. Can the Prime Minister provide answers to the same?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime minister, that pending issue, please conclude with it.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is a matter that has appeared in the media but Government has also handled it. The minister responsible will be making a report on the matter - (Laughter)  - yes, so that Parliament and the country can better be informed about this rather unique and intriguing matter because as it has already been rightly said – (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, you guided everybody here, including the Prime Minister that the Prime Minister’s Question Time is for the Prime Minister. The questions asked here must be answered here by him. 
Is the Prime Minister here in order to go against the advice and the ruling of the Speaker by continuously referring to the responsible minister coming to make a report? Why ask the minister to come when we have to finish it here? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I listened to the Prime Minister. He gave the answer he could for now. However, he said that the matter is intriguing; it might require a statement from the minister. That does not mean that we have to wait for that statement because ministers are at liberty to address this House on any subject relating to policy, under Rule 44 of our Rules of Procedure. A minister can come any time and inform the Clerk that they have a statement to make to the House. So, they are at liberty to make such statements on the pending matters that they have heard and have not been properly clarified. Probably outside here, the Prime Minister could interest the ministers to urgently make statements pertaining to some of the things that are still in doubt. Otherwise, the Prime Minster cannot say they will make a statement next week because the House has its own business for next week, which is already full. That is my guidance on that. So, can we pause here on these matters?

DR RUGUNDA: To make us conclude this subject matter, I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I watched Aljazeera television two days ago and there was a story to the effect that the Israeli are still being brought to Uganda and in total, they intend to bring here 99,000 people. 

As we wait for the statement, I would like to get clarification about where those who were brought earlier are residing now, and two, on what the country is doing so that these people do not continue to bring other people until this House is properly informed and takes a decision about this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, did you watch Aljazeera television news? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I did not have the opportunity as my sister to watch Aljazeera television.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, at an appropriate time, this matter will be addressed properly. Let us leave it at this. Can we deal with the questions, which where deferred? I would like the minister responsible to start with an apology to the Speaker and to the House.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 01/01/01 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the hon. Kenneth Lubogo here? Now that the honourable member is not here, has he designated another Member to listen in and respond? If not, the rules are strict - a question cannot be answered in the absence of the Member that raised it, unless another Member is delegated to do so. Let us go to the next item.

QUESTION 09/01/10 TO THE MINISTER OF HEALTH

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, the honourable member who asked the
question is present. So, honourable minister, please. You don’t
have to read the question.

5.00
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): “1. What interventions does Uganda have for the management of Sickle Cell Disease? 
2. 	What capacity does the country have to implement the required interventions? 
3. 	Does Uganda have a National Policy on genetic conditions, especially the Sickle Cell Disease? 
4. 	What legislative agenda does the Ministry of Health have on Sickle Cell Disease? 
5. 	Is the Ministry of Health aware that herbalists are peddling concoctions claiming to cure Sickle Cell Disease hence fleecing people of their money? Has there been any effort to find out the safety of the herbs?”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please respond and you do not have to read the question.

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to apologise – I actually came at around 1.00 p.m. but I was called and held up in a small meeting to attend to a serious emergency. By the time I arrived, you had already called off the matter. I do sincerely apologise.

Mr Speaker, the hon. Betty Nambooze wanted to know what interventions the Government has regarding the management of the sickle cells disease. We have made a statement on the Floor of this House before, regarding this disease. As you all know, this was declared the public health emergency by both the WHO and the UN.

It is very unfortunate - I must admit that this is one of the neglected diseases in the country and it was not until 2014 when we decided to do a survey in the country to know the magnitude of the problem. Statistics indicate that about 6,000,000 people have the sickle cell traits and about 250,000 are estimated to have sickle cell disease. 

It is also estimated that between 20,000 to 25,000 babies born with the sickle cell disease do not live beyond – 70 to 80 per cent of these babies do not live beyond their 5th birth day. This, therefore, implies that sickle cell patients require special attention including regular check-ups and monitoring in health facilities. 

We have been focusing on prevention - as you all know, this disease is not curable and it is very expensive to manage. The only procedure that provides hope is the bone marrow transplant, which is very expensive and also risky. It is not available in the country; not even within the region, although we have plans to establish this service at the proposed Mulago Specialised Hospital.

We have been focusing on prevention and right from the year 2013, we began commemorating the World Sickle Cell Day that falls on the 19th of June. This is aimed at raising awareness. We have reached out to the cultural institutions because it is not easy - this is a genetic disease and once couples have identified one another, it is difficult to ask these people to separate or not to have children. That is why we focused more on prevention by reaching out to the various stakeholders, including the cultural institutions and the religious leaders.

I would also like to appreciate Parliament for participating in the last “Kabaka run.” We commemorated the World Sickle Cell Day this year at Kamuli and during these processes, we actually screened people and provided adequate information on what needs to be done when couples are found with this disease or the trait.

Other than screening, we have had the newborn Sickle Cell screening in the high burdened regions. After the survey, the findings showed that we have people living with the Sickle Cell disease or the traits in all districts of the country. 

However, the burden is highest in Northern Uganda, specifically, Acholi and Lango, Busoga, parts of Teso, Bundibugyo, Buganda and Bukedi regions, specifically Tororo and Busia.

Other than the newborn screening, which is on-going, all babies born in our health facilities, blood samples are picked and sent to the Central Public Health Laboratory and the results are sent back. 

We are also advocating for pre-marital pre-parenting Sickle Cell counselling, vaccination against Neumococo. The issue of cure and treatment is also another intervention that we have in place. 

We have over 40 Sickle Cell clinics that have been opened specifically in the high burdened areas of Uganda that I have mentioned; mid northern, northern, eastern and central regions.

The ministry is also working, in collaboration with research groups, in conducting a study on the hydroxyurea, which is a treatment that is available, and improves the quality of care for Sickle Cell patients and gives them a chance to live longer. This is ongoing and at an appropriate time, we shall definitely provide the information.

Mr Speaker, we work closely with various partners in this, aware that funding towards our interventions regarding Sickle Cell treatment has also been a challenge.

The other question the honourable member asked was what capacity the country has to implement the required interventions. In my introduction, I have highlighted that the management of the Sickle Cell disease requires a multi-sectoral approach and interventions. The ministry, working together with partners, has developed the initial capacity required for early interventions such as the National Sickle Cell Reference Laboratory that has been established at Butabika. This does the newborn Sickle Cell screening.

The laboratory has a capacity to run 600,000 tests annually and about 2,000 weekly although of course we have challenges of reagents. Because of limited funds for reagents, our capacity is now only at 25 percent.

The next question was about whether Uganda has a national policy on genetic conditions especially the Sickle Cell disease. As I indicated earlier, we did not know the magnitude of the problem but following the declaration by WHO and the UN; we actually thought the problem was in Luweero and Bundibugyo districts only. 

However, when we commissioned a nationwide survey in 2014, the results showed that the problem was bigger than we thought. Yes, we did not have a policy then but the ministry has now drafted a national policy on the Sickle Cell disease, which is undergoing consultations with the various stakeholders before it can be presented to Cabinet for approval and of course, we will bring it to the House for your information.

The honourable member asked: what legislative agenda does the ministry of health have on the sickle cell disease?

The first legislative agenda that is required is to have the compulsory premarital Sickle Cell counselling and testing, the same way it is being done for HIV. This will help reduce the new cases before couples make a decision on their marriages.

The second legislative agenda is to conduct the compulsory newborn screening for the Sickle Cell disease. This is already ongoing although there is no law in place. Therefore, Mr Speaker, we hope that after the policy, we can then move in to having this law.

The last question from the hon. Betty Nambooze was: is the ministry of health aware that herbalists are peddling concoctions claiming that they cure the sickle cell disease hence fleecing people of their money and that has there been any effort to find out the safety of the herbs?

Mr Speaker, herbalists are a major challenge faced by our entire health system and society. Our people still believe in these herbalists. We are actually aware that some of the herbalists have been providing information that they can cure Sickle Cell. We are aware of some of them - the most prominent one is in Lira but of course, the sicklers who have been going there have been testifying that they get relief when they get to use those herbs.

However, Mr Speaker, ignorance of the public about a disease gives herbalists a flourishing ground to take advantage of them. We have started massive awareness, creation and sensitisation campaign about the Sickle Cell disease bearing in mind that most of our people have been relating this disease to witchcraft. This is also another thing; we have encouraged the people to get to the health facilities, be screened and get results instead of thinking about it being witchcraft. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that we have the Indigenous and Complementary Medicines Bill, which is before the committee. We hope that the committee will prioritise this and bring it to the Floor so that we can regulate this area because it remains a grey area not only in the management of Sickle Cell - there are various herbalists - if you watch television, you see many of them advertising themselves. Our appeal to them has been to submit whatever concoction they have to the National Chemotherapeutic Research Laboratory at Wandegeya; it also majors in this area under the Ministry of Health. 

Therefore, if there are any people in your communities - we cannot rule out herbal medicine because we know it is there and it is effective in some cases but it must be tested and that is the purpose of the Bill. We hope that the Committee on Health will bring this to the House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we know the rules. The rules give the authority to the Member who raised the question to ask the supplementary question and that is where we stop.

5.13
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am aware of our Rules of Procedure but this is a matter that touches health. Most probably, the way I was touched because of getting near children who have sickle cell disease may be the very way my colleagues are touched. I hope that you will be kind enough to relax the rule for the sake of the health of our people.

Having said that, and I humbly beg so, my supplementary question is: yes, we have heard about the Kabaka’s Run - and I am so grateful to the Kabaka of Buganda for this initiative. I wonder whether Government has reached out to thank His Majesty for this kind gesture - but what about other areas? 

If we know that cultural leaders can reach out to people, why do you leave it in Buganda only? Who will run for the Basoga who you have said suffer from this same disease? How about the people in Acholi and other areas you have mentioned? Why can’t this be a policy that we request our cultural leaders to be part of this crusade?

Mr Speaker, I have been a matron, a flower girl and bridesmaid but I have never seen anywhere in church where we have been asked, advised or required the intending couple to take this test.

With now six million Ugandans with the sickle cell trait, if we do not sensitise our people about the problems that will come with somebody with a trait marrying the other, in a few years we shall have millions of Ugandans with this disease.

Lastly, you talked about the herbalists - I am happy that my brother, the hon. Pastor Peter Sematimba is here. Even the pastors in Pentecostal churches are claiming to cure this disease. Unfortunately, when they go to pray for the patients, they advise them to abandon the medicine. They tell patients that if they believe in God, they should stop taking medicine to get cured. What are you doing about that?

Mr Speaker, it is so sad that we need Shs 5 billion equivalent to five bulls to immunize our children but we cannot find Shs 5 billion as a country and the minister has said –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, ask the supplementary question.

MS NAMBOOZE: The question I am asking is: why is it that the minister addressed this matter to the Speaker and to Cabinet? In her report, she said: “I raised this matter with the Speaker of Parliament.” Yes, we do the appropriation here but the budget comes from the ministry. What is Cabinet doing about this? How can we really fail to find Shs 5 billion to immunise children against this very dangerous and painful disease? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any supplementary question from Kilak?

5.17
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate hon. Betty Nambooze for raising this very important concern. This disease is also majorly affecting my area. In Amuru District, we have very many children suffering from Sickle Cell and it is true people are ignorant. They do not know the causes and what is supposed to be done. 

The question I am raising to the minister is: you talked of vaccination. I would like to know what category of people is supposed to be vaccinated. Is it the children, the young babies or the adults? 

Secondly, I would like to find out whether Government has already started the process of vaccination. What I am seeing is that currently polio and measles vaccinators move from village to village. However, I have never heard about the Sickle Cell vaccination. Honourable minister, I would like to find out about that vaccination. Thank you.

5.18
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I would like to find out from the minister - she mentioned an issue about the bone marrow transplant but did not to tell us how much it costs. She just said it is expensive. Also she did not also bring out clearly where it is done. 

It would also be important to list the hospitals in the region that she talked about. Where exactly is Government providing these services from and what is the cost if at all it is provided at a cost?

5.18
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo): From the minister’s report, it is apparent that the Sickle Cell disease burden in Uganda is very big because she talked about six million people. I was wondering whether the minister has considered empowering the health centres under primary healthcare to get drugs for this disease.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the rules say you will respond to them in two minutes.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for raising these concerns. I want to indicate that it is the Ministry of Health that reached out to His Majesty, the Kabaka, to join us in this campaign. This is because, as I said before, Buganda is one of the regions with the highest burden of this Sickle Cell disease and that is why we felt we should start with Buganda and engage other cultural leaders later. Of course, you know that the Kabaka run attracts not only people from Buganda but other regions as well. 

However, we have not only stopped at that. We have engaged Members of Parliament. You turned up in big numbers for the breakfast meeting on the Sickle Cell to raise awareness. We gave you brochures and asked you to help us, go out and speak to people about this disease at weddings and other functions, the same way we have talked about HIV; please talk about the Sickle Cell disease.

Mr Speaker, we have also reached out to the cultural leaders in Busoga, this being one of the regions where we have this challenge. I have to inform you that the Rt. hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, is actually our Sickle Cell champion and that is why you saw that statement in that document. I indicated to you that we are in Busoga for this year’s commemoration. We have had other commemorations in Luweero and Lira where we launched that report. And of course, we have been to Bundibugyo where initially we thought had the highest burden of Sickle Cell disease because they marry even cousins. I think hon. Nambooze’s question has been answered. 

However, allow me say that we have also held a meeting with religious leaders from all denominations. This meeting was held in 2015. We did not only take them through the challenges of Sickle Cell disease but also other health challenges. We appealed to them to join us in this campaign because these are serious matters of the heart. If you reach out to couples, you will hear what they will tell you – “I have agreed to live with so and so in good and in bad…” It is a very difficult thing to separate people but maybe with time and with the religious leaders joining in, we shall be able to break that. 

Why did we raise it with the Speaker? I have already talked about that. Mr Speaker, I said it very clearly that there is no treatment for the Sickle Cell disease. The only thing we can focus on is prevention so that a person with Sickle Cell trait does not get married to another with a trait. Once they do that they will produce children who do not have this challenge. However, if two people with the trait get married, that is where challenges start. If a person with the Sickle Cell disease gets married to another, they will definitely get children with this disease. 

We are focusing on prevention. However, the hydroxorea that I talked about is still undergoing research, as I said; it is being used to improve the quality of life of these sicklers. It is not a treatment but it improves the quality of life. So, that is what is available and what we are trying to move with. I indicated that we even introduced the pneumococcal conjugate vaccines in the country in 2013. It is available and part of the vaccines that are provided to children during their first year. However, we note that some children miss out; they do not complete their vaccinations. 

Mr Speaker, regarding the bone marrow transplant, this is a service that we will soon have in the country once Mulago is up and running – the specialised facility. However, abroad the minimum cost for the service is estimated at between Shs 15 to 20 million. That does not include the air tickets and other medications. Therefore, it is not something very simple. It comes to about Shs 30 or Shs 35 million that one will require. 

Therefore, Members of Parliament, who are not yet married, please ensure you screen to know your status and that of your partner. If you have the traits and the partner you have identified has the traits, you can agree to live together but do not produce children. 

Mr Speaker, I think that is it. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I am advised that the Member who raised the first question now has someone to represent him. Please, call the first question.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Abala is standing in for hon. Kenneth Lubogo. Honourable minister, please?

QUESTION 01/01/01 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
 
5.25
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, NRM, Ngora): “Government has been channelling funds to partnering banks for credit to support the agriculture sector/farmers.

    (1) Which banks does Government partner with for the disbursement of agricultural loans?
    (1) How much money has so far been disbursed for this purpose?
    (2) Which category of farmers qualify for the loans?”

5.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to apologise because by the time this question was called, I had stepped out to handle something. I apologise.

The first question which hon. Kenneth Lubogo asked was: which banks does Government partner with for the disbursement of agricultural facility loans? 

Mr Speaker, currently, there are 15 commercial banks that the Government of Uganda is partnering with to disburse the agricultural loans and these include: Stanbic Bank Ltd, DFCU Bank, Post Bank Ltd, Uganda Development Bank Ltd, Bank of Baroda, Centenary Bank, Bank of Africa, Housing Finance Bank, Kenya Commercial Bank, Tropical Bank, Opportunity Bank Ltd, Diamond Trust Bank, Barclays Bank, Standard Chartered Bank and Orient Bank.

The second question was: how much money has so far been disbursed for this purpose? Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda has to date remitted to the Central Bank Shs 119.07 billion, to cover the disbursement and commitments made since the inception of the programme. We had expected to raise Shs 240 billion, as at 30 June 2017, but that didn’t come to pass, leaving us a shortfall of Shs 120 billion.

Mr Speaker, so far, 426 loan applications amounting to Shs 336.91 billion have been received by the Bank of Uganda. Out of that, we have been able to finance applications amounting to Shs 119 billion, as I indicated above.

The last question was: which categories of farmers qualify for the loans?

Mr Speaker, agriculture is the backbone of Uganda’s economy. Therefore, all farmers’ activities along the value chain, whether large, medium or small scale are eligible for this agriculture facility. 

There are 330 projects across the country that have benefited from the scheme with key investment areas being Agro-processing, machinery, tractors, farm equipment, irrigation equipment, green house facilities, farm expansion and modernisation, poultry and related activities  including piggery and storage facilities. 

We hope to continue increasing these facilities and expanding the line of credit in order to lift those who qualify for this facility, so that we can have an impact in the agricultural sector. That is what I can answer, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. It is straight forward and to the point. Do you have supplementary questions? The supplementary question must relate to the answer. 

5.30
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much. I would like to thank the minister for the responses to the questions presented to him. I have basically two questions. 

Mr Speaker, the minister has talked about Shs 119.07 billion that has been disbursed to the banks to give out to the farmers. However, it appears this money is benefiting purely the commercial not the subsistence framers. Therefore, honourable minister, what strategy do you have to ensure the very poor also benefit from these loans?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just ask, what categories of farmers have been given this money?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as I said, the loan facility is open to all farmers along the value chain. However, it is true that those that have been engaged in commercial farming have had more interest in this facility. As Government, we shall continue to sensitise the farmers that this facility is available for all those who want to improve their business activities, especially in the agricultural sector.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this brings us to the close of today’s business. In the gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Moyak Bright Primary School, represented by hon. Mangusho Lawrence and hon. Lydia Chekwel, from Kween District. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are very welcome. 

Honourable members, thank you very much. This House is now adjourned to Tuesday 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.34 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 September 2107 at 2.00 p.m.)
