Wednesday, 11 September 2013

Parliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this morning’s special sitting, which we informed you about yesterday. We are here to pay tribute to a former Member of this House and former Member of the Constituent Assembly, hon. Fiona Lucy Egunyu. 

(Entrance of the late hon. Fiona Lucy Egunyu)

National Anthem (One Verse)

East African Community Anthem (One Verse)

Laying of wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY  TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. EGUNYU ASEMO LUCY FIONA, FORMER MP NGORA COUNTY, KUMI DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, just before I invite the Prime Minister to move the motion, I want to inform the House that we have a message of condolence and tribute from the NRM Parliamentary Caucus, from the Government Chief Whip. She acknowledges the contribution of hon. Egunyu in the constitutional development of Uganda as a staff of the Constitutional Commission; later as a Constituent Assembly delegate; and then her immense contribution in the Sixth Parliament where she represented Ngora County. 

We also have a message from hon. Jessica Alupo, Minister for Education. “On behalf of the entire staff of the Ministry of Education and Sports and on my own behalf, I convey our heartfelt sympathy and condolence to the Speaker, Members of Parliament, Members of the NRM, the people of Ngora and the entire nation for losing such a committed and hardworking person.” 

We also have a message from the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly, Rt. hon. Margaret Zziwa who says, “We recall hon. Egunyu as a brilliant legislator, a competent legal mind who was always full of passion, commitment and energy to serve her people of Ngora and Teso sub-region, the women and Uganda at large. She stood out loud and tall in promoting peaceful means to resolve the conflict even when it called for her to review her political party leaning. We salute her endeavours which eventually resulted in the peace now enjoyed in the sub-region. May her soul rest in peace. Rt Hon. Nantongo Zziwa.”

We also have a message from hon. Lydia Wanyoto expressing her shock and pain. We have another message from flight captain, hon. George Mike Mukula, who is equally distressed by the death of the great person. “The nation will miss her great services, team work, commitment, legal zeal. She remained a patriot, a nationalist and a great Pan-Africanist.” Thank you very much.

12.37
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Fiona Lucy Egunyu, moved under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with deep sorrow the sad news of the demise of hon. Fiona Lucy Egunyu which occurred on Sunday, 8 September 2013 at Kitante Medical Centre;

NOTING that the late hon. Fiona Lucy Egunyu was born on 7 February 1963 and held a Bachelor’s Degree in Law from Makerere University;

AWARE that the late hon. Fiona Lucy Egunyu has since 1996 been involved in active politics in which she exhibited a high level of patriotism;

RECOGNISING that the late hon. Fiona Lucy Egunyu was a Member of Parliament for Ngora County in the Sixth Parliament, former Constituent Assembly Member and has also been a Senior Presidential Advisor on Legal Affairs at the time of her demise, which position she served meticulously;

APPRECIATING that the late Fiona Lucy Egunyu was an intelligent and hardworking person who, because of the love and passion she had for her country, served it passionately and diligently;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:
    1. That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends and in-laws upon the loss of hon. Fiona Lucy Egunyu.
    2. That it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late hon. Fiona Egunyu to the country.”

Moved by me, hon. Moses Ali.

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded by the Leader of the Opposition.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Justification, Madam Speaker. The late Fiona Lucy Egunyu was born on 27 February 1963 to Francis Egunyu and Genevieve Egunyu in Omitto-Agule Village, Kapir Sub-county in Kumi District.

She attended Madera Girls Primary School and later proceeded to Namagunga Girls School for her O and A’levels. She then joined Makerere University where she pursued a law degree.

The late Fiona Lucy Egunyu was between 1994 and 1995 a member of the Uganda Constituency Assembly that debated and promulgated the new Constitution of Uganda in 1995. At the time she was representing the people of Ngora County in the august House.  It was during this time in the women’s caucus that she ensured constitutional protection for women, children and families. These constitutional activities built on earlier work done between 1990 and 1992 when the late hon. Egunyu was a legal research assistant on the child law review committee which looked into codifying various customary legal practices for what became the 1996 Children’s Statute and later an Act.

As well, in 1992, she was a research assistant for the Uganda Constitutional Commission whose work focussed on political, legal, social and cultural rights and issues of governance. The research conducted by the Child Law Review Committee and the Constitution Commission among others was compiled into the draft constitution.  

The late hon. Egunyu, while serving in Parliament, was a member of various committees including on rules, privileges and discipline; legal and parliamentary affairs, appointments and the presidential and foreign affairs committees. This House must also not forget that she was an active member of the women’s caucus in Parliament.

The late Egunyu also served her people of Ngora in the Sixth Parliament although she could not make it to the Seventh Parliament. The late Egunyu had extensive experience in human rights advocacy, rural mobilisation, gender and development legislation and building of bilateral and multilateral relations. It is on this premise that she did not take long to catch the eye of his Excellency the President who later appointed her as a senior presidential advisor on legal matters, a position she held until her death. 

Having a rich experience in human rights advocacy led her to forming Oya rural development association which works on issues such as peace and conflict resolution, gender and child welfare advocacy, microcredit in rural areas and development projects in areas of education and social welfare.

The late hon. Egunyu has represented the Parliament of Uganda in a number of international fora. October 1999, she represented the Ugandan Parliament in the Inter-Parliamentary Union in Berlin. In November 1999, she was part of a delegation to the United States and Canada to discuss gender, human and political activities. In recognition of her commitment to gender equity and human rights, she was granted honorary citizenship in Jepherson County Kentucky, United States.

As Government, we are indeed saddened by the death of hon. Egunyu who has till her demise been serving as presidential advisor in legal affairs. I wish to extend my sincere heartfelt condolences to the family of the deceased, the people of Ngora and the country at large. May God rest the soul of the deceased in eternal peace. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Before I invite the Leader of the Opposition, I want the hon. Baguma Isoke, former MP for Buyanja, he worked with hon. Egunyu in the Sixth Parliament and also the Constituency Assembly.

Also join me in welcoming the children and teachers of Gulu Police Primary School represented by hon. Jacob Oulanyah and hon. Betty Aol.

12.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I stand here to second a motion which was moved by the Second Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Ali, for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Fiona Lucy Egunyu Asemo today. On behalf of the entire Opposition and on my own behalf, we sincerely send our condolences to the family, friends and relatives of the late hon. Fiona Egunyu for the loss of your beloved one.

The short life of the late Fiona should be an example to all of us, although she has passed on at a young stage, she accomplished a lot of things that has positively changed the lives of many Ugandans. This implies that one does not need to live 101 years to make this world a better place to live in.

The late Fiona was a good lawyer who was passionate about human rights. In October 1999, she represented the Ugandan Parliament in the IPU in Berlin USA and Canada to discuss issues on human rights and political activities in Uganda. This led to a lot of changes in how human rights are handled in Uganda.

Hon. Fiona walked the talk while she represented Ngora County; she achieved a lot for the women not only in Ngora but in other parts of the country. She introduced rural women to micro credit union and development projects in areas of education, social welfare, which lifted the status in her area and other parts of the country. She was a founder of Oya Rural Development Association which works on issues of peace and conflict resolution, gender and a child welfare advocacy.

As a member of the Constituency Assembly, the late Fiona advocated so much for the constitutional protection of women and children. She ensured that all the vulnerable in our society are protected by the Constitution. She worked so hard to put up the right law that is the 1995 Constitution, which over time, has been changed to suit certain people’s interest.

She fought for multiparty politics and if you remember, she was a secretary on the caucus on democracy which was chaired by the late Prof. Nabudere. She belonged to the group of positive thinking minds.

In the Sixth Parliament, the late Fiona was instrumental in the formation of Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) and then the Young Parliamentary Association (YPA) which opened the minds of many people to advocate for multiparty politics. She foresaw that one party system could not take Uganda anywhere; Uganda needed the ideas of everybody. 

It is a well-known fact that the late never said yes when she meant no; she would never accept to compromise or sell her conscience. These days, when there is a controversial issue on the Floor of the House, people change their minds as soon they are summoned to State House. The late Fiona’s no was a no and she believed in what she said. That was her legacy; of course that is a challenge she is leaving for us today as the current members of Parliament. Are we able to protect our integrity and the integrity of this House? Can we stand the challenges of being intimated by the powers that be, can we stand up and challenge the current blame game where the President comes late only to tell the public that the road is bad because they voted badly - for instance, voted a Member of Parliament who is not of his party or does not toe the line? Does Uganda belong to a section of people and not others?

Of course, you can also imagine a whole President making a donation from taxpayers’ money and claiming it is his personal donation. This is Ugandans’ money not President Museveni’s property and I am sure hon. Fiona Egunyu would not accept this – [HON. MEMBER: “She was his legal advisor.”] - on donations?

Hon. Egunyu has left behind children who are the assets but she has liabilities and one of the big liabilities is a big mortgage on the house she was had. She has been serving this government with all her energy. We believe and we think that a good government will look after its citizens whether alive or dead. 

We are asking the government to settle this mortgage so that these children –(Applause) - in fact using our taxpayers’ money and that one, we shall approve in Parliament –(Applause)- so that she is able to settle this bill. And this is a serious matter, by the way, because if the President is donating, at an appropriate time, we are going to investigate the source of those donations. So we need the government to settle this mortgage so that these children are not on the streets and the family is not made destitute.

This is why I want to call upon all members of Parliament and fellow citizens to defend our Constitution. Stand for the rights of the people you represent, hon. Members. Poverty is killing our people while a few privileged are enriching themselves. Stand up for the values of our Constitution, which the late Egunyu was passionate about.

However, all hope is not lost; we know that God will give us the zeal, energy and strength to protect mother Uganda based on the core values of our Constitution. 

Hon. Fiona Egunyu, as you go, we want to assure you that the seeds you sowed will not go in vain. We will continue to fight until all Ugandans have a better place to live.

“A great soul serves everyone all the time.  A great soul never dies. It brings us together again and again,” says Maya Angelou. 

I want to ask God to strengthen the family. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, the Leader of the Opposition. Hon. Members, again a number of friends of the late Egunyu who served with her are in the Gallery. Hon. Onapito who was MP for Amuria at that time; he has come to witness the proceedings. (Applause) Hon. Bernard Mulengani was also with her. Hon. Wanyoto is there and we have already read her message.

Hon. Members, although this is a solemn occasion, we only have one hour in which to pay tribute. So, I will only give Members two minutes because we must close this sitting at 2 p.m. in order to adjourn for the ordinary sitting – now that is lobbying. (Laughter) Hon. Ekanya, hon. Baba Diri, hon. Kiwanda and then UWOPA - two minutes. Let us start with those four first.

12.58
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. To the family of the late Fiona Egunyu, to all the people of Uganda, Madam Speaker and colleagues, two minutes may not be enough but we have to accept that time is limited just like how life is limited. We are visitors to this earth and when the clock ticks, it closes.

Colleagues, I was with the late in the Sixth Parliament and you can read her contribution from the Hansard. But we are all going to pass away and our time will come. The question that we should always ask ourselves is how do we use our life in a positive manner that the generations after us will not incur the cost and the burden and how do they reflect on that contribution of ours?

I have said, every time we are paying tribute to our colleagues here that the population in this country is increasing and the land size is not expanding. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to request that you direct the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to come up with a Bill to establish a memorial site for this country so that all the good things that are said when we pass away can be read and reflected upon by our great grandchildren. That will put in the minds of those who are living to live a better and positive life because the generation after us will have to know whether we have made good contributions or we have transferred costs to them.

Around the world and even in the villages, people are excavating graves. I do not want to see graves of great leaders like hon. Egunyu being excavated. We should have memorials in the districts and cities and with records that can be read and recited by generations to come. This is a very serious matter that this Parliament should do so that other children, instead of coming here, can read in their schools so that leaders can be behave in a manner knowing that if they do bad things, that will transfer to their children. 

Hon. Egunyu, now the late, did wonderful things  (Member timed out.)  

1.03
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise with great sorrow to pay tribute to our beloved sister, hon. Fiona Lucy Egunyu.

I first met hon. Egunyu in the Sixth Parliament and she was a very young, vibrant and intelligent lady. I remember that when she used to contribute – that time, we were still new comers, I used to admire her debate. She was talking with information and very eloquently. She was ranked among the best speakers in Parliament at that time. She really contributed a lot in the times of women working together to see that our issues of women are put in our law. 

Also bear in mind that she was one of the architects of the Constitution, she talked with information and also quoted the Constitution. So, this is the kind of lady we have lost today.

When hon. Egunyu did not come back in the Seventh Parliament, her sister is the one who took up and up to now, the sister is around and she is a minister. That shows that the family of hon. Fiona Egunyu is very intelligent and they have contributed a lot to the development of this nation.

When she left Parliament, she did not abandon the work of politics. She continued to mobilise and I am happy to tell you that she started in maybe a different party but she has ended up as NRM. She saw the importance and how good NRM is and that is why she mobilised seriously for NRM in her constituency. It is her work for the NRM – (Member timed out.)

1.06
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was not in the Sixth Parliament where hon. Egunyu served but I was in the Seventh Parliament. While in the Seventh Parliament, hon. Egunyu contested for the East African Legislative Assembly and she lost. But I came to know hon. Egunyu as a very eloquent person and a lawyer. When I read about what she contributed in the House, I saw a very powerful lady. 

It was very difficult, especially in the Sixth Parliament for a lady to represent a constituency but hon. Egunyu represented Ngora County not on affirmative action but as a constituency, which should have been represented by men. She stood with men and defeated them and that shows a very courageous person and it really teaches a lot to our girl child.

Today, while viewing her submissions in the House, she stood near the late Nobert Mayombo and near the late Bernadette Bigirwa and all these were young people and all these people are dead. What is this? The short life span of the politician! When I looked at Nobert Mao, I saw – 

THE SPEAKER: Is it Noble Mayombo?

MR KIWANDA: Yes. Norbert Mao is still alive and I wish him long life. I meant Noble Mayombo. Madam Speaker, we were with other colleagues, so we discussed the life span of the politician. At age 40, 46 or 50, we are going and something has to be done.

I also want to urge the government especially on the mortgage of the house that the Leader of the Opposition has talked about –(Member timed out.)

1.07
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is very unfortunate that again we are here faced with the demise of our colleague and I want to express to the family, the people of Teso and Uganda at large our deepest and most sincere condolences upon the loss of another gallant Ugandan.

The late Egunyu was a very loud sounding household name in Teso but we can see she is gone. If you follow the contributions, there are contributions that show she was patriotic and whenever she talked, she talked for her people and not for her selfish interests and she used to make trade-offs for the good of this country and this is what I urge all of us to do. Let us not look at our egos, let us not look at our parties but let us think and work towards the good of our people. Parties can come and go but our people’s welfare must be a permanent mind-set within us and with that, I want to say, may her soul rest in eternal peace. 

Hon. Egunyu, thank you for what you did for Uganda and may we emulate you. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

1.11
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to extend my condolences to the family of the late hon. Fiona Lucy Egunyu and to Government and to the people of Teso and indeed to this country. I was not a member of the Sixth Parliament but as a student leader, I used to attend this House in the Strangers’ Gallery and at the time she was a member of this House, she is one of those young women that those of us who were aspiring to join politics looked up to. Like hon. Kiwanda said, together with the late Bernadette Bigirwa, the likes of hon. Winnie Byanyima and many others, we looked up to them but I admired her persuasive argument in this debate and I got the opportunity in 2000, after I had become a youth leader and therefore left Makerere, to interact with her at close range and indeed, we worked together. 

She was a member of the National Task Force of the 2001 elections and together with the late Noble Mayombo, she led a few of us that were supposed to campaign and indeed later, she contributed to many of us coming to this House as young people in youth elections and that is the time when I admired her courage and her passion. Whenever hon. Egunyu was up to something, she would do it very passionately and would really do it with speed and courage and was never deterred by anything. 

I regard her as an astute lawyer and politician and there is a lot that we ought to learn from her and I want to thank Government that even when she lost her bid to come back to Parliament, she kept active in politics –(Member timed out.) 

1.13
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Buvuma, I wish to send my condolences to the friends, relatives and my in-laws. The late hon. Egunyu is my in-law. We have been interacting for some good time but I have a lot of lessons that I learnt from her. 

First of all, as we have seen, she has been a peace maker. I want to give an example. She advocated in the CA for the disarmament of the Karimojongs. Karamoja has been a place that has been very insecure and this led to cattle rustling that had extended to Teso. I wish to tell this august House that if such resolutions were not made at the time because of the power of the gun, and had the Karimojong not been disarmed, the whole of this place would have been raided and the country would not be peaceful. 

I also want to tell this House that from my interaction with her, she has been a real politician who is not a hypocrite. Some politicians are hypocrites. Yes, they are very cosmetic but this is a lady who stood by what she said. I want to give an example; in those days when she came to the Sixth Parliament, it was not easy for the NRM to win votes in the East. My in-laws here can bear me witness but she stood firm and she told the people the importance of the ruling government, the importance of the NRM party; that is why so many people were converted to the NRM party and according to what has been said, she has been a front NRM cadre – (Member timed out.)

1.16
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to send my condolences to the family of the late Fiona Egunyu and to state that the late Egunyu was a name that if you were in the women empowerment crusade, you would not easily come across because as a woman, most of us seated here have had to break barriers. She had to break several barriers; she stood where she was not married to and for women seated here, you know the difficulties. When you are married, they will tell you to go and stand where you are married and not where you were born. But even then, she stood in a constituency where she was born and she broke that barrier. It is one of the vital barriers in women politics and participation that is very necessary for women coming up. And I am sure that in Teso, if any other woman comes up to stand where she is not married, she will not have to bear a lot of burden like she had to – she has already laid the field. 

I think she did mentorship – to see her young sister seated with us here. I think she saw what Fiona did and she admired it. I am certain that Fiona mentored her and she mentored most of us. At that time, I was at university with hon. Namayanja and we wanted to join politics. But we would listen to people like Fiona Egunyu – that was a household name, Matembe, Winnie Byanyima – and we would say, “Certainly, we have to join this group of women.” And now we are here; that is the legacy she has left behind. (Member timed out.)

1.18
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to send my condolences to the old woman and to the entire Egunyu family and pray that the good Lord will give them courage to bear the loss of our dear sister, Fiona. 

Fiona represented the people of Teso at a time when Teso was going through extreme hardship – the insurgency, the post-war issues, the poverty – and Fiona never at one time let down the people of Teso. She spoke for us and defended us; she was passionate and loved Teso. She also loved this country. For those and many more reasons, we, as the people of Teso, will certainly miss Fiona. 

I would like to implore the leaders of this country – whether you sit there or this side in the Opposition, dare be courageous for your people because that is the only legacy you will leave – how did you defend them in their time of need? I pray that the good Lord will comfort the family. Thank you.

1.20
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to the late Fiona Egunyu in my capacity as the member of Parliament for Rubaga South and the leader of the Conservative Party. Fiona Egunyu was a unique character. Those of you, who may have heard the story of the Sixth Parliament, will recall how great Fiona Egunyu was. The little I knew about Egunyu was that she was a principled person; she was a woman of character who was passionate and joyous. She was a debater of substance and she rarely lost. She was also a mobiliser of excellence. She was a very accommodative person unlike many a politician I have seen, especially in the NRM. And because of that accommodative spirit, I came to like her. 

We came to know each other in the Sixth Parliament in 1998 when I broke the bonds of pronouncing a reality over what had happened politically between the DRC and Uganda. At that time, one of the judges in the Constitutional Court had lied here before Parliament that the UPDF had never gone to Congo. I did my research and broke the record by pronouncing what had happened. I put it to Members that the UPDF had penetrated into the Congo up to 1,000 kilometres inside Congo. And Fiona Egunyu jumped and embraced me and said, “You are great.” (Laughter) So I would like to pay tribute to Fiona Egunyu because of her heroism.

Finally, one of the greatest writers about the concept of death is John Milton – (Member timed out.)

1.21
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people of Teso have lost a great lady in the name of Fiona. And for those who may not know, the name “Fiona” means “fair”. So it is not a surprise that in her judgment, Lady Fiona Egunyu was a fair lady. To us as the people of Teso, she was a great person; she was the first woman to stand in a constituency in the Teso sub-region. At the age of 33, she was able to break that barrier and up to now, there are many yet to follow in her footsteps.

Madam Speaker, she advocated for peace and security in Teso, especially at that time when she and the likes of hon. Onapito, hon. Mike Mukula, hon. Jeje Odongo and the hon. Aporu, did whatever they could to enable us have the peace we are enjoying today. At that time, those were the young leaders and Teso was emerging out of the war that had ravaged the area. We thank the late hon. Fiona Egunyu for that.

When I listened to a recording of her today, I heard her commenting on the Kibwetere incident that occurred in Kanungu. She was asking when the report would come out. Up to today, we do not know what the Police and the government are doing because the people want to know what exactly happened and where those of Kibwetere are.

Hon. Kiwanda here said that hon. Egunyu lost the race for the EALA seat; she did not lose. To know the true character of our sister, she stepped down for Lydia Wanyoto. That was her and that was the kind of leader we had in Teso. So I thank Parliament for having accorded her a befitting send-off. 

I also thank the President and the government for their contribution to the family. I ask you to continue supporting the family, especially on the issue of the mortgage that has been mentioned here so that the two children who have been left behind will have a decent home. May her soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before I invite hon. Wadri, in the Gallery, we have the guild council of Bukalasa Agricultural College, Luweero, represented by hon. Khiddu Makubuya and hon. Nabukenya. You are welcome. (Applause)

1.24
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to pay tribute to a long-time friend, the late Fiona Egunyu Asemo, who I got to know in 1990 to 1991 when we were working together in the same office under Child Law Review Committee under the chairmanship of the late Saulo Musoke. The late Fiona was such a determined person that any assignment given to her in her capacity as a research assistant in charge of legal issues was work that you were sure that at the end of the day would be delivered. She was a determined person to the extent that we used to use our common office as a forum for discussing politics. At that time, the late Fiona was a staunch and ardent member of UPC while I was a DP follower. And we laid a strategy of entering into politics.

However, she ran faster than I and left me behind to the extent that when we appeared before the sessional committee to defend proposals which culminated into the Children’s Statute of 1996 under the then chairmanship of hon. Bwanika Bbaale - I remember hon. Bwanika making a remark that “It seems the two of you want to cause trouble to some of our colleagues in this House.” But we told him that we were only playing our noble role but if he had identified a talent in her, we would end up there. And indeed hon. Fiona Asemo left me behind and she jumped the queue as it were and she came to Parliament. 

When I met her here, I said, “My sister, you have left me; how is it on that side. I am still marking time but I will join you shortly.” However, when we came to the Seventh Parliament, where I hoped that I would once again work with her, it was unfortunate that she did not make it. (Member timed out.) 

1.26
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I knew hon. Fiona Egunyu when she was still professing my party, Uganda People’s Congress. I was an ardent admirer of the way she spoke; the way she debated and the way she expounded the profession that I also profess, that is the law. She was a seasoned lawyer; honest when discussing with anybody. That is what I know about her as a professional and also as a legislator. 

But, we are now talking about the passage of life and this brings me to remember what I was given as an answer about life. I asked somebody “What is life?” he told me, “Life is a bowel of wormwood which one sips once at a time world without end”. That means, life is a difficult terrain; there are ups and downs. There was this pain, of this man, Julius Caesar that, “The good that man does is oft interred within his bones, but the bad things that he does life long after him.”

In the case of hon. Egunyu, we are glad to know that even after her death, people are pouring a lot of good things about her, to repeat what one of us has said, let us live lives that will not be regretted by our posterity. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Government of Uganda, particularly H.E the President of Uganda for according an exceptional pass on – this kind of opportunity for us to come and thank her publicly. 

As a neighbour, I come from Lango, she comes from Teso, we are in solidarity; we have all the time been doing our politics together. I hope that one time we shall get leaders like Egunyu who will bring us together –(Member timed out.)

1.29
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kumi, I wish to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family of the late Fiona Egunyu, upon the demise of this gallant soldier of this land. 

I knew Fiona Egunyu, my sister, who lies before us today, as an intelligent lawyer; a uniting factor; an advocate for the less privileged and a nationalist. Because we are constrained by time, I would like to say a few things about her contribution during the Constituency Assembly. 

I admired Fiona and aspired to go to the CA myself, but I was not able to make it. Ahead of the elections, Mzee Akabwai, who was the Electoral Commission chief at that time brought us to a room and asked us to speak to what we intended to do in the CA. In Fiona Egunyu, I saw an articulate young politician. She went all the way to the CA. 

The people of Teso will remember the late Fiona Egunyu for standing firm on the position of land and the rights that we enjoy today – and that is one thing that we will never forget about her. The second contribution that she made was to stand firm on the issue of term limits. I see some of you confessing that you made a mistake to remove term-limits. Fiona Egunyu stood firm on having term limits. Some of the problems we are facing today are precisely caused by the mistakes that were done in the Seventh Parliament – (Member timed out.)

1.31
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to pay tribute to our late sister Fiona Egunyu and may I take this opportunity to extend my condolences to the family of the late Fiona. 

Fiona was one of the few legal minds in the Sixth Parliament. And indeed as alluded to by some honourable members here, Egunyu was a very brilliant lawyer. She was a principled person and she always debated issues in the interest of this country, notwithstanding the issues of Ngora County at that time, the country she represented. She always took into account the interest of this country, especially, on issues of equal opportunities. This made her one of the founding members of UWOPA. She championed the issue of women rights on the Floor of the House and even outside Parliament. 

One of the few things for which Fiona will be remembered for was her love for her culture. She loved the Ateso culture because she was Ateso. And whenever she spoke to people, she made sure that she was an Ateso above all other interests. 

The late hon. Egunyu was a person who was interested in emancipation of women. She was one of the Members who made sure that micro-credit financing schemes are put in place especially for women – (Member timed out.)

1.33
MR MIKE MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, before us lies a gallant daughter of Uganda; a great debater – she was a consummate legislator. Madam Egunyu was the fire brand in the Constituency Assembly; a lady of great courage; a great patriot; a nationalist and a Pan-Africanist. 

In the African continents and globally, the representation of women in Parliament is still very low. Rwanda still ranks as the leading country in the world – Uganda is number 21 globally. But she was one of the people who championed the cause of women emancipation and the ability to have women representation in the House of Parliament of Uganda. She was a great leader. 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the people of Ngora for having elected her and given her the opportunity to serve Uganda and to serve her constituency. May I take the opportunity to say that I thank His Excellency the President for having accorded her this descent send off and given her an official burial. 

The support that has been extended to the family is overwhelming. I want to thank the doctors; the family members and the children who were able to protect and look after her during this difficult time. 

As the chairman of the burial committee, I would like to assure you, Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, that the burial arrangements are getting on very well and I want to thank all who are participating in making sure that all these arrangements take place in an orderly manner. Thank you very much. 

1.36
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I bring condolences to the family, the people of Ngora and Uganda at large from Bujenje constituency in Masindi district. 

As I pay tribute to a gallant daughter of Uganda, I had the opportunity to serve with hon. Fiona Egunyu in the Sixth Parliament and she is among those who inspired me because at that time, I was the Woman MP for Masindi District. She did inspire me to leave the district and contest at a constituency level and I have never looked back.

These days, people tend to criticise women who contest at district level saying that they should contest once and move on to the constituency. I beg to differ. When we were coordinating and networking with Fiona, it was not easy for women to break through and contest at the constituency level. My advice has always been, and still is, to my colleagues, the Women Members of Parliament who represent districts, that if you find that there is an opportunity for you to come through at constituency level, go for it. If there is no opportunity, we should not leave out these women who have built capacity by participating in Parliament. Stay put and contest at the district level.

Fiona was very passionate about Ngora, the people of Ngora and the people of Teso. You remember there was still insurgency in that area but she did contribute and worked so hard especially - (Member timed out.)

1.39
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I convey the condolences of the people of Kigulu South constituency to the family, the country and this House upon the demise and loss of our sister Fiona. This morning, I put off time to listen and watch the monitor that was casting the contributions of hon. Egunyu. One thing I saw in her was that she always did her research. Her contributions were always researched and I thought this would be a lesson to most of the Members. 

There are those who struggle to contribute on a particular matter because they are ignorant of the matter. One of the causes of this is the score card and news publications that are compelling Members to say whatever they have to say when they are not informed. So I want to salute and appreciate the late Egunyu for doing the needful on any matter that always came on the Floor.

Madam Speaker, sister Egunyu was a patriot and peace lover. I also saw her contributions regarding the pacification of Karamoja where she always pushed for disarmament. That is the time when Members took long to decide on whether the army should swing into action to disarm or not. She was always there to convince her uncles to drop arms and I think this is a credit to her that we should always be proud of.

Finally, this is one of the few friends of ours who ever said to the people of Busoga, thank you for hosting our people during the time of the insurgency. She always told me, thank you for hosting our people because I have a sub-county that is almost predominantly Ateso - (Member timed out.)

1.41
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to extend my condolences to the family of the late hon. Egunyu. I am just wondering if, every week that we are in this House, we are giving tribute to people of such high calibre, what could that imply to the ordinary people. To me, it implies that when we lose one person of this calibre, we are losing 100 among the ordinary people. 

This is why we are burying people. In my constituency, I get more than 10-20 calls every day to attend burials. What does that imply? It implies that there is a problem with our health units. It implies that we have a problem with our medicines, with our doctors and everything in the health sector and that is why we are losing people in such numbers.

Secondly, I know our sister would not be happy if, as Women MPs in this House, we do not continue to push for women’s issues. If we continue to divide our interests when we are debating issues of women and if we continue to pull each other down and gang against you that you must not be a Speaker, or if we continue to gang against our Chief Whip that she must not have that position - Now that we have women in those positions, it is upon us, the women, to protect those women in those positions. If we do not do it, our sister will not be happy where she is because that has been one of her key issues in the Constituency Assembly and in the Sixth Parliament.

Therefore, those of us who are here should stand warned. We must protect these women in the positions in which they are. We must struggle to make sure that the Speaker remains where she is - (Member timed out.)

1.44
MR CLEMENT OBOTE ONGALO (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for according me this opportunity to support the motion to pay tribute to lady Fiona and to give my condolences, on behalf of the people of Kalaki whom I represent in this House, to the family of the late lady Fiona and to the people of Ngora.

Life is often equated to a race. Some people choose to run the 1,000 metres. They run on and on and on and they are soon forgotten. Other people run the 100 metres. Their race is soon over but people will talk about them for a long time. Lady Fiona was a sprinter. Her race ended too soon but as can be seen from the tributes pouring in to her from across the divide, she won the gold medal and she deserves the tribute she is getting.

I would like to agree with hon. Kiwanda that surely there is an evil eye on this House. I have done some research about Parliaments and Senates and I have found that the life expectancy in the Parliament of Uganda is very low. I would like to pray to God to look somewhere else and let this House legislate. I thank you very much. 

1.45
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the Sixth Parliament, I was a medical doctor working in the hospitals but I followed the politics of the country and Fiona Egunyu’s name is among the names that kept coming up among the Members who were in the Sixth Parliament. I want to thank her for the contributions she made when she was in the House but even after the House, she continued working for the public.

I rise on behalf of the people of Kanungu to support the motion to pay tribute and recognise her achievements. As we heard, she was an eloquent legislator who stood for issues of the people. Like hon. Okupa said, she raised questions concerning the massacre, which occurred in Kanungu and I am here to raise the same questions; where is the report, Leader of Government Business and where is Kibwetere? How I wish that report could come so that she gets settled in heaven where she has gone. 

Recently, while in my constituency, I asked the constituents to give me a feedback on how they feel about the workings of the ninth Parliament. I want to report that there are some key questions that people were asking with respect to the governance and constitutional environment in which we are currently operating. So, I think strong people like the late here before us today provided lessons to us as legislators who are here on how we can do our work in terms of articulating the interests of the people. 

We thank her for the contributions she made. She has gone yes, but her actions and what she stood for and how she always presented herself as a Member of Parliament will keep lingering in our minds and the minds of the public. Thank you very much. I also thank everybody for the positive contributions you have made. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Rose Akol makes her contribution, I want to introduce hon. Anthony Butele – the ten points programme. He is there and was in the Sixth Parliament and also worked with the late, hon. Rhoda Acheng, I don’t know where she is sitting. Okay, she is there and was also in the Sixth Parliament. You are welcome.

1.47
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving this opportunity to join my colleagues in paying tribute to my departed friend, the late Fiona Egunyu. I deliver condolences from the people of Bukedea to the family and the sister who is our colleague, hon. Akiror.

I got to know the late while we were still very young children in Kumi where the mother was my teacher. We used to be childhood friends. After that, she joined Nabumali Senior Secondary School while I went to Ngora High School. Later, we met in A ‘Level before she went to Makerere University as I went to Nakawa.

But all through, I want to say that the late has been very intelligent, self-made person who believed in what she wanted to do. Even while at Ngora High School, she actually had to just come back to sit her exams because of the kind of character she was. If she wanted to do something, she had to do it. Anyway, all the same she excelled. 

Today, I am a politician because of her mentorship. It is the late, together with the late Tom Omongole, who mentored me into politics. This was mainly because of the way she used to conduct herself. That is the kind of person we are paying tribute to today.
For the people of Bukedea, we will remember the late for the fight she exhibited with her colleagues here to stop cattle rustling, which had been taken to be a normal activity for the Karimojong. For them to raid Teso was understood to be a normal thing. But it was her and other colleagues who brought out the plight of the people of Bukedea where the Karimojong used to come, raid, rape and even kill people. It was not until this issue was understood by Government that efforts to pacify Karamoja of the guns were taken. I want to say that the peace we now enjoy in Teso is part of her efforts.

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I want to stop here. But before I do that, I want to say that if there was a place where we would be writing the names of the heroes of Teso, this is the one lady whose name would be recorded as number two –(Member timed out.)

1.51
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, on my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Ngora, we have lost a great daughter, the late hon. Fiona Egunyu. She was a very courageous woman. By the time I met her while still a young girl in Primary Seven - I remember I danced for her better than all the other pupils in addition to giving a nice poem, which prompted her to give me a pen. I still remember that she handed me a red pen and a book before she said, “That is leadership for you.” I am sure today I am here because of that mentorship.

The late hon. Egunyu in 2001, when she contested for Ngora County, could sometimes sleep at my home. She would come to sleep with us in a grass thatched house but I also recall she would say, “Young girl, don’t worry, we are going to make it.” I remember we would walk from home to home canvassing for votes for her. She was very courageous. I have never seen such a determined woman. 

When I stood for Woman MP for Ngora, some people used to call me Fifi, meaning I was just like Fiona. I recall that as we grew, among the known names in Teso – we were four children in our home - I can tell you that we used to admire four people in Teso and among those, were the late hon. Fiona Egunyu, hon. Amongin Aporu, hon. Mukula and hon. Odongo Jeje. Because of that, we named ourselves after their names. I was named Amongin Aporu, although she didn’t know - (Laughter) - my sister named herself Fiona Egunyu, my brother named himself Mukula and the other brother named himself Odongo Jeje. I can tell you it was very interesting.

Today, I stand here to tell the august House that as people of Teso, we have not only lost a person who has been serving us, we have lost a great woman –(Member timed out.)

1.54
MR MUSA ECWERU (NRM, Amuria County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to the late hon. Fiona Egunyu. Listening very carefully to the recordings of this House while she was in the Sixth Parliament, Fiona was very brilliant, extremely articulate and very patriotic.

As we speak today, the people of Amuria have returned to their original homes after being displaced for over 50 years – between the border of Amuria and Karamoja, particularly the districts Amuria and Napak - thanks to the contributions of this wonderful lady and her colleagues in the Sixth Parliament, when they moved a motion for the people of Karamoja to be disarmed, I mean the Karimojong cattle rustlers.

Today, we are able to do a lot of things including farming together with the people of Karamoja because they have also moved to the border that they themselves had abandoned because of insurgency – we are grateful to this lady and her colleagues. 

Her death has come at a time when we have just lost yet another very great son of Teso. The other day, when we were paying tribute to that great son of Teso, the late Bishop Ilukor, we asked why the cruel hand of death had continued to rob us particularly of these very special people. We want to pray for ourselves and say may God spare those very few and gifted people who hail from that part of the country, who are making very special contributions to this country. And may you, as colleagues, continue to support and pray for us as we lay this wonderful lady to rest and as we come to terms with the gaps that have been created by the demise of this very brilliant lady.

I want to thank the President and you, Madam Speaker, for being here personally to preside over this sitting as we pay tribute to this wonderful lady. In the same vein, I want to invite my friends and comrades here to come to Ngora on Saturday where we are going to lay Fiona to her final resting place. May her soul rest in eternal peace. 

1.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (TESO AFFAIRS) (Ms Christine Amongin): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, let me, from the onset, on behalf of the people of Teso, thank you for the condolence messages we received when we lost the retired Bishop of Soroti. Madam Speaker, you were out of the country but your message and support were loud and clear. 

Uganda has lost a treasure in the names of the late hon. Asemo whose body is before us. In Fiona, I saw intellect. She was a brilliant girl and she did not mince her words. The people of Teso and the country in general will miss her. Fiona’s late father was killed by the Amin soldiers but their mother struggled to bring these children up and Fiona, as a first daughter, was a very strong pillar in the family. 

I am very grateful, Madam Speaker, that we are here as Members of Parliament to pay tribute to this great lady. She was a unifier. She was a very strong person in her faith. She confessed the Catholic faith and she believed in the teachings of the church. 

Fiona will be missed by the people of Teso for her courageous ability especially during the days of disarmament. When we came in the Sixth Parliament, the late hon. Omongole, and now the late Fiona and hon. Jackson Osire and myself - me and hon. Osire could not drive. This lady was the first lady in Teso to buy a car and put the number plate as the name of her mother - Aryenyo. So, whenever we could go to these places they would think it is the Army vehicle because of the number plate. It was Aryenyo written in green. I could not drive and hon. Osire could not drive but her and the late hon. Omongole could drive. Hon. Mukula’s role was to teach us how to assemble the gun. We would go with wooden batons that we are running but Fiona would say, “Let us put on trousers and go to the battle field.” 

On a lighter note, Madam Speaker, on the first day of the sitting of the Sixth Parliament, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and me came and sat in front there. It was hon. Fiona who came and told us, “Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and hon. Amongin Aporu, you are lost. That is not your seat.” She was our first teacher when we came to the Sixth Parliament. I am here and Ken-Lukyamuzi was here to pay tribute to her.

Madam Speaker, we want to continue to pray for hon. Akiror and the family that the Almighty sustains this family. We were with His Excellency at home yesterday when he was paying his respect. We want to convey our appreciation as people of Teso and the people of Ngora District - (Member timed out.)

2.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (Ms Agnes Egunyu): Madam Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to hon. Fiona Egunyu. Fiona Egunyu was our eldest sister. As you have heard from hon. Christine Aporu, when Papa went to office in 1979 and he never came back home, we were left orphans. But she encouraged us to study as girls. And she was very bright and intelligent. She was very loving to us and through encouragement, despite the fact that by that time the girl child was not a priority to be educated, three of my sisters were lawyers and all my father’s daughters have graduated. 

Fiona inspired me to join politics. We used to call her our legal counsel - me and the others who were not lawyers. Whenever we wanted to consult on something to do with law, we would consult her.

My sister gave selfless service to the people of Ngora. When she was a Member of Parliament, she was generous to no fault. She served them very well. She shared with them everything she had. And I would ask her, “But my sister, how come you spend everything you have on your people?” She would say, “My people are the ones who have made me.” 

When Fiona was given any assignment, she worked tirelessly. She would work at night. She would read the whole night then I would tell her, “Fiona, why don’t you sleep?” She would say, “No, I have to get this assignment done.” And when she had something to do, she wanted it to be done perfectly.

Fiona Egunyu was very objective; she was never biased. And when she had any challenge to raise, she would also try to give solutions. She was always the peace builder in our family. She would urge us to keep together. And she never used to talk too much. She would talk and then she would keep quiet and just look at you. 

Hon. Fiona, my sister, always did her things in a very calculated way. We had gone to bury the late bishop. But before we went, she called hon. Rhoda and said, “Rhoda, if I get fuel in time, I will come and join you on Friday.” When I called her on Friday, she said, “I am fine. I am just taking porridge in my sitting room.” On Saturday, she drove to my home where our mum was. Mum had come because she was not well. She said, “Mummy, I want to take you somewhere.” So they left with mum. On the way she told her, “We are going to see my doctor. I am not feeling well.” And in less than 12 hours she had passed on. That is how smart Fiona was in everything she did. And she never tried to raise an alarm. 

Madam Speaker, Fiona lived a modest life of integrity. You have heard she still had a mortgage to pay. She left behind three biological children and two adopted ones. The older daughter Phyllis Irene Egunyu was not able to come. She was supposed to come with my sister, Fiona’s follower, but then she failed to come. She kept collapsing and the doctor said she was not fit to travel so she is in the UK. Only two children are here. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank Members of Parliament across the political divide for being very supportive to our family during this trying time. They have consoled us. They have given us moral and financial support. I want to thank the President of Uganda for all the support he has extended to our family. Yesterday, he was at home to pay his respect to my sister. I want to thank Government of Uganda and Parliament for having accorded hon. Fiona Egunyu, our eldest sister, an official funeral in memory of her contributions to this country. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you in a very special way. Every time I have met you, you have asked, “How is Fiona?” But this time I did not have time to tell you that Fiona was not feeling well. I also want to thank you for having spared time to be here to chair this special session in memory of my departed sister. 

Honourable colleagues, I thank all of you for all these contributions and paying this glowing tribute to my sister hon. Fiona Lucy Egunyu. My elder sister, may the good lord grant your soul eternal rest.

2.06
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you Madam Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to hon. Fiona Egunyu and i would like to say that whatever has been said about her in as far as I am concerned is correct and hasten to add that hon. Fiona was a lady of wisdom. For the record, wisdom has three elements; judgement, justice and equity and so was hon. Fiona.

On the other hand, I know after death, the general rule is that we must only say good things about the dead. We must reach a level of creating exceptions. Today, Fiona has left as we have said but there are lessons which must go to us and we ask ourselves a question, “What legacy are we leaving behind; in case today any of us passed on, would Members gather here to say good things about us?”

I shall call upon my colleagues that we make a contribution we must know that actually we are here to make a contribution - (Member timed out.)

2.08
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman representative, Soroti): I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the daughter of Emorimor. When I watched the screen this morning, I saw a true Ateso. We are known for boldness, we are known for straight forwardness, we are known for strength and we are known for honesty and that is what I saw in hon. Egunyu today. I am proud to be an Ateso.

A lot of things have been said and indeed we need to learn lessons from them but also knowing that our life does not end on earth. Some of us may be wondering or may be thinking that that is the end of Fiona. To the best of my knowledge, Fiona made the best choice that anyone could ever make and I want all of us to do that at the opportune time. She chose Jesus Christ as her lord and saviour. 

The Bible says, “What does it profit a man to gain the whole world and lose his own soul.” All these good things that we talk about can be talked about, you can do them but at the end of the day, where is your soul? Choose Jesus today as you do whatever you do and your destiny will be a good one.  

2.10
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to late hon. Fiona Lucy Egunyu. On behalf of the people of Namutumba District and on my own behalf, I would like to extend our heartfelt condolences to the family, the people of Ngora and the Government of Uganda for the loss of Fiona.

It was rightly mentioned here that while Fiona was in Parliament, she was on the Adhoc committee that contributed to the drafting of the Children’s Bill and it was later enacted as law. As Parliament we have the responsibility to make sure that we keep the candle that was lit by Fiona as far as children’s rights are concerned in this Parliament and in Uganda. 

This Parliament directed the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to amend the Children’s Act in 2004 and up to now, the ministry has not done anything. This is a wish of Fiona. She protected the rights of children and in this Act now, the rights of the children are not coming out properly.

2.11
THE GOVERNMENT CHEIF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the NRM caucus and on behalf of the people of Bugiri and my family, I want to send our condolences to the family. I want to thank the following; the people of Ngora for having voted this lady because when they voted her, they gave us the opportunity to know and also work with her. Thank you so much, the people of Ngora. I also want in a special way to thank hon. Agnes for having taken care of her because not all people can take care of their relatives.

On behalf of the NRM caucus, I want to thank you for that. I admired many things about Fiona but I want to say one thing which has not been said here. When you wanted Fiona to do something, convince her and the moment she is convinced and she internalises, she would use speed to achieve and implement what you have requested her to do. I want to thank God for that talent that God gave her. Eternal life grant unto her oh lord and let perpetual light shine upon her. May she rest in peace! May the souls of the faithful departed rest in peace. Fare thee well, Fiona.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, hon. Members. I want to welcome hon. Charles Oleny, former MP for Usuk; he is in the Gallery to witness the proceedings. 
As I indicated in my communication, we have the normal afternoon sitting in less than an hour. I want now to put the question that this House pays tribute to the hon. Lucy Fiona Asemo Egunyu as proposed by the Prime Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Members, I want to thank you very much for interrupting your work to go to do an important duty. I think she deserved it. I direct the Clerk to prepare the motion and also ensure that the Hansard for today is sent to her family.

East African Anthem 

National Anthem 

(Exit of the body of the late Fiona Egunyu)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank you very much for the work done this morning. 

But just for the record, hon. Epetait is not feeling too well. He collapsed today in the canteen when they were actually meeting to work out arrangements for hon. Egunyu’s funeral. About two weeks ago, he had come to me and said that if I do not see him too frequently, then it is because he is not feeling very well. 

I think we will pray for him and hope that he recovers. I thought that I should let you know. Thank you. Yes, of course he is the Member for Ngora.

The House is adjourned to 3.00 p.m. It is an adjournment because it is a special sitting.

(The House rose at 2.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 11 September 2013 at 3.00 p.m.) 

