Thursday, 25 September 2014

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Kisubi High School in Wakiso, represented by hon. Balikuddembe and hon. Seninde. (Applause)

We also have teachers and students from Nabumali High School. They are here for a reciprocal visit; last year, Parliament carried out a school outreach programme in Busoga College Mwiri, Iganga SS, Mbale SS and Nabumali High School and presentations were made about Parliament and the role of a Member of Parliament. That is why they are here to make a return visit. They are represented by hon. Connie Galiwango, hon. Jack Wamai, hon. Gudoi and hon. Michael Werikhe. They are from that land in the east so welcome them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Kyembogo Primary School in Kyenjojo represented by hon. Muhumuza and hon. Timbigamba of Kyenjojo. They are also here to witness the proceedings. We also have in the gallery the victorious team of the She Cranes. They are here to attend this sitting as we move the motion to congratulate them. (Applause)

Secondly, honourable members, I want to amend the Order Paper. One, I will allow the Minister for Finance to bring the Appropriation Bill for first reading. I will also amend the Order Paper to include statements made by the Minister of Internal Affairs that were not made yesterday; one is on the blackout at Namboole and the other about some problems in Bushenyi. They will be presented later.

Because this is Thursday, private members’ business takes precedence. We shall, therefore, have the motion on the IPU, which is brief; the motion about the She Cranes; and the motion on the select committee on the standard gauge railway. We shall then go to the other Government business. I would want members to be brief and to the point so that we do not take too much time. Let us first deal with the Minister of Finance.

BILLS
 FIRST READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2014
2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, for first reading, the Appropriation Bill, 2014. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by the Minister of Lands, that of sports, plus hon. Aza.
MR OMACH: I have also tabled the certificate of financial implications.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you know, the Appropriation Bill is quite urgent. We need to conclude the budget process, so I will send the Appropriation Bill to the Committee on Finance for expeditious perusal, and I want to have your report on my desk by tomorrow evening.

2.53
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to present a matter of public concern. However, before I do so, allow me to congratulate you and the entire community of Busoga upon attaining the Kyabazinga. In the same vein, I would like to salute His Majesty William Kaddumbula Gabula Nadiope IV. Long live! Madam Speaker, you know how much the Conservative Party cherishes traditional glory. 

Madam Speaker, permit me to raise a matter of public concern pertaining to one retired captain Amon Byarugaba who has been languishing in Makindye Military Barracks since 19 March 2003 without the opportunity to be tried in a court of law. He was charged with treason and left at that. Every time he is taken to the court martial, his case is merely mentioned and he is returned to languish again in jail.

Amon Byarugaba is aged 69. He retired from the UPDF in 1996 and even received a retirement letter as well as a discharge book whose copy I would like to lay on the Table. He is sick and could die in the military barracks at Makindye anytime from now.

By law, Amon Byarugaba is supposed to be a civilian but he has been detained at Makindye Military Barracks for the last 11 years. This case is very crucial and something should be done. He has been denied a trial, which is a constitutional right, and he never applied to join the reserve force; he is a typical civilian. 

Under Article 28(3) of the Constitution, every person who is charged with a criminal offence is presumed to be innocent until proved guilty or until that person has pleaded guilty. In the case of Amon Byarugaba, something must be done. We cannot simply look at it and leave it at that. That person is even entitled to legal protection in a court of law at the expense of the state. 

So, I would like to ask the Government of Uganda – I believe the Government is present although the Prime Minister is not here; I hope there is enough representation capable of handling the magnitude of this question. Is Government aware that Byarugaba is a civilian who should be tried in a civilian court? Why don’t you take him to court? Is Government aware that the detention of Byarugaba in a wrong prison is unconstitutional pursuant to Article 28 (3) of the Constitution?

Finally, I smell a rat. There are so many people, Madam Speaker, languishing in jail under military cover, including those who are languishing in safe houses. I demand that the Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Defence, produces an audit of people who are tried and sentenced under the cover of military justice, if there is any justice at all.

The Prisons Department gives us an audit of what is happening every year - who has been sentenced for what and so on. We equally demand that Ministry of Defence does the same because many people are languishing in jail under unexplainable circumstances. Please give us an audit. If you do not, you better quit Government, and that man should be released expeditiously.

2.58
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This matter obviously has just emerged this afternoon. My good friend, the hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, did not give me any indication that he would raise this matter today. So, all I can do at this stage is to undertake to search into his question and return to the House with a statement.

Madam Speaker, this could be done as early as Tuesday next week. Thank you.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED DURING THE 130TH INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION ASSEMBLY

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Emmanuel Dombo, if you could just use 15 minutes.

2.59
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to move a motion for consideration and adoption of the resolutions adopted at the 130th Inter-Parliamentary Union Assembly in Geneva.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that Parliament of Uganda is a member of the IPU. So, I move this motion to coincide with Parliament of Uganda recognising and celebrating 125 years since the IPU was formed.

The IPU was formed to promote the rule of law, democracy, and protection of human rights and dignity of life, promotion of sustainable development and international humanitarian law, recognition of international conventions and many aspects of international governance. Whenever the IPU meets, it adopts a number of resolutions, some of which are considered emergency situations. The others are considered as full themes under the sub committees of the IPU.

During the 130th Assembly, the Parliament of Uganda was represented by a delegation led by the Speaker of Parliament. The other members were: hon. Reagan Okumu, hon. Betty Amongi, hon. Kenneth Bbosa Kiyingi and I.

During the meeting, a number of resolutions were adopted. These resolutions covered the following four thematic areas:

The first resolution was about moving towards a nuclear-free world, the contribution of parliaments. The second resolution was about moving towards risk-resilient development, taking into consideration demographic trends and natural constraints. The other resolution was about the role of parliaments in protecting the rights of children and preventing their exploitation in situations of armed conflict. The fourth one was about helping to restore peace and security and consolidate democracy in the Central African Republic.

Madam Speaker, I want to talk about each resolution in brief and refer the House to the detailed resolutions considering the following: the background, the international conventions, the prevailing law and the calls that these resolutions aspire to achieve especially the actions expected of respective governments and national parliaments.

Madam Speaker, the first resolution about moving towards a nuclear-weapon-free world, the contribution of parliaments. The IPU affirmed the key role of parliaments and 	1parliamentarians in addressing nuclear risks and building the legislative and political framework needed to achieve a nuclear-weapon-free world.

It also reaffirmed that all states must ensure compliance with their nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation obligations especially those under the non-proliferation treaty.

It also noted the United Nations Secretary-General’s five-point proposal for nuclear disarmament and his address on nuclear disarmament at the opening of the Public Plenary of the Conference on Disarmament held on 21 January 2014.

During that meeting, the IPU called on all member parliaments and parliamentarians to promote nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation as objectives of the highest priority and urgency.

The IPU also encouraged parliamentarians to engage in dialogue and build multiparty networks and coalitions at all levels in pursuit of nuclear disarmament and nuclear proliferation.

Madam Speaker, the IPU also urged parliaments to strengthen the safety of all nuclear materials, including those intended for military use, notably by monitoring the implementation of the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540 of 2004, and by ensuring the ratification of the relevant multilateral treaties such as the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials.

The same resolution, amongst others, calls on parliamentarians to support the convening, at the earliest possible date, of a conference for a Middle East free of weapons of mass destruction, to be attended by all states in the region on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at.

Finally, the resolution calls on parliamentarians to use the IPU as a global forum to focus political attention on the need for effective, verifiable and irreversible nuclear disarmament, and on concrete and practical actions that can be taken in the immediate future to advance this goal.

Madam Speaker, this resolution is very comprehensive and I have only taken the abridged version for purposes of this presentation. Members can, however, access the entire resolution on their iPads.

Madam Speaker, the second resolution was, “Towards risk-resilient development: taking into consideration demographic trends and natural constraints.” The IPU noted that development patterns, including poorly planned and managed urbanisation, population growth in high-risk areas, endemic poverty, weak governance and institutions and environmental degradation are important drivers of disaster risks.

Madam Speaker, you will note that in Uganda we have so many vulnerable areas, Butaleja, for example, and you know what has happened in Kasese and many areas that have been affected because of environmental degradation. It is with this background, therefore, that in various countries, the IPU collectively notes that this requires collective action so that collective development can be achieved.

The IPU therefore calls on all Members of Parliament to acquire information on and knowledge of issues related to disaster and risk trends, so as to enhance their oversight role with regard to reducing the impact and risk of disasters, building resilience, protecting people and safeguarding development gains from disasters and the effects of climate change, while at the same time guaranteeing that this becomes an important issue on the national agenda and that the relevant measures are implemented.

The IPU also appeals to all governments to take immediate action to review national policies and regulations so as to ensure that socio-economic development is balanced against the need to reduce risk, to the population and the economy, of disasters in the long run, as more engagement is needed to keep development policies and practices coherent and aligned with those for disaster risk reduction.

On a positive note, I want to recognise the contribution of the Parliament of Uganda. While we may not have a deliberate forum on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, Madam Speaker, you know that this Parliament has a forum on disaster risk reduction, which is chaired by hon. Alex Byarugaba. This forum has been very effective and most of the presentations in these meetings have been a product of this. Whereas IPU is taking note now, the Parliament of Uganda under your wise leadership has taken cognisance of these issues and is already a mile ahead. 

The IPU also urges parliaments and governments to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women when it comes to land and livestock ownership, and to facilitate women’s access to credit as a means of strengthening women’s resilience. Madam Speaker, in one of these meetings, it was noted that the most vulnerable people during these disasters have been women and children. Therefore, their capacity to resist these disasters must be enhanced so that they are pushed above the poverty line.

Therefore, amongst other things, the IPU calls on governments and parliaments to integrate gender and age perspectives into the design and implementation of all phases of risk management.

The IPU also calls on all parliaments to work at national, regional and international level for the inclusion of reproductive health indicators as part of the post-2015 development goals in the areas of health, equity and women’s empowerment, to promote a rights-based approach to reproductive health and to take appropriate measures through legislation and budget allocations, to provide universal access to voluntary family planning services etcetera.

Madam Speaker, you know that in the last meeting in Kampala, you sponsored a motion for adoption concerning this matter and for sure, the contribution of Parliament of Uganda has been recognised within this perspective. Therefore, the IPU amongst other things, calls on parliaments to drive the process of political ownership and will, at the governmental level in order to achieve tangible results in sustainable development and to contain human-induced environmental changes that contribute to the occurrence or severity of natural disasters, especially as a result of climate change; and in particular, calls for the conclusion by 2015 of an ambitious global agreement that has legal force under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and is applicable to all parties thereafter.

Finally on this resolution, the IPU invites all IPU member parliaments to take urgent action to follow up the recommendations made in this resolution in their respective countries and regions. This presentation is part of that follow-up.

Resolution number three was, “The role of parliaments in protecting the rights of children, in particular unaccompanied migrant children, and in preventing their exploitation in situations of armed conflict.” Madam Speaker, again, you will note that this parliament has got a forum for children and all Members of Parliament must have participated in one way or another in one of the training sessions, in which capacity has been deliberately given to the Members of Parliament to be able to understand children’s rights and issues.

When the IPU decided to take this on, as a Parliament of Uganda we discovered that we were a mile ahead. The IPU also recalls that paragraph 13 of general comment No. 13 (2011) on the right of the child to freedom from all forms of violence issued by the Committee on the Rights of the Child states that, “Addressing and eliminating the widespread prevalence and incidence of violence against children is an obligation of state parties under the convention. Securing and promoting children’s fundamental rights to respect for their human dignity and physical and psychological integrity through the prevention of all forms of violence, is essential for promoting the full set of child rights in the convention.”

Madam Speaker, this resolution calls for a number of things and amongst them, it calls on parliaments especially those in countries experiencing situations of armed conflict, internal conflict or occupation, to amend their existing legislation so as to prevent and punish the recruitment of children for direct participation in hostilities and other forms of exploitation of children in such situations. It also calls on parliaments to prevent, suppress and punish the exploitation of children by organised criminal groups in line with relevant international laws.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the resolution also calls on parliaments to design efficient legislative tools for the legal protection of minors, thus establishing a legal framework effectively guaranteeing the rights of children and to enact legislation aimed at establishing comprehensive and effective protection systems with adequate resources and coordinated by a high ranking government official in order to ensure the best interests of the child.

Madam Speaker, this resolution is wide and varied; it states so many issues required to be done by the parliaments, by the relevant authorities, by government ministries and by us, parliamentarians. However, for purposes of the time allocated, I will rest my case on that resolution.

I will go to the final resolution, which was, “Helping to restore peace and security and consolidate democracy in the Central African Republic: the contribution of the IPU.”Madam Speaker, allow me to note here that while the IPU was noting this as a resolution, I was very proud as a Ugandan because I know that the Uganda government was ahead of this resolution because it contributed forces towards stabilising the situation in the Central African Republic.

There are many people who may not know how Uganda has effectively contributed and has brought peace and stability in the African Region and the international community. When these resolutions come after Uganda has gone ahead of them, to us we have nothing to do apart from being proud about it.

On this resolution, the IPU was deeply concerned about the security situation in the Central African Republic, which continues to deteriorate. It is characterised by a breakdown in public order, decline in the rule of law and a rise in interreligious and intercommunity tensions.

The IPU also considered the risk that interreligious and intercommunity tensions in the country may degenerate into religious and ethnic conflict on a nationwide scale and imperil national unity and territorial integrity, with potentially grave repercussions throughout the Central African region. These could have an effect of spilling over to the neighbouring states and regions. Already, like you have said, Uganda is making a contribution although it is not part of the Central African Republic.

The IPU demanded and noted a number of things, and amongst them the IPU condemned the escalation of the interreligious and the intercommunity violence in the Central African Republic. The IPU demands that the protagonists immediately halt all acts of violence, whatever their motivation, and in particular those said to be grounded in religion, ethnicity and gender.

The IPU further demands that all parties to the conflict facilitate safe and free access for humanitarian organisations and their personnel, without delay, to areas where populations are in need, so that they may swiftly provide the necessary humanitarian assistance in accordance to the United Nations Guiding Principles on Humanitarian Assistance. 

Madam Speaker, the IPU has urged on a number of things and amongst them, the IPU welcomes the establishment of a special fund through which states, international, regional and sub regional organisations can contribute to the Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA) and expresses support for the organisation of the international donors’ conference as soon as possible to request contributions, in particular through this fund.

One of the challenges that we have had is that we have participated in meetings where countries have made pledges through their Members of Parliament, and we need to establish a mechanism through here on how Members of Parliament will interact with the Executive so that in whatever forum we are represented, we can effectively speak with authority, knowing exactly what the Government has in the pocket. In many situations, the Ugandan Parliament has not made specific contributions apart from the able representation and debating.

The IPU recommends that the United Nations Security Council deploys, by the earliest time possible, a UN peace keeping mission to the Central African Republic with an expanded mandate covering support for the political transition, the restoration of state authority throughout the country, the organisation of elections, protection for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and the return of refugees and persons displaced by violence. The IPU entrusts the Secretary-General with the task of conveying this resolution to all IPU members, associate members, observers and the other international organisations.

Madam Speaker, it is with this background that these IPU resolutions were relayed to you and under your guidance, have been presented and laid to this House. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Dombo. Honourable members, those were our resolutions and recommendations which are required to go to different organs. If you do not mind, we could adopt them and then pass them onto the relevant organs for action. 

3.21
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Emmanuel Dombo for the report that he has submitted. 

In the course of his submission, he did allude to the fact that there was a resolution that many African countries as much as possible assist in stabilizing the regime in the Central African Republic. However, I am not so sure whether the UPDF’s presence in the Central African Republic is to pacify that country or, hand in hand with the American forces, we are in pursuit of Joseph Kony. Can we be clarified on that before we pronounce ourselves? 

To the best of my knowledge and what has been carried in the papers, our presence in the DRC and in the Central African Republic is to pursue and capture Kony. I do not know whether that also goes hand in hand with the pacification of the Central African Republic.

3.22
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, the IPU and parliaments around the world have always had challenges in regard to participation in the United Nations meetings and its agencies at the UN. Parliaments do not have space to discuss and represent national and regional parliaments.   

The IPU has been advocating for space; now Uganda is privileged to have the President of the UN General Assembly and I seek clarification on how we can use this to our advantage. How can we use the chairing of the general assembly to push for this request that the IPU has been pushing for for many years, so that when we go to the UN we are not just witnesses or participating from the periphery but we participate as equal stakeholders, instead of NGOs having more space than Members of Parliament? It is painful and costly. The NGOs are there, yes, but they do not have representative, legislative and appropriation powers. 

I, therefore, seek for your indulgence; can’t Government commit itself to use our current position at the UN so that Parliament can have equal space? 

3.23
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, PIAN COUNTY, NAKAPIRIPIRIT): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas we had agreed that these resolutions could be adopted now and passed to the relevant bodies, I am also aware that two years ago, our Government borrowed about US$200 million and we did an aerial survey of the minerals in this country, and it is now known that there are significant deposits of Uranium of a commercial measure. Now if we adopt the idea of a nuclear-free world – I do not know if it is a nuclear-free or nuclear-weapons-free world - as a matter of urgency, I do not for whom. 

We are also aware that this very Government’s Ministry of Energy has proposals on exploiting these minerals for energy production in the country. What is our position? Is it to adopt this or to go with our plans? If we adopt these resolutions as they are, what will the implications be for some of the resources that we have in this country?

THE SPEAKER: We expect that when we send the resolutions to the government and ministries, they will be able to say what is okay and what is not. That is also why we want it to go to the ministries.

To answer hon. Ekanya, I met the President of the UN General Assembly just before he took oath and discussed with him the need to create space. I told him that he should make a difference as he is a parliamentarian, so that Parliament can – You know, we are spectators! I go to the UN and I cannot speak but the civil society has so many opportunities to speak. We are just there hanging around. 

Let us ask hon. Kiyonga to respond on the other issue.

3.25
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE (Dr Chripus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Ugandan delegation that went to this historical meeting and to thank hon. Dombo for the very eloquent way he has presented the resolutions. 

In regard to the Central African Republic, as colleagues know, we initially went there in hot pursuit of the LRA but now the LRA is recognised as a regional terrorist group and has destabilised not only Uganda but also South Sudan, the DRC and the Central African Republic. Because of that recognition, the African Union created the regional taskforce, i.e. they took over that mission to pursue Kony in the interest of stabilising the region, and the UPDF was joined by the national army of the DRC, the army of the Republic of South Sudan and also the army of the Central African Republic before they got the current problems. So, answer No. 1 is that the UPDF alongside other African armies out there are basically doing the job of stabilising not only the Central African Republic but also other African states that have been destabilised by the LRA. 

Now, Uganda was requested to participate in the current mission that hon. Dombo talked about, that should now be taken over by the UN Security Council, as we did state in our policy statement. However, we have a condition that we could only participate if the area where we are, which is our area of interest where Kony is operating, would be covered and we would be deployed in that sector where the LRA is active. The response we have received today is that initially, this UN mission will cover the area around Bangui, the capital city of Central African Republic, stretching up to the border with Chad. We have therefore opted to stay out of that mission for now so that we continue to operate where the LRA is active. In that way, we are also contributing to the stabilisation of the sister Republic of the Central African Republic. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to put the question that the report of the 130th IPU Assembly be adopted and the Clerk sends this to all the agencies which are affected, and at some stage we shall call for feedback from the ministries and the agencies. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE UGANDA NATIONAL NETBALL TEAM, THE SHE CRANES, FOR QUALIFYING FOR THE NETBALL WORLD CUP SCHEDULED FOR 7TH – 16TH AUGUST 2015 IN SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA, AT THE JUST CONCLUDED AFRICA WORLD CUP QUALIFIERS IN GABORONE, BOTSWANA FROM 13TH – 19TH SEPTEMBER 2014

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you could use 10 minutes and then we can use 20 for debate.

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the Uganda national netball team, the She Cranes, for qualifying for the Netball World Cup scheduled for the 7thto 16th August 2015 in Sydney, Australia at the just concluded Africa World Cup Qualifiers in Gaborone, Botswana from 13thto 19th September 2014. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by several members of the Cabinet and the backbench on both sides of the House.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995 under the provision of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XVII mandates the state to promote recreation sports for the citizens of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 8A of the Constitution of Uganda provides for governance based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy;

AWARE THAT on Friday, 19 September 2013 through excellent team performance, the She Cranes qualified for the Netball World Cup after thrashing Namibia by 66 to 24 goals in the finals of the African Zone Netball World Cup Qualifying Tournament in Gaborone, Botswana;

FURTHER AWARE that the African Zone World Cup Qualifying Tournament was composed of six top ranked and well-facilitated African netball teams including Namibia, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Botswana and Swaziland, the She Cranes defied the odds to win the African Group by defeating all teams with victories of 53 to 48 over Zambia; 43 to 42 over Zimbabwe; 47 to 32 over Botswana; 51 to 38 over Swaziland thereby eliciting national pride for Uganda to be recognised as a country of world class excellence among the international community of sporting nations as a result of this achievement;

FURTHER AWARE that the She Cranes was one of the unranked teams at the tournament and in spite of all the limited participation and lack of international exposure, through determination, stamina, faithful persistence and love for Uganda the team deservedly excelled and qualified for the world cup and will now compete in the 2015 World Cup in Australia amongst the elite netball teams in the world such as England, Australia, New Zealand, Jamaica, Wales, Scotland, Samoa, Fiji, Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, Singapore, Malawi, South Africa, Sri Lanka and Zambia;

FURTHER AWARE that Uganda last participated in the Netball World Cup 35 years ago in Trinidad and Tobago in 1979;

FURTHER AWARE that the She Cranes also won for Uganda the netball gold medal at the All Africa Games in 2011 in Mozambique, where second and silver medallists at the Africa Nations Cup in Malawi, 2012, and also won for Uganda a trophy and a gold medal at the Six Nations Netball Tournament in Singapore in December 2013 to qualify for the Africa World Cup Qualifiers in Gaborone, Botswana 2014, and it was in that spirit that Parliament appreciated the team and each member contributed Shs 100,000 towards their motivation, hence victory as a result of this motivation;

FURTHER AWARE that this triumphant victory of the She Cranes presents a rare and unique opportunity and platform for national unity, patriotism, national consensus for future development and for the advancement and promotion of physical education and sports in Uganda for the citizens’ well-being, health and productivity especially among the youth and women;

COGNISANT THAT it is now the practise of Government and Parliament to appropriately and timely honour, recognise and reward all those Ugandans, young and old, male and female, who have deservedly excelled in various fields of human endeavour including sports;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Ninth Parliament sitting in Kampala this 25th day of September 2014 at Parliament House that: 

1. Parliament collectively congratulates and pays deserved glowing tribute to the Uganda national netball team, the She Cranes, for the tremendous achievement for the country and the people of Uganda, which feat ought to automatically qualify them for consideration as national heroes.
2. Parliament urges and encourages all Ugandans with potential talent in sports, especially the youth, to emulate the example set by the She Cranes as an accomplished team through hard work and determination.

3. Parliament of Uganda approves an increase in the annual budget to the sports subsector of the Ministry of Education and Sports, to adequately facilitate the development of physical education and sports countrywide, through schools talent development programmes, enhanced sports competitions, support to national teams, and development of appropriate sports infrastructure and human, technical and managerial capacity.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

Briefly, in support of my motion, I would like to express my gratitude to the Rt Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda for the great contribution you made towards this team that enabled them go. I salute you, Madam Speaker. 

Before I proceed, allow me also to first introduce to you these gallant daughters and son – the coach – that made us proud today: Hadijah Nakabuye; Peace Proscovia, who is the captain, and she scored 43 against 47 in one event; Florence Amono; Halima Nakacwa; Annet Nakiwu; Lillian Ajio; Beatrice Zawadi; Florence Nanyonga; Alice Nanteza; Susan Atiro, Desire Obua; and Flavia Nalule.

Madam Speaker, these are the team officials: Annet Kisomose, General Secretary; Fred Mugerwa, the coach and the only man; Susan Anek, the president; Jocelyn Uchanda, team manager; and of course the patron of the team, Dr Sarah Nkonge. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, it is important to note that this has taken 35 years since 1979, so they deserve this honour. It is good for us to develop the culture of motivating and encouraging young sportsmen and sportswomen who excel at international level and bring honour to our country. Sports is an important tool for marketing a country and boosting the tourism sector.

We are not doing this for the first time; we have done it before, and I congratulate the Parliament and we need to maintain this. We did it for Dorcus Inzikuru when she won a gold medal; we did it for Moses Kipsiro when he won the gold medals at Commonwealth Games in 2010 and 2014; we did it for Kiprotich for winning a gold medal at the London Olympics; we also did it for the Cranes when they brought us a gold medal; and this particular netball team, the She Cranes, was also recognised last year after winning a trophy. We need to maintain this.  

I want to congratulate the Parliament and also say that in the same spirit, we need to continue motivating our team so that we move together with them as we prepare them for next year’s world cup.

I thank you very much and I beg to move.


3.39
MS WINIFREDKIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by the honourable minister for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the Uganda national netball team, the She Cranes, for qualifying for the netball world cup scheduled for August 2015.

Madam Speaker, as a country, we feel proud that our women made it. As a Parliament, we have a special attachment to the women you see over there, in the sense that their coach is also our coach for the Parliamentary Netball Team. (Applause) We also have a special attachment because some of their players train with us and we also get special guidance from the manager of the She Cranes. So, we have an attachment that as a parliament we feel we are proud of. 

When the ladies were leaving for this game, it was quite a sad moment for them. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for the passion you have for women and for the passion you have had for sports in this country. When the Cranes were struggling to go for their matches, you aided us to pass a resolution to contribute towards their victory.

In the same way, when our ladies, the gallant daughters of Uganda, the ones we are proud of, the ones who have put Uganda on the world map, were going, you also diligently guided us that we should support them. Members, it is your Shs 100,000 that the ministry is talking about. I want to congratulate all of you, Members, because this victory is a shared victory. We all contributed to it.

I realise that there is nothing that has brought Ugandans together like sports. If there is anything that makes us put away all our shades, colours, bitterness and anger, it is sports and I would pray that more money be put into this field. 

As a nation, we only pride in lifting up those who have made themselves; the She Cranes have struggled and it is at the last moment that we come here to say, “Oh, our gallant daughters, you have made Ugandans proud!” I would pray that we look for money and we put it in young talented Ugandans, see them grow up and we make them our own and then we can proudly say, “There they are, they are our Ugandans.”

I want to request that as the petition has always been - The ladies still have a long way to go; this was just the beginning. Now, they are going to the top, where they will participate in marketing this country. We have spent lots of money marketing the country but this is a golden opportunity for us to market Uganda through sports using our gallant daughters. May I therefore propose that just like we did the other time, the honourable members also feel proud to be associated with the project and we contribute Shs 100,000 again towards the success of the girls at the world cup competitions?  I thank you and I beg to move.

3.43
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for moving this motion. However, from the content of his motion, he sadly notes that it was in 1979 that Uganda last reached where we are today. In my mind, I wondered whether President Amin went with Uganda and why it was possible that during President Amin’s time, sports was so central in the heart of this government. I think there needs to be a second thought; we should not make sports a by-the-way issue that those who are interested in it can either contribute or not. We should be invited to come to help where the main sector is already making a contribution.

Madam Speaker, I am saddened by the fact that the ministers from the Ministry of Education always come here with their motions when somebody has made Uganda proud, but at the budgeting time, they are not ready to cut down on the heavy administrative expenditure in favour of sports. Although my sister, hon. Kiiza, the woman MP of Kasese, has made an appeal to us, last week and this week our email addresses were awash with complaints about involuntary contributions being made to support sports activities. 

I think Government needs to reconsider what we want to be known for; is it for the type of corruption cases we have seen, where large amounts of money is disappearing in government coffers, in ministries and you send our troops out to people who are aggressing us at our own expense? Why don’t we cultivate this focal thing which brings us all together, across the political divide – sports - so that we can be able to take pride in it? I think Government needs to reconsider.

Secondly, when two to three main counterparts made us proud at world level, rewards were given to Kiprotich. The other time the Committee on Government Assurances went to Sebei region to see, among other things, whether the Government was implementing the promise that they had made by way of building houses and a stadium for this gallant son. Why don’t we also do a similar thing for the She Cranes? Why should we only move when it is the men who have done us proud and we cannot even consider the several gallant daughters who have done something?

I think we need to come up with a friendly environment for these people by way of having a stadium to recognise the efforts of the She Cranes, to recognise how they have made us proud as a country, so that they can also be able to identify themselves and we all collectively move forward.

3.47
MS SYLVIA NAMABIDDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to join you and the House to congratulate the She Cranes; indeed, you have done us proud!

If we are to talk about patriotism, what the She Cranes achieved for Uganda is a clear manifestation of your patriotism, Madam Speaker. We know that the road to Gaborone was not an easy road. We know that they went with around Shs 600,000 as they were going to compete but despite those odds, they managed to put up an astounding victory. For that, I want to congratulate them and to urge Government through the Minister of Education to give priority to sports.

While listening to the speech by the captain of the She Cranes, she did say that we are quick to celebrate and congratulate them and yet at their greatest hour of need, we do not come to support them. I would like to call upon the Minister of State for Sports to style up and to support the She Cranes and any other sporting group.

The issues we are talking about raise very serious gender concerns. I know that sports in general is underfunded, but when it comes to women’s sports, it is relegated to a secondary position. We know that it is the She Cranes who travel without funds. We know that it is the She Cranes that do not have sponsors. We know that it is the She Cranes that do not have changing rooms. We know that the She Cranes have been humiliated because when they are changing, they change while squatting down because no changing rooms have been provided for them.

I know the Minister of Education and Sports has a gender policy but I want to see them put this into realisation - (Member timed out.)

3.50
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take the opportunity to thank the She Cranes for the victory. I also thank the parliamentary coach and the manager for the work well done.

It is true the She Cranes last appeared for the world cup in 1979; this time round, the next world cup is within our reach. My humble request goes to the minister; let us start planning now. It really hurts to hear that when they were setting off, they left their manager behind because there was no money. She had to run up and down looking for financial help as if it was an abrupt programme. The minister must plan now because we shall get embarrassed when the time comes for the world cup and the team is denied money. When those people reached there, we are told that they were accommodated and fed on credit. It is very absurd and embarrassing! 

My humble request and prayer goes to the minister to start planning now such that when the time comes, there is money. It will not require the manager to stay behind and start seeking for help, going to the Speaker and other people for help. (Member timed out.)

3.52
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion moved by the minister. When I look around at these gallant ladies of Uganda, I feel proud for one thing - I was at the airport the day they were flagged off and they were all shouting “Our Speaker, our Speaker” until they entered the plane. 

Uganda has been slowly advertised by our sports; the other time it was Kiprotich and Kipsiro, today it is our gallant ladies. I think the power is vested in this Parliament for us to appropriate money. We are the appropriators of money in this Government, so we should not only blame the minister; we should also blame ourselves. We appropriate money sometimes to ministries which have even failed to account. We appropriate money to ministries like - I do not want to mention some of them, but huge sums of money is given to these ministries and we know they are not going to put it to use. These people do not want a lot of money; even Shs 5 billion can make a change or Shs10 billion, but have we done it? No! 

I also want to thank the President for tirelessly empowering the woman. If he had not done that, some of these women would have remained behind and they would not have come up. Whoever can convey my gratitude to him, let him do it. (Member timed out)

3.54
MS SARAH NETALASIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice in congratulating the She Cranes for making us proud. As a netballer -Somebody is asking me which number I play; in the Parliamentary Netball Team, I play the G (f) and for two consecutive years I have been awarded a trophy as the best shooter of the tournament.

As I was saying, as a netballer and as a sportswoman, I know that it is so sad to go for these tournaments when you are not facilitated. I listened to the captain of the She Cranes when she was interviewed and she said even the uniforms they were putting on were embarrassing. It takes love for the country and love for the game to enter the pitch. 

I want to congratulate the She Cranes because you put aside all the pride, you put aside all the needs you had, and what was ahead of you was Uganda. Thank you for making us proud. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, we have seen state dinners being organised for Kiprotich, for Kipsiro, and these ladies have also brought us fame and joy; honourable Minister of Education, Jessica Alupo, and your team, what was so hard for you to do the same for these ladies?

Madam Speaker, I know that the She Cranes still need our support but we cannot continue in the way we are doing because we only avail money to them at the last minute and after – (Member timed out_)

3.57
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Permit me to congratulate the She Cranes for bringing us victory. Despite all the challenges, some of which have been flashed in the media, the She Cranes are here again. I want to know from the Minister of Education and Sports – The last time the She Cranes brought us victory, we made some recommendations; I want to think that if some of these recommendations were to be implemented, possibly some of the challenges that they encountered would have been addressed.

Madam Speaker, before the She Cranes left for the games, they did not have a training ground. The one that is supposed to be used by all the teams at Nakivubo was destroyed and to date, it has never been reconstructed. I mean the one for the netballers; I know the one for the footballers is functioning. I find this discrimination of the highest class against a woman.

I recall when we were thanking them the other time, we asked Government to procure for them a van. I want to find out from the minister how far they have gone in procuring transport for the She Cranes. From reliable information I got, it is true that the She Cranes have not been provided with a van. When Parliament passes resolutions and Government fails to implement them – (Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I have been forced to stand on a point of order because repeatedly, every colleague who has spoken to this motion has been referring to this team as the She Cranes. My understanding is that we have the crested crane and we are to refer to a team either as the Cranes football team or the Cranes netball team. 

I am a gender sensitive person and I think this is segregation, because when it comes to the ladies, you want to call them the “She Cranes”. So, is it therefore in order for us to continuously refer to the Cranes netball team as the “She Cranes” yet when it comes to the football team, we do not refer to them as the “He Cranes”? (Laughter) Are we in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Sports, what is the official name of the team?

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. What I have to say is that a name is a name and the name for the netball team is the She Cranes and that for the football team is the Cranes; that is how they were baptised.

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, it is shameful that the ministry did not even provide kits to the team. They did not even provide a bottle of water. At this moment, I want to thank out consulate in Botswana who kept on providing water and fruits to the team.

Madam Speaker, the team entered the pitch while they were carrying their clothes yet they were supposed to have bags. You cannot participate in the game when you are not organised.

I want the minister to assure this House – since 2015 is still some months away - that the She Cranes will participate in the 2015 World Cup with all the facilitation available to them. The team needs facilitation to be dressed and they need sports kits. The team needs allowances. Each of them paidUS$400 to cater for their accommodation but imagine staying there for all those days and a person is paid only US$400. That money had also not been budgeted for by the ministry.

Madam Speaker, we need to plan for this. If Parliament had not remitted that Shs 100,000 which was deducted from each member’s account, the team would not have got the tickets. It is that money deducted from our salaries that helped them to procure the tickets. The National Council of Sports provided only three tickets. We are here talking about the She Cranes, we are busy saying they have flown our flag high, but there is need for us to plan for them. That is the assurance I want from the minister. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Medard Bitekyerezo. However, before he comes in, I also have a demand. We have independence celebrations coming soon; I demand that the team be recognised as heroes.


4.03
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to join my colleagues to thank the She Cranes. However, I want to say that you cannot milk a cow when you do not give it grass; the milk will never come out.

Madam Speaker, for these wonderful ladies to travel without money as if we are not here is very painful. If we had not contributed, these ladies would not have gone, but you can see us here celebrating the winning when we did not give them enough money. Madam Speaker, before I talk much, I want to suggest that instead of giving them only that Shs 100, 000 – we have been donating money every day – let us contribute Shs 200,000.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, when you look at the budget for the Ministry of Education, you realise that the sports component has the least allocation; there is a lot of money for workshops and conferences but very little for sports activities. So, I would like the Ministry of Education and Sports to get serious. How can four ministers – Hon. J.C. Muyingo, you are here, what is happening? Why can’t you budget money for sports in this country?

Madam Speaker, as matter of fact – (Member timed out_)

4.06
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On a very bright day like this, allow me to take this opportunity to add my voice to my colleagues to first of all thank you very much for the support that you gave to the She Cranes. I am certain that without your support, and given the fact that they last played 35 years back even before I was born, they would not have played this game. I really want to thank you sincerely from the bottom of my heart. Madam Speaker, you have made the She Cranes known.

First of all, the debate on why the She Cranes and why not the Cranes would not have come up if you did not give this support, because all we knew in this country were the Uganda Cranes. I am very happy that we now have the She Cranes and we are proudly associated with them.

Madam Speaker, there was a time we were celebrating Kiprotich of Uganda and I was so excited about him in this House. I want to tell you that I felt joy when the minister was introducing members of the She Cranes and there was a male coach giving support to the females. I want to say thank you very much, coach, for not being discriminative and for supporting the women.

Madam Speaker, members have already said we should contribute Shs 100,000 and others are saying Shs 200,000. From my pocket and as a young person, I want to contribute Shs 500,000 because I really feel that we must support these young people, and I am giving it in cash. Madam Speaker, I am being threatened to lay it on the Table. For fear for my bag as I will be going there to lay it on the Table,- I see there are people who are also- I will lay it in the hands of the coach because I am not sure- (Interruption)

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable member on the Floor has offered Shs 500,000 to the She Cranes. It is this very Member of Parliament who moved for the sole candidature and we know how much money was spent to popularise the sole candidature. Is she in order to start asking members to contribute when we know how much money was spent per sub county to popularise the sole candidature? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what you are contributing has no relevance to this motion. Please conclude.

MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for that wise ruling. I know members cannot sustain the heat that we are causing in the countryside with the sole candidate but- (Member timed out.)

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I am not about to give a legal opinion, but I want to make my brief remarks as long as they take. 

I want to talk about sports in congratulating the She Cranes team. I want to make reference to sports as a tool in the nation building process and make reference to the late Mandela and his efforts in bringing the South Africans together under the rugby team. He did a commendable job and even when he requested for the world cup to go and take place in South Africa, no one could dare object. 

What we lack in this country are common spaces that bring us together. We need to seriously reflect on an Article we put in the Constitution in 2005; Article 8A of our Constitution which emphasises pursuance and advocating for the common good - things that bring us together like peace, unity and development because all else are a means to an end. They are not a means in themselves.

There are structures you see in society like the sports team, the cultural institutions- congratulations, Madam Speaker, on your achievement in Busoga in getting a king. The cultural institutions, the sports teams, the political arena, for instance, we have got common spaces like the National Consultative Forum, we have got IPOD; all these structures should not be pursued, advocated for and promoted in an ad hoc manner.

I want to assure you that in Government - and I want to thank the minister for his motion and I am sure everyone supports it. We should pursue these objectives in a more coherent, planned and persuasive manner, otherwise- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MR RUHINDI: There is no other way we can get out of our backwardness as a nation if we do not pursue the common objectives and common good in this country. Thank you so much.

4.13
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The great question of the day will not be solved by speeches and resolutions of the majority but by action. However much we make resolutions in this House, if Cabinet is not giving the necessary support we shall always continue to talk about all these concerns but without any action being taken.

Gaining victory has never been an event; it is a process and if that process is not nurtured well, we cannot talk about victory. What we are injecting in sports leaves a lot to be desired and indeed as Parliament, we are more than ready. I would not want to turn this august House into a charitable organisation whereby we are contributing and yet it is the mandate of the government.

When you look at our 2014/2015 budget, State House entertainment was allocated over Shs 60 billion. What kind of entertainment if the She Cranes are not supported? When you look at how much we have been spending in as far as advertisement is concerned, you remember some time back we spent almost US$ 1 million to advertise this nation but without putting in the necessary requirements- (Member timed out.)



4.15
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a sportswoman who plays a centre in the parliamentary netball team, I want to join the minister and all my colleagues to congratulate the She Cranes. I have watched the events on their Facebook page and I want to thank the She Cranes for establishing this page. It is called the netball lovers. Please go and like that page and contribute to their development.

Madam Speaker, we are so proud that Uganda is registering a lot of progress in sports and now talking about the She Cranes advancing after 35 years. I want to thank Rotarian Sarah Nkonge for that rotary spirit, because I know that it has contributed much to the success of the team. I also want to thank Coach Mugerwa, the team captain, Proscovia, and the manager, Joselyn, for all the commitment that you have put into this team.

Madam Speaker, what surprised me, and everybody has said it, is the role of the government in promoting sports and not MPs, individuals or well wishers to support where there is a need. We are spending so much money on patriotism; why don’t we reallocate this money and put it under sports and specifically now for the She Cranes? 

The world cup in August 2015 is just “tomorrow”. Are we now going to start running around with baskets trying to get money for our gallant girls to go, and present and then we come back here and the minister moves to own the credit? Where were you when they were starving in Botswana? (Interruption)

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you very much, hon. Nalubega, for giving way.  Madam Speaker, as you are aware, I am a very serious sportsman and its does not stop at me but also my young brothers who could still be playing for the national team. 

As sportsmen, we have a very serious issue. At times like this, the officials, like what the minister has done, always come and own the game. There is one of my old friends with whom I used to play football with here in Uganda and as I speak, I am not even sure if he is still alive – (Interjections) –He got a football injury. 

The information that I want to give is that the soccer governing body – (Interjections) – I will mention the name- has played a very big role in terms of neglecting the former serious players. The person that I am talking about is Andrew Fimbo Mukasa. He is in a very terrible condition and has suffered a lot. So, I want to congratulate the She Cranes for having achieved –

THE SPEAKER: But is that information or you are smuggling? (Laughter)

MR BAGOOLE: I only have one message: Do not get surprised one day if you went to watch some of those who will be playing after you have retired and the minister or person responsible will not have a record of those who played and made Uganda qualify for the world cup. I thank you very much.

4.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion but also to congratulate the She Cranes for making our country proud. We thank you.

This is not the first time that we are congratulating the She Cranes. Last year on 18thDecember, we had a similar motion moved here and the Speaker gave some guidelines and directives when we had that discussion on what the government should do or should have done for the She Cranes. We talked about them lacking offices, and the motion had been moved by hon. Jalia Bintu, and a number of things were supposed to be done by our Government for the She Cranes. However, nothing has been done; we are here lamenting, talking about the budget and yet we have the ability to influence this budget. We should not come here when they come with the world cup and we have another motion and again lament about the same things. 

I would really like to appeal to the Government to take sports as a serious aspect of our lives. Sports helps us in building cultural ties and friendship through competition. Sports entertains us, keeps us physically fit and healthy and also sells the name of the institution or country. If they came back with the world cup, they would have done much more work than any money that the government has spent on marketing Uganda. So, we should invest money into sports instead of lamenting. 

We think that anybody who has been in the national team, whether soccer, netball, hockey or rugby, should be given an allowance by this country. We can afford to give them an allowance. People sell our name when they are strong and when they become old, the die in poverty. In this country, many die in poverty. As a Parliament and country, we should recognise them and set up an allowance by the ministry which can be budgeted for, so that they live decently when they retire, and also die decently instead of dying in poverty as they do. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have spent a bit of time on this motion. I just want to hear proposals. I also want to object to one of the minister’s prayers when he says that Parliament should allocate more money. We allocate based on your proposals and so if you have that motion, it means that we are the ones who are not allocating enough money. So, that part of the motion, no. 

Since the chairperson of the awards committee is here, I also want a commitment that these few Ugandan women can be recognised at this Independence as heroes of Uganda. I think that they are heroes.

4.23
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I thank you for raising the issue of awarding medals to those who distinguish themselves in serving our country. I am happy to report that we gave Kiprotich one of the highest medals of this country and we also gave Inzikuru the Independence Medal.

The process of giving medals is still ongoing and Parliament legislated that it is done through the Presidential Awards Committee. The process is such that somebody writes to the committee proposing the name and giving reasons why. That process is open and we cannot decide here in Parliament. So, that process is there and I request those that are concerned to send their names and they will be considered.

THE SPEAKER: If it is part of our resolution, what will happen? The names are already there and are part of the resolution.

GEN. TUMWINE: I am glad, Madam Speaker, that this issue is being raised because people are asking how medals are awarded. I get a lot of problems because people ask, “What about me or what about that one?”  

I have said that there is a legal procedure given by this House. We enacted the National Honours and Awards Act, 2001 in this Parliament in which the process of awarding medals is not by resolutions but through the process of writing to the Presidential Awards Committee.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, I am giving notice that I am going to write to you, Gen. Tumwine. Let us conclude. Is there any further amendment?  Honourable members, I now put the question that this House do adopt the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA ON 
THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY (SGR) IN UGANDA

4.26
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament of Uganda on the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) in Uganda.  This motion is moved under rules 47, 48 and 50 of our Rules of Procedure. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MR SSEKIKUBO: “WHEREAS on 13 January 2012 the Government of the Republic of Uganda through the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with China Civil Engineering Construction Corporation (CCECC) for the rehabilitation or upgrading of the existing railway line from Malaba to Kampala;

AND WHEREAS on the same day, another memorandum was entered into between the same parties for the rehabilitation and/or upgrading of the existing railway line from Tororo to Pakwach and then to Gulu, and expansion of the railway line from Gulu to Nimule;

AND WHEREAS the Government of Uganda, on the 8th day of April 2014, issued a notice and purported to terminate the Memorandum of Understanding between the parties in respect of the eastern and northern route, that is, Kampala to Malaba, Tororo to Pakwach then Gulu, and from Gulu to Nimule, of the said SGR project to the consternation of CCECC, the original company;

AND WHEREAS CCECC contested the government decision to terminate the Memorandum of Understanding, vide High Court miscellaneous cause No. 71 of 2014;

AND WHEREAS, by a ruling dated 23 July 2014, court issued orders inter alia prohibiting Government or its agents from entering into a contract regarding the eastern route of the Standard Gauge Railway project in Uganda if CCECC is still interested in the same route;

AND WHEREAS the Government has, in total disregard of the court orders, purported to terminate the above herein mentioned memorandum;

NOTING THAT the sum involved as submitted by CCECC is US$4.2 billion and the sum involved by CHECH, the other company, is US$ 8.5 billion, giving a variance of US$4.3 billion;

AWARE THAT the circumstances surrounding the government’s decision in this matter are of great public importance in view of the colossal sums involved in the project, amounting to US$8.5 billion, that is, Shs 22 trillion, which is unprecedented in the history of Uganda and which must ultimately constitute the largest debt burden to the present and future generations of Uganda; 

FURTHER AWARE that the Parliament of Uganda in exercise of its constitutional mandate under Article 79 is under obligation to ensure accountability on the part of the Executive and to protect the Constitution and to promote democratic governance;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:
1. The Government be urged to respect the rule of law by fully complying with the orders of court and in conformity with Article 128(2) and (3) of the Constitution so as not to hold the Judiciary, which is the third arm of Government, in contempt.

2. A select committee of Parliament be set up to urgently investigate the actions of the State Minister for Works and Transport and all officials involved in the procurement process of all the companies involved in the Standard Gauge Railway project.

3. In light of the urgency of the matters involved in this motion and the colossal amounts of money the taxpayer shall ultimately pay, the select committee of Parliament is granted exceptional facilitation to conduct its work with speed and report back to Parliament within 30 days.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before we proceed, the gallant She Cranes are free to leave because we have finished with your motion, but if you want to stay, you can stay. Thank you very much.  

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I wish to proceed by giving a background and justification for this motion.

Madam Speaker, contact between Government and M/s CCECC started way back in 1998 when CCECC wrote to the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication then headed by hon. Nasasira, expressing their desire to introduce a trolley bus transport system in Kampala. Then in a letter referenced 291, dated 1 December 2000, the Principle Private Secretary to the President informed the Executive Director of M/s Union Investments Ltd, who had introduced M/s CCECC, that there were a number of large-scale infrastructure projects that could be of interest to CCECC. Such projects included the rehabilitating of the Kampala-Kasese railway line, the line from Bihanga to Kabale, and he therefore advised the director to consult the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication. 

On 17 February 2004, His Excellency the President met the chairman of CCECC at State House, Entebbe. In October 2006, the President received the CCECC delegation in Kempinski Hotel in Beijing during the China Africa Summit. The CCECC delegation is reported to have spoken on behalf of all Chinese overseas companies operating in Africa at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing. 

In a letter referenced P1, dated 29 October 2010, entitled “Development of East African Regional Railway Network”, the President responded to the letter from the chairman of CCECC on the possible strategic cooperation between the Government of Uganda and M/s CCECC. In the letter, His Excellency the President Museveni stated: “You are aware of our Government’s commitment to contribute towards setting up a regional railway network. Our Government is thus formally expressing its interest in revitalising, reconstructing and developing a modern railway network in East Africa and Central African Region. 

As a corporation of the Chinese Government, there are many business/working modalities that our Government could structure with your corporation and Government fast tracks implementation of this infrastructure development effort. 

I am thus directing the Uganda Government technical staff to study and devise how best such a project can be structured under a private public partnership with your corporation.

Accordingly, by copy of this letter, I am directing the Minister of Works and the Chief of Defence Forces to liaise with your technical staff as well as modalities aimed at forging a working relationship that is aimed at paving way for the development and implementation of this massive infrastructure project.”

On 17 December 2010, M/s CCECC replied to the letter to the President and appreciated the trust His Excellency the President had expressed and their willingness to cooperate with the UPDF and they invited the ministers to China. 

In July 2011, the Ministry of Works inquired from the Chinese Embassy about the capacity of this particular company called M/s CCECC. Then in a letter under minute TERS/16 dated 24 August 2011 entitled, “Proposed railway projects from Kampala through Tororo-Malaba, Tororo-Pakwach, Gulu-Atiak-Nimule” the Minister of Works requested the Minister of Finance to authorise them to sign a memorandum of understanding with CCECC. 

On 10 January 2012, the Permanent Secretary requested for the clearance of the memorandum. On the same day, the ministry acknowledged the approval from the President to sign the Memorandum of Understanding. On 13 January 2012, the Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the Government and M/s CCECC. It is clear from the preamble of the agreement that Government desired to develop a railway system in the country to enable it play a critical role in the socio-economic development of the country and the East African Region.

On 8th May, CCECC sent a technical team to carry out a feasibility study. This was done together with Uganda Railways Corporation and the Ministry of Works. On 22 May 2013, the Chinese technical team submitted a report to the Uganda Railway Corporation and the Ministry of Works. In October 2012, CCECC completed the feasibility studies. However, this was in Chinese language.

In the letter, CCECC MTW 13/1, the regional manager of CCECC submitted feasibility studies on the railway lines from Kampala to Malaba. In a letter - still, for purposes of laying on the Table we have it here with us - dated 19April 2013, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Works and Transport, informed the Director of Transport, Ministry of Works, and the Director of Engineering, Engineer in Chief and the Chief Civil Engineer that they had submitted and received a feasibility study for the Tororo-Gulu-Pakwach-Nimule railway line.

On 23rdApril, in a letter under reference ADM 715501, the Solicitor-General informed the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Defence that the memorandum of understanding signed between the Ministry of Defence and M/s CCECC was signed against the advice of the Solicitor-General, that it was signed by the wrong party on the part of Government and without clearance of the Attorney-General. In a surprise turn of events, at a meeting held on 20thAugust at the Ministry of Works, it was decided that after consultations at a higher level, the railways sections, which had originally been allocated to one firm, CCECC, which had done the feasibility study, was now to be allocated to another Chinese firm called Chinese Harbour Engineering Company (CHEC). 

On 5 February 2014, the Ministry of Works sought advice from the Solicitor-General on whether a memorandum of understanding between Government of Uganda and M/s CCECC could be terminated. On the 26th February, the Solicitor-General wrote advising against termination of the memorandum of understanding. He stated thus: “There is no clear reason advanced as to why you want to terminate the Memorandum of Understanding with CCECC since it does not hinder any arrangement by Government in its desire to fast-track the SGR construction.”

Subsequently, CCECC went to court to challenge the termination and the High Court of Uganda, on 23 July 2014, quashed the purported termination by the minister. The minister, in spite of the court order, on 25 August 2014 went ahead to enter into another MoU with CHEC, which had the effect of terminating the MoU with CCECC, with attendant consequences regarding derailing the railway project in Uganda and the region.

Considering the humongous trillions of shillings involved in the SGR project, as captured by the Government of Uganda project proposal cost, at US$8.5 billion, which is equivalent to Shs 22 trillion; further, without a clear explanation to the Uganda people’s representatives about the said project; further, the apparent clash and disagreement between members of the Executive as depicted in their contradictory correspondences, copies of which are attached as well as the media reports; further compounded by the opaqueness of the process lacking parliamentary scrutiny as dully mandated by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; further buttressed and fortified by a similar Kenyan experience where this very standard gauge railway under similar strange circumstances was first subjected to two parliamentary committees for streamlining before the project would be sanctioned; in the premises, it was considered duty bound that this matter be brought to the attention of honourable august House for Parliament to rise up to its constitutional mandate as a people’s representative body in protecting and defending the Constitution and the performance of its core oversight functions.

So far, the documentary evidence available and to be tabled reveals glaring irregularities bordering on the gross abuse of the due process, wanton graft involving very huge sums of money unprecedented in the history of this country. 

The above grave concerns are highlighted under the following five areas:

1) The multiplicity of memoranda of understanding entered at the same time and entered into by different government offices with different companies over the same standard gauge railway. 
2) The gross abuse of the procurement process. 
3) Total disrespect of the court orders and undermining of the Judiciary, the third arm of government. 
4) Deliberately fronting an inexperienced and blacklisted company to undertake such a huge project of the standard gauge railway.
5) Influence peddling and abuse of office.

I will move on one, four and five and my seconders will take on the remaining items. Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Can you do this in a few minutes? How much time do you require?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I am going to summarise because at an appropriate time, these matters can be handed over to the committee. However, for such a serious matter, we were concerned by the multiplicity of the memoranda of understanding. Many were entered between different firms by different government officials, entered into at the same time and for the same project. This cannot be the way Government runs business!

I beg to lay these documents on the Table as I speak on them. With me here is the Memorandum of Understanding made on the 13th day of January 2012 between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication and China Civil Engineering Construction Corporation over the Kampala-Malaba route and the north. It was signed by Dr Stephen Chebrot, the minister, and CCECC. 

On 13 July 2012, we had another Memorandum of Understanding between Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication and China Communications Construction Company Ltd on the Malaba-Kampala route, the same route. This was signed by hon. Abraham Byandala and CCCC.

Another Memorandum of Understanding between Ministry of Works and Transport and CCCC for the Tororo-Pakwach-Gulu route, dated 13th July was signed again by hon. Abraham Byandala and Mr Cheng of the same company. 

Now we have another MoU dated 18 April 2013 between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and China Harbour Engineering Company Ltd. This was signed by Ms Rosette Byengoma, PS Ministry of Defence, together with Ju Gang of the CHECL. This one is for the same Malaba-Kampala standard gauge railway. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Honourable member, you better clarify to the House that these are different companies. Clarify that the MoU were signed by officials of the Government of Uganda and different Chinese companies because if you say CHECL, people may not understand. They are different companies but the same project.

MR SSEKIKUBO: This is the same project of the standard gauge railway entered between different companies and different government officials.

There is a recent one that was signed on the 25th of August between hon. Byabagambi and CHECL; that one is still kept in the drawer and we have not accessed it. 

In a letter as early as 2012, the Attorney-General, hon. Peter Nyombi, warned against the multiplicity of the memoranda of understanding. In one instance he wrote, “I need to bring this to your attention for, as it is, we have agreements with different firms for execution of works on the same line. Therefore, this needs to be harmonised within your ministry to avoid potential embarrassment.” He was writing to the hon. Minister of Works, Transport and Communication.

The PS, Ministry of Works, wrote to the Minister for Works and Transport, the minister of state in charge of works and the minister of state in charge of transport. He warned, and I will read the last line - This was on 13 May 2013. “The problems of multiplicity of parallel MoUs and letters of intent signed with private companies for upgrading of the same railway network and Kampala Port at Bukasa. The multiplicity of MoUs and the commitments between Government of Uganda and different companies is beginning to cause embarrassment to Government and will most likely result in Government paying compensation costs. Such compensation will spark off fire in Parliament sooner or later and heads will roll. This should be avoided now.”It is signed by the then PS, Mr Charles Muganzi. 

To us, you cannot sign different memoranda of understanding with different firms for the same project. That is what has culminated into CCECC going to court and court halting the process. Like it or not, we, the taxpayers, are the ones to suffer at the end of this.

Two, I am considering the inexperienced and blacklisted firm. We are presenting documents to show that Government carried out due diligence on the two firms that have been at the frontline. The first due diligence was on CHECL. The team visited the harbour works that were being constructed in Cameroon. 

I have to quote this for the benefit of Parliament. The Minister of Works and Transport, hon. Byandala, was writing in a letter dated 16 April 2013to the Minister for the Presidency and Minister responsible for Kampala City. He wrote, “CHECL and China Roads and Bridge Corporation are subsidiaries of a huge enterprise called China Communications and Construction Company (CCC), which owns 50 percent of CHECL. The CHECL is a Chinese state owned firm that started work in 1980.It is registered in China and it has a short experience of slightly five years of railway construction and it is limited to China but it has started well. 

An advance copy of the report has been given to Ministry of Defence to enable them advance the component of the MoU for partnership between CHECL and UPDF.”

This was the minister writing and showing that the company was inexperienced. The due diligence itself carried on the same firm is here. If I may read, “CHEC, one of the companies, has been dealing mainly in engineering procurement and construction projects compared to PPP. Also, the core functions of CHEC are basic infrastructure construction such as marine engineering, dredging, reclamation, construction of railways, roads and bridges.”

As per its name, it is basically a harbour construction firm. To that extent, a proposal to construct the port at Bukasa was better suited for them, but now for it to be transformed into one to construct the railway is where the problems come from. This is China Harbour and Engineering Company but in a surprise turn of events, it is now the one that has been given the project for the railway construction.

We also have in our possession the due diligence on another firm called CCECC. It has been removed from the project, has vast experience, it started way back in 1979 and it has the following works up its sleeve: It constructed the Tazara railway linking Tanzania and Zambia,  3,288 kilometres; the Nigeria railway of 1,315 kilometres; the Chad railway network of 1,364 kilometres; the Libya coast railway of 472 kilometres; the Libya North South railway of 643 kilometres; Ethiopia-Djibouti railway project of 340kilometres; Lagos railway project of 27 kilometres and many more. The contract was instead given to CHEC that has coverage of only 79 kilometres of railway, and this is of a high-speed railway and in China, not anywhere in Africa, and an experience of five years compared to the company with experience from 1979.

From our research, we came across information that the company that has now been given the MoU was blacklisted by the World Bank. This is from the Cayman News Services: “The Chinese company that the Cayman Islands Government is negotiating with over the development of cruise berthing facilities has been banned by the World Bank because of fraud and corruption. The parent company of China Harbour Engineering Company (CHEC), China Communications Construction Company (CCCC) Limited, has been barred from being involved in projects financed by the global bank since 2009 under its fraud and corruption sanctioning policy.”

I have another attachment here and this is from the press, and I want to read it to you. It is from 8 September 2014 when this news broke; CHECL wanted to rebut it, and it says, “Meanwhile, Lee Yu Huan, the officer in charge of information from CHEC, issued a statement yesterday dismissing reports that the company was blacklisted by World Bank over fraud and corruption. The statement sent to the New Vision said that the reports were caused by a mix-up of the companies involved. He explained that the company blacklisted was China Communications Construction Company (CCCC), one of the subsidiaries of CHEC mother company.” In actual sense, the CCCC they are talking about owns 50 percent of CHEC. So, they are one and the same. Actually, it is the major shareholder in the company. 

I want to end with one last issue before I can invite my colleagues. This is the issue about the abuse of office and influence peddling by the officers that shall be named. In a letter dated 11 June 2014, the Attorney-General, hon. Peter Nyombi, wrote to the hon. Abraham James Byandala over the construction of the standard gauge railway. In that letter, the minister said, “Therefore, I wish to reiterate my earlier advice of not terminating the Memorandum of Understanding without being advised by this office. Accordingly, there is no reason why you should not proceed and conclude the agreement with M/s CCECC.” 

Also earlier, the Solicitor-General wrote, in a letter dated 26 February 2014, to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Works and Transport. The letter was entitled, “Intention to terminate the Memorandum of Understanding with CCECC.” The letter states, “Termination of the Memorandum of Understanding which has been implemented may expose Government of Uganda to unnecessary litigation and associated costs, both in monetary terms and delays in the implementation of the project. There is no clear reason advanced as to why you want to terminate the MoU with CCECC, since it does not hinder any arrangement by Government in its desire to fast-track the SGR construction. We should avoid being seen as the ones unilaterally breaching the MoUs.” That was the Solicitor-General advising the ministry.

Then as late as 27 June 2014, the Attorney-General wrote to the President of Uganda about the progress regarding the construction of the standard gauge railway in Uganda. The long and short of it, again, is that he concludes by saying thus: “Should the Minister of State for Works and Transport proceed to terminate the Memorandum of Understanding, not only will Government be liable for huge costs and damage, the termination will also stall the process if the aggrieved party decides to challenge the decision. Accordingly, I advise that the Minister of State be directed to retract his notice of termination.” This was because at that time, the hon. John Byabagambi had issued a notice of termination. This letter was signed by the Attorney-General, and that was the position of Government.

Now we shift to what the ministry or those who are behind this -

THE SPEAKER: Please, try to wind up.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, Madam Speaker, I am winding up. On 25 August 2014, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance/Secretary to the Treasury wrote to the Minister of Works, and listen to this: “Clearance for the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding between China Harbour Engineering Corporation and Government of Uganda. I acknowledge receipt of your letter dated GFR83/22/08/2014 but received on 25 August 2014. I have reviewed and submitted the documents in three hours, and given the short notice of your submission, this is to forward you my comments.” 

This is a project involving Shs 22 trillion and the PS reviewed it within three hours. The letter was written to him on 22nd and it took three days for that letter to move from Ministry of Works to Ministry of Finance but when it arrived there, he was given a deadline to work on it within three hours. The rest, honourable members, you can imagine for yourself. What kind of advice on a project of Shs 22 trillion can be handled in three hours?

We also have a letter dated 22 August 2014, which is about the clearance for the termination of the Memorandum of Understanding between Government of Uganda and the China Civil Engineering and Construction Corporation. The letter was written by the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, holding the portfolio of the Attorney-General. The concern is that as late as 27 June 2014, the substantive Attorney-General was saying no to this decision, but without reference to the correspondence by the full Attorney-General, now the Deputy Attorney-General, without even copying to all the relevant offices, wrote to authorise the termination. 

So, this is what is pertaining to this matter of the standard gauge railway. Therefore, it would be important to know what informed the deputy who was standing in while the minister was away to immediately authorise the termination, in spite of the letters from the Attorney-General and the Solicitor General.

Lastly, let me refer to one–(Interruption)- It is hon. Fred Ruhindi who is responsible for this. On 9 July 2014, the Minster of Ethics and Integrity, the hon. Simon Lokodo, wrote to his counterpart at the Ministry of Works and Transport, hon. John Byabagambi. I would like to beg that you allow me read the last sentence: “This is therefore to advise you and the standard gauge railway steering committee not to proceed with the signing of other MoUs and the reallocation of the railway line sections as mentioned in your communication dated 7thJuly to the contactors until the IGG’s office advises and recommendations are communicated.” He wrote this after he noticed that it was unethical for him to proceed when there was a matter with the IGG.

On 10thJuly, the following day, the hon. John Byabagambi responded, and I will read only two sentences: “I am not privy to the decisions and I do not know whether one of the decisions was to direct the Minister of State for Ethics to communicate the decisions of this meeting to the Minister of State for Works. Therefore, this is to inform you that I am eagerly waiting for the decision of the meeting, which took place on 8 July 2014, and to inform you that unless advised otherwise by His Excellency the President, the process to sign the memorandum will continue.” This is hon. John Byabagambi who wrote to rebuke his colleague, the Minister of State for Ethics and Integrity – (Interjections) – I am reading from the ink that was put to paper.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please wind up.

MR SSEKIKUBO: In winding up, I would like to end by referring to one of piece of communication, which came from the President to the hon. Abraham Byandala, the Minister of Works and Transport. The project was about the new Kampala Port at Bukasa and the standard gauge railway. The President wrote thus: “Some time ago, our black American compatriot, Ms Rosa Whitaker, formerly the US Trade Representative for Africa, brought to us a Chinese group known as China Harbour Engineering Company Ltd that wanted to help source Chinese funds”. He adds, “Ms Rosa Whitaker had assured these Chinese that in Uganda, there is no need for bribing officials, which apparently is a common practice in many parts of Africa; instead, that money should be used to equip the Engineering Brigade of the UPDF and further train them.” 

This is communication in which the President is saying that the company be given the job and the commission built in the project, instead of giving it to the corrupt officials, can be given to Government to develop and train the UPDF. This means that this will automatically inflate the cost of the project to unprecedented levels. When did we as a country start budgeting for commissions and bribes to modernise the UPDF? I think it is this that energised minister Byabagambi and others to hold all the due processes in contempt.

Honourable members, this is quite unacceptable and I think it is as a result of this that despite all the due advice, it was not heeded. The minister, with the strongest arrogance possible, said he would proceed to terminate because there is the bribe component. Instead of bribing the ministry officials now, it is handed over to Government and those concerned - I find this very strange because year in, year out, it is this Parliament that appropriates money for Ministry of Defence and for the police. Never at any stage have we said that the development of the UPDF and the training will be based on a bribe. I allow my colleagues to move to the second stage and I lay this letter on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Can we just use three minutes, please?

5.07
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will begin from where he ended. My issue will be on the abuse of the procurement process. I have in mind the role of procurement. The procurement began in a meeting attended by the lady named by my colleague, Mrs Rosa Whitaker, a meeting that was held on 20 August 2013. 

On page 3 of the minutes of that meeting, and this is what I want to read for you to appreciate, it was said thus: “There is need for the three companies, CCECC, CCCC and CHEC, to form a consortium so that we sign a bi-lateral agreement with the Government of China instead of signing with individual companies. This arrangement will help us by-pass procurement procedures, which requires the jobs to be advertised and to ensure that all the three companies are not left out due to competitive bidding.”I beg to lay on the Table these minutes signed by hon. John Byabagambi and G. Okello Ngyero as secretary.

Madam Speaker, I also want to lay on the Table a letter written by the law firm of Agaba Muhairwe, which was procured by the Minister of Works to help the Government in defending the matter that had gone to court, of course contrary to the procurement laws. In effect, they advised that one, Government should appeal and two, should ensure that the negotiations should not continue. I want to lay on the Table the letter itself and the opinion given by that law firm.

I will also lay on the Table a letter written by His Excellency the President on 11 August 2014 purportedly to appoint a negotiating team. It includes the same law firm of Agaba Muhairwe and Company Advocates, which had advised that there should be an appeal and that negotiations should not continue, together with a one Brig. Timothy Mutebile Sabiiti to be among the team. Brig. Timothy Mutebile Sabiiti had witnessed one of the memoranda of understanding with one of the companies called CHEC, which has already been laid on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I also want to lay on the Table a letter from the PPDA, and I will read this for purposes of emphasis so that we appreciate that the whole procurement process is shrouded in mystery. This is what the authority said in a letter dated 28 February 2013: “The Authority informed the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the circumstances stated in the letter of 3 December 2012 did not fall under the exceptional circumstances listed under the law.”

So, they wanted a procurement that would by-pass the law, and this is what the Authority said:“The Authority advised that the implementing agency of Government for the proposed project should submit a formal request for a deviation to use the direct procurement method to the Authority together with the following information…” which is given. Finally, the Authority said that in light of the above, in effect they did not give the procuring entity the permission to procure these services outside the law.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I will invite you to support this motion to avoid the country being plunged into a terrible financial crisis, where a few individuals - I have information that Cabinet itself has not sat to discuss this matter -

THE SPEAKER: There are some children here who came in when we were talking. They are from Sibiriyise Primary School in Busia represented by hon. Maganda and hon. Oundo. You are welcome.

MR NIWAGABA: I beg you, honourable members, to support this motion for the good of our country, for the sake of transparency and to ensure that finally, if we are to get the railway line, we shall have value for money with no kickbacks paid to specific individuals. I thank you.

5.12
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As ably articulated by my colleagues before, this matter eventually ended up in court and with me here is the ruling of the court. I will quote a few paragraphs such that this august House appreciates the magnitude of the problem. 

This was the judge’s finding:“I find the minister’s termination decision to be unilateral, irrational, high-handed, arbitrary, unreasonable, clothed in procedural impropriety, ultra vires, erroneous and the face of the record with no legal basis and not in public interest within the standards of these principles enumerated.” This is the finding of the court. The minister we are talking about has gone ahead, despite this court decision, to terminate, and this is the hon. John Byabagambi. 

Madam Speaker, since when did politicians have a role in procurement? This is the very issue we were raising during the oil debate, trying to shield our own ministers on the Front Bench. We argued, do not get involved in procurement, remain at policy level and the technical people go into procurement. You fought it and now you are in it. 

It embarrasses some of us to be talking about our own colleagues. We would rather grill these technical people than having some of you involved in this sort of impropriety. If a court finds a minister to be irrational, unreasonable, ultra vires, arbitrary and high-handed, what business does he have in an office? If a court of law finds a minister who does not act in public interest, what business does he have in that office?

Lastly, I will read another bit of the ruling, and this is what the judge said, “I wish to observe, before I take leave of this matter, that while annexure (a) and (b) to the minister’s affidavit in reply demonstrate that the contract for the project in Uganda stands given to the applicant…with a view to fast track the project, the minister’s continued cuddling regarding termination of the applicant’s Memorandum of Understanding with the Government, pushing the applicant to seek redress in court, serves only to delay…”- and this is what I want to emphasise -“…serves only to delay the project in Uganda. It is not in tandem with the directive to prioritise fast-tracking the SGR project nor the overall public interest of development of railway infrastructure in Uganda. In my humble view, the minister should check his intentions, put his country first and come into line for the fast-tracking of the said project as a priority.” This is the court that is also now questioning the minister’s intention. 

This whole saga, Madam Speaker, serves to delay the project and it is going to be very expensive. The learned Attorney-General can tell you that today, the domestic arrears in terms of court judgments and awards stands at Shs554 billion because of the recklessness of government officials. We are talking – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, we are talking about a country that loses 100 women in labour everyday because of lack of maternal healthcare. If you were to take only a quarter of this, our maternal healthcare system would improve. This is criminality! To make matters worse, the Cabinet has not discussed this matter. A stitch in time saves nine. 

I beg to lay this court decision and the court order, which was - (Hon. Member:“What is the name of the judge?”] It is Justice Lydia Mugambe, and this is what she ordered after the ruling: “An order of prohibition be issued against the minister or any agent of the Government from entering into a contract regarding the eastern route SGR project if the applicant is still interested in the same.” The minister has done the exact opposite from what she ordered and we shall end up in court and taxpayers’ money being lost.

Madam Speaker, as I end, it is not that we are advocating for one of these companies to be awarded a contract, and we want to make this clear. We think that the process is wrong; Government can follow the law, and all this impropriety and unethical behaviour of officials of government, which has even been condemned by the Minister for Ethics, should be investigated and checked. 

Humbly, Madam Speaker, we have a lot of evidence and if it pleases this House to establish a committee, we shall appear before this committee and give in detail what has been going on. But it smells dirty!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question that we shall have to decide on is whether from what you have heard, it is necessary to set up a committee. Let us hear from the minister.

5.20
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank my colleagues who have brought the motion and the seconders. 

Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, I want to make it absolutely clear from the beginning that there is no project of Shs 22 trillion – (Interjections) -There is no project of any amount of money. They are talking of the Memorandum of Understanding and if you check in all of these, there is an exclusivity clause saying that if you signed with me, you cannot sign with this one. – (Interjections) -You can check in the MoU. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker,- (Interruption)-Let me talk.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has been listening, so give him his time. 

MR BYANDALA: Secondly–

THE SPEAKER: Order! Allow the minister to speak, please. He has been listening intently.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, we have documents that were laid on the Table and we have got one side, but all the names involved are from Cabinet; why don’t we allow the Leader of Government Business to sort out their problems. We can give them a timeframe to come here and we deal with that matter because now we are going to be an arbitrator and the minister mentioned has a conflict of interest as he is mentioned in the report.

Let the Cabinet and state ministers go back and sort out their matters, they come back with the concerns we got from Members and we shall start from there. The moment we start listening from one minister to another, we shall not resolve this matter.

THE SPEAKER: So you are suggesting that the minister should not speak?

MR KAKOOZA: Yes. What I am saying is that since these are ministers and the documents are from them, let the Leader of Government Business first sort it out and they bring us what they think about our colleagues’ report. As Parliament, we shall then be able to assert ourselves with a way forward.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, before I call hon. Dombo, I want you to join me in recognising a group from Kyanvuma Parish in Irongo Sub-County; they are called Kigere-Igu. They are here from Luuka represented by hon. Bagoole and hon. Naome Kaabule. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I feel a little bit constrained because of the concluding words used by hon. Katuntu. The exclusion that he provided, that he is actually not advocating for one side, is contrary to what hon. Ssekikubo was saying. Hon. Ssekikubo was very specific and emphatic, contrasting two positions and saying that this one has this experience, this one does not have that experience. I therefore, did not pick the gist.    

I had wanted to say that this House has been bogged down by a number of select committees that have been set up and they have not given their reports. –(Interjections)– On the oil report that was about the then Prime Minister, we even do not know what recommendations and decisions we are going to make. 

We have sector committees, which are responsible and can do effective work and come and report to this House. In order for me not to apportion any blame or make any member look suspicious, we have sector committees that we have set up and they can do effective inquiry and make propositions on the issues that we feel belong to their sectors. 

I want to beg for the indulgence of Madam Speaker and the Members; since this specific matter falls under the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, why don’t we refer this matter there? We can then give them this evidence, give them a timeframe so that they can come and give us specific recommendations, which we can effectively debate as a House. After they have done that, then it would be up to this House to give the way forward.

Finally, Madam Speaker, as you consider the proposition and my request to this House, it becomes unfair on the side of Government if the media goes away with a one–sided story. We have heard something from the other side; it becomes prudent for the ministers to tell us something even when this matter will be referred to a committee, so that a balanced position can be portrayed. That is my proposition. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is why I had invited the minister to say a few things. Let the minister speak because he has been named. 

THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. As I said, we do not have any project of Shs 22 trillion. Hon. Ssekikubo said that we have conflicting MoUs; to the best of my knowledge, we do not have a MoU with CCCC. The Clerk can check and inform us on that.

Secondly, we have not yet started the procurement process. We are well aware that we are going to go through the procedures of procurement, which are well known to all of us in the ministry. We are going to use the existing laws to ensure that the procurement goes through the processes as stated – (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the minister speak. I think in a democracy, you listen to both sides. So, let the minister speak.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, in the submission, there was also confusion created, that the Ministry of Defence was to do the construction of the standard gauge railway. The MoU between Ministry of Defence and that company was for them to establish an engineering school to train our people in these works.

Hon. Katuntu did not read all the rulings by the judge, but in a nutshell, the judge said, “Go back and discuss this issue.” This is basically what the judge said, and we went back and sat with the company to go through the existing MoU between us and that company, CCECC. The objective of this was for us to go through and see whether the company – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I have been sitting here and listening very attentively. Hon. Byandala began his submission and midway, he said there is no MoU and in the last few minutes, he has just said there is a MoU. Madam Speaker, is he in order to mislead this House as to contradict himself within a span of five minutes? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether there is a MoU or not but tell us your side, honourable minister.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, just to clear that, the MoU of CCCC that they are talking about expired long time ago; there is a difference between CCECC and CCCC. The one of CCCC expired and I am sure of that. 

Madam Speaker, I want to assure this House that we are determined; we are going to follow the laid down rules and laws of Uganda in procuring. Nobody can talk of Shs 22 trillion already because we have not yet done a detailed engineering design. Without a detailed engineering design, you cannot have the cost –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order on the Floor.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The conduct of the minister alone reveals so much; there is something that he trying to hide, and that is the motive the judge referred to in the judgement. 

Madam Speaker, we had clearly heard the minister, just a few minutes ago, say that the MoU of CCCC expired. This is the same MoU which the Attorney-General referred to saying, “Please, watch out”, and the same MoU that the court made a ruling on. How dare he come on the Floor of Parliament, without proving to us that this very MoU that the different authorities have been talking about and have been trying to warn him against expired? Is he in order to try to confuse this House, doing damage control that is not even adding up? Is he in order?

THESPEAKER: It is difficult for me to know what was brought because I have not seen the papers. Please, conclude. Let us hear from the minister, honourable members.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, let me assure my colleagues, and the clerk can check, that the MoU of CCCC expired. The MoU which is currently running is the one with CCECC. These are two different companies. The other one expired. 

Madam Speaker, we were never given notice about this, so I request that they give us these documents, we go and prepare a robust reply, so that if necessary we can go to the committee or to the select committee if set up. I wish my colleagues had come to my office and we shared information before coming here. I thank you. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify on a few issues. The minister here is on record to say there is no amount attached, that there is no Shs 22 trillion involved. Now, this is a government project document - Ministry of Works and Transport, Uganda Railways Corporation. It is his ministry. I understand because it was signed by engineer John Byabagambi on March 31s and he probably did not have a copy. 

However, according to the datasheet of the standard gauge railway development, the cost estimate is US$8.5 billion, which is equivalent to Shs 22 trillion. So, the working document is already here under which they are contracting.

Secondly, the minister says we give the documents to him; the same problem had arisen in Kenya and it took two committees of Parliament to investigate these matters.

I really respect hon. Emmanuel Dombo’s proposal, but because of the huge workload involved with this and there is also timeline, you cannot bog down an ordinary committee. This is a matter that needs special attention, a special purview; why not? We are ready to furnish all the information given to that select committee. We shall furnish them with all that information. I want to say that in Kenya, it happened; why are we running away from it?

MRS SENINDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure. I remember early last year, we debated something similar to this and it was about oil. I vividly recall we came up with a committee to investigate the problem. Unfortunately, I must say, we did not yield any results to-date.

Madam Speaker, I want to say that as we speak now, the issue that is being raised on the Floor of Parliament is something that we must not underrate. It is a very crucial issue that every Ugandan who reads newspapers will be interested in. As a Parliament of Uganda, and as a Parliament that has been so keen against issues of corruption, I want us to interest ourselves in this issue. 

As a matter of procedure, I wish to say that coming up with another select committee for now may not help. We do not need it because we have a committee of Parliament, and that is the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Whether we form another select committee or use the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, we are the same people, the same Members of Parliament.

I would like to propose, Madam Speaker, that we give a chance to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to investigate this and we give them a timeframe of just one month. The reason I say so, dear colleagues, is that we should not forget that whether we bring another committee or use the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, we are the same people. I want to say that we must debate this issue seriously after we have got a report.

Madam Speaker, if we continue with the minister informing us in the easy way he is informing us and misguiding us, I think it may not help for now. Let us forge a way forward, and the way forward is to give a timeframe on when this report must be presented to Parliament so that we discuss it comprehensively.

The issues our colleagues have raised are very important, and we must make sure we discuss them comprehensively. I beg to suggest.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a point of procure on the names of the companies you are talking about. The proposers of what we are discussing have come up with clearly two names – CCECC and CHEC. In this digital era, not the analogue world, where maybe the honourable minister is still in, you can easily log on and check. You will find out that the two companies were the China construction engineering company and the China harbour engineering company. Now, the minister introduced another company, which he called CCCC, and I did not even hear what he was saying.

Madam Speaker, shall we be proceeding right without enquiring from the minister and asking him to clarify? It seems he is proceeding on another completely different document away from what the movers of this motion have put forward. Thank you very much.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue raised by our colleagues is a very serious one and I would disagree entirely with the idea of using the Committee on Physical Infrastructure of Parliament. This is because the people of Mbale brought a petition to this House and the committee went to Mbale about a year ago, they have never produced a report.

This is an urgent matter, a matter touching Uganda’s Shs 22 trillion, and the documents are here. Madam Speaker, this matter is urgent and I would request that we set up a committee which will come up urgently, with a report. Ugandans are looking at us concerned about the US$8.5 billion and you want to dilly-dally by pushing this matter to the committee of Parliament, which has failed all along to produce reports when petitions are brought to this House. We want a select committee that can handle this matter within two to three weeks.

The committee on oil was killed and we know why it was killed. We cannot send this to the committee on oil; we want this to go to a specific committee and they look into the matters of the US$8.5 billion. We have all the documents here; we have got a judgment from court, I do not know why these people are now coming to confuse our House. This matter concerns all Ugandans. This is money for Ugandans. We know people are dying in hospitals, women are dying every day, the netball team was here and there is no money and yet money is being stolen.

THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, let us thank the Members who have raised these concerns. I would say that in order to give balanced attention to this matter, since the issues have been raised and documents have been laid on the Table which principally touch on the work of the Executive, we go back as the Executive and come back with a statement on every issue. At that stage, after we have presented our own side, then a committee, select or sessional or whatever the case, comes in. 

Certainly, there are even some sensational statements that have been made. When you say that the Deputy Attorney-General acted in total disregard of the Solicitor-General and every office in the institution, it is absolutely not correct. I can even swear an affidavit and I will lay on the Table all the necessary advice that was given to me from my office to take the decision I took. I find it strange, whether it is intentional, deliberate or otherwise, to malign my name.

I have never been involved in any scandal and before you involve my name to that magnitude, my conscience will vindicate me. I gave advice based on correct judgement, based on the advice I was given. Therefore, let us give you a statement from the government side and then after that, we shall see which way to go.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the movers of this motion because they are capable, as they have shown, of getting all these documents which we were not able to get. Therefore, for that effort, we may thank them.

Secondly, I strongly support the proposal that this be sent to the infrastructure committee. By proposing to send this issue to a select committee, we might be moving a vote of no confidence in the infrastructure committee. That is their job and they have not failed. We have ever appointed an ad hoc committee on a similar issue, about oil, and we know what happened. 

I think the time of the House should not be wasted. Let us refer the matter to the infrastructure committee where everybody will go, with even more documents if they are there, and everybody mentioned will have time, so that this House is given another chance. I think we can conclude the matter by referring it to the infrastructure committee.

THE SPEAKER: Let me just hear from the chair of the committee, hon. Biraaro.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraaro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the members who have brought this matter to the House. You will note that this is the first time this matter is coming formally to the House. 

I also want to inform the House that on the 19th of August at 9.00 a.m., I went to your office, Madam Speaker, and I submitted to you the chronology of these events, which we had got from whistle blowers. All the issues that hon. Ssekikubo has raised here, which had so far happened by 19th, were written chronologically and given to you and you are aware. Yes, we have been working even from the whistle blowers information. 

Secondly, the honourable minister had, like hon. Karuhanga was asking, given three companies. The information that we have so far gathered shows that CCCC is the mother company of CHECL. Two, CCECC is an independent company fighting for jobs in Uganda and contracts with CHECL. 

Given what we have gone through, I have also endeavoured with my committee to talk to the ministers, even outside the formal means, to restrain them from terminating the MoU between the Government of Uganda and CCECCC but it was a problem. So we need further information about that so that we can go on with our work. 

I want to assure the House that the committee has so far done a lot, minus the issues which occurred between the 18th of August to-date. For the rest of the history, since 2004 in April, the committee has handled and recorded it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, you see sometimes you force the hand of Parliament. This matter has been in the public domain for over two months, but no one has come to the House to explain to the country what is happening. So when you abdicate your responsibility other people take it up. 

I want to agree with the proposals and merge them; one, that the Executive responds, so that we can find areas where there is a divergence and that is what we shall take to the committee. Whatever is outstanding will be taken to the committee.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, we are most obliged for your guidance. However, the chairperson of the committee has told this House, and we have demonstrated how even within Government, the Attorney-General was saying one thing together with the Solicitor-General, but because of the immense pressure, hon. Byabagambi told his colleague that come what may, he must sign. 

Two, we already have a debt burden of US$6.5 billion, which is staggering, and now we are adding another US$8.5 billion with our fragile economy. The money issue is not straight forward. Where one company says they can do the work at US$4.2 billion, the other company that is now being engaged is doing it at US$8.5 billion, a difference of US$4.3 billion. I wonder why members can dilly-dally with this because if a mistake is made now, it will be very difficult to correct. I, therefore, pray to my colleagues that we arrest the situation in time. In Kenya, it took two committees to intervene and streamline the project. They are now on course. 

MR CHEMASWET: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Ssekikubo and the seconders of the motion. 

I listened to the chairman of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure reporting to the House, and his advice to the minister not to terminate the contract. Now, I feel that the chairperson concluded this issue and he has a position already as the chairperson who is supposed to be chairing the same committee. I have been whispering to him that he concluded his work and therefore the proposal of having a select committee is important. 

Also, I would like to take the position of hon. Ruhindi, of the Cabinet going back and then they report to the House. After that, we can then take a position on the select committee and not again the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

MR ALEPER: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true this matter is very touching, just from the guidance you have just given, that after the Executive position has been heard by this House, where issues have been left without harmonising, they be referred to relevant committee, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Following what my colleague, hon. Ssekikubo, has said, a similar matter happened in Kenya and two committees were put in place.

There are two issues here, Madam Speaker. We have the issue of physical infrastructure and there is also a legal matter, which pertains to the court ruling. In that regard, I would propose that the Committee on Physical Infrastructure works with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs so that when it comes to legal issues, the legal committee handles them. We shall come up with a comprehensive document, which harmonises the two positions.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want us to first agree on how to move; do we make a decision to give it to legal, infrastructure or an ad hoc committee can come later? What I had wanted was for the Government to answer, then we have a debate and then we agree whether we have an ad hoc committee or another.

5.56
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, there is already a motion on the Floor of Parliament presented by my good colleague. He has made a very good presentation with a litany of problems. Even our colleagues have been faulted in this presentation.

Right now, we have a motion with prayers. The first prayer is that Government be urged to respect the rule of law by fully complying with the orders of court and in conformity with Article 128(2) and (3) of the Constitution. Madam Speaker, if this Parliament approves this point, it means Parliament is directly entering the process of procurement. 

Madam Speaker, let us not turn Parliament into a procurement House. This is important because there are many people lobbying Members of Parliament. Don’t think this thing is just here. There are members who are being lobbied from different angles. There are also ministers who are being lobbied from different angles. There are Ugandans who are lobbying us, Members of Parliament. Parliament should not be turned into a clearing house because that will compromise the power and impartiality of our Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I heard from my dear colleague - even looking at his presentation with the papers, with the clarity, with the information - and I do not believe, my conscience is not clear, that a Member of Parliament can have a lot of information. He should actually declare his interests before Parliament – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okot Ogong, you are now moving away from the issue. Honourable members, we were about to reach a point of convergence. I think let us agree that Government comes back to answer. Based on their submission, we will have a debate before we take a decision.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, whereas we are agreeable – because usually there are two sides to the matter –(Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, you have just ruled; why should a Member resume the debate when you have ruled that Government will come with an explanation before we debate this matter? Why should the Member proceed to challenge your ruling?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have agreed on a way forward, which I think is fair. He has made allegations and the Government should be given time to answer, we debate and make a decision.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, if that is the case, there is need to have a timeframe within which Government will come back with this explanation. 

I want to also tell you that information is always information and facts are always facts. I do not think honourable members should be blackmailed the way the hon. Okot Ogong is attempting to do. Members should be free because this is our purview as Members of Parliament. So, can we have the timeframe within which we can receive a Government submission?

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, every Member of Parliament is entitled to their views. The issue here has been tabled and a member moved a motion. The hon. Okot Ogong is free to express his views. He said that because that is his opinion. So, is the honourable member in order to say that the hon. Okot Ogong was attempting to blackmail Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us treat each other with respect. Okay, what is the timeframe?

MR ALEPER: Madam Speaker, before the hon. Theodore Ssekikubo got up, I was about to raise the point that Parliament should give the Executive a time as to when they should come back with their position.

THE SPEAKER: What do you propose?

MR ALEPER: Madam Speaker, maybe 14 days from now.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to propose next Tuesday.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I propose two weeks for thorough work to be done. That is our proposal.

MR SEBAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Due to the gravity of the issue and given the fact that Cabinet has been aware of what is going on, two weeks is too long a period. Let us have a response on Thursday next week.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. All the information that has been laid before us by the hon. Theodore Ssekikubo and other colleagues is information that has been retrieved from Government files. In that regard, one does not need a lot of time to report back to Parliament. I would like to propose a period of not more than seven working days for Government to report, and that is Thursday next week. That will help us to debate the matter. Thank you

MR SABILA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue at hand is critical. I think this information is available because these Members did not get it from space; it must be somewhere. We need time to internalise this matter and debate it before we take a position. So, giving the Executive a lot of time, like two weeks, is wastage of time. We need a shorter time to take a decision on this matter. My proposal is to second what the hon. Musasizi has said, not more than seven working days. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us receive a report on Wednesday next week.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DISSOLVES ITSELF INTO 
A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

    1. THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES 
FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2013/14; AND

    2. BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2014/15

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been informed that the Minister of Finance already moved the motion. So, let us go to the Committee of Supply.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/15

Votes 163-176, Referral Hospitals

THE CHAIRPERSON: I propose that a total sum of Shs 58,841,797,000, under votes 163 to 176 for referral hospitals be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2014/15.

(Question put and agreed to.)



Votes 201-236, Missions Abroad

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 79,472,015,000 for votes 201-236, missions abroad, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2014/2015. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 501-778, Local Governments

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,007,870,964,000, votes 501-778, local governments, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Central Government Votes

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 3,904,430,478,000, central government votes, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, do you want to say something on central government? We have finished local governments. Okay, let us hear what the problem is.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, I had an issue with vote 122, Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control. In our committee report, we recommended that Shs 1 billion be moved from wage to non-wage recurrent, to enable the directorate to recruit and train immigration staff, but this change was not effected and the figures remained as they were. My request was that we remove Shs 1 billion from the wage bill and put it under non-wage recurrent.

The justification is that while the directorate thought that they would be able to recruit, train and deploy, they will not be able to do so in this financial year. The only thing that they will be able to do is recruit and train and the trainees will be passed out in the next financial year and that is when they can start getting salaries. So I request that Shs 1 billion be moved from wage to non-wage recurrent under vote 122. Thank you.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So we shall have to amend the Bill because -

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, the minister laid a Bill here and we are supplying. If tomorrow the Budget Committee finds inconsistency with the recommendations of the sectoral committee, we can amend the Bill; otherwise, we cannot start conceding and making changes now as we are just supplying. Table the Bill and tomorrow we shall harmonise during the appropriation.

THE CHAIRPEROSN: So honourable members, be alert during the Appropriation Bill so that we can make the adjustments. Since you are a member of the Budget Committee, we have asked you to go and look at that Bill and report by tomorrow evening. Honourable members, we now go to development expenditure. 

Votes 163-176, Referral Hospitals
I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 13,450,180,000 under votes 163-176, referral hospitals, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 201-236, Missions Abroad

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 15,930,200,000 under votes 201-236, missions abroad, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)




Votes 501-778, Local Governments

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 338,435,070,000 under votes 501-778, local governments, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Central Government Votes

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 6,800,599,789,000, central government votes, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Statutory Votes

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,616,994,064,000, statutory votes, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply supplied the Budget for financial year 2014/2015 and passed it without any amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 19,300,000 (APPROX. US $29,336,000) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT (IFAD) FOR FINANCING THE PROGRAMME FOR FINANCIAL INCLUSION IN RURAL AREAS (PROSIRA)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we had concluded debate on the loan and we wanted a commitment from the Government about the proposals. I do not know whether the Ministry of Finance is ready so that we can conclude this matter in a few minutes. 

6.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Caroline Amali): Madam Speaker, I thank you. Just as you have said, we concluded the debate on the loan that was on the Floor and Government has made responses. I would like to go to the recommendations made by the committee as it is in the report, as you rightly asked yesterday.

I want to thank Members for supporting the proposal. Recommendation number one on the project was that the Government should fast-track the tier IV regulatory framework and guidelines for community savings and credit groups. The ministry is in agreement with this recommendation and the draft Bill is ready and has been submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat for inclusion on the order paper.

It is also worthwhile to note that part of the loan, especially component No. 3 on policy and institutional support, is meant to support the operationalisation of the tier IV regulatory framework, including the establishment of the Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority. Also, the proposals for regulation of tier IV institutions include the guidelines and policy framework for the operations of community savings and credit groups.

Resolution No. 2 by the Committee on National Economy was that the ministry should ensure orientation of UCSCU, the apex body of all SACCOS in Uganda; and also rationalisation and structuring to create a solid income generating base for the organisation. The response from the Government is that restructuring of UCSCU is already going on and the ministry has supported UCSCU to develop a strategic and business plan that will guide them to achieve financial self-sustainability. In addition, PROFIRA will support UCSCU to transform into a sustainable SACCO union.

On Resolution No. 3, Madam Speaker -

MR WADRI: Thank you very much. I wish to thank the minister for the attempt she is making to respond to the critical issues that were raised in this subject matter that was hotly debated yesterday.

The way in which the minister is proceeding is as if the critical issue and request, that we cannot proceed with this loan request in the absence of a legal framework – I mean, surely, what amount of explanation is the minister going to give that will replace the legal framework that this Parliament asked for? I see us going in circles and we are talking of structural arrangements, which are yet to be put into place, and in which case we want to get this loan when actually the required institutions and frameworks are not in place. 

I really seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, on whether we are proceeding rightly, to go ahead and entertain this as we are about to pronounce ourselves on this thing, without answering the question and request by this august House that we need a legal framework in place before we can go and borrow this large amount of money. I seek your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: I think that we had resolved that, but our main focus was the proposal that such an amount of money be moved from one programme to another. That is why we wanted your commitment. 

MS AMALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. You rightly guided yesterday and Members had issues to which we are going to respond to, but I wanted to start from the recommendations because that was where we ended yesterday before you adjourned the House.

I have just said that the tier IV regulatory Bill is already in Cabinet for discussion and anytime – It has been long overdue and I appreciate that fact. Madam Speaker, as a professional, you very well know that any law that has to stand the test of time has to be properly consulted on. So, I would like to ask honourable members to understand that the consultation process of this law has taken all this time because we wanted, as Government, to make sure that the law stands the test of time. 

I do not think honourable members would be happy if I presented to you a half baked law in this House. I know that you would rightly send me back with it –(Interruption) - That is why I am saying that the draft Bill is due for discussion and I want to seek the indulgence of this House  to support the project because this money –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much. It is unfortunate that I do not have a copy of our Rules of Procedure but I recall that it is duly provided for in our Rules of Procedure that we shall not act in anticipation. The minister has told us that the draft Bill is in Cabinet and they are consulting on it. We do not know the possible outcomes of their consultations and when it will come into force as a law. 

Are we proceeding rightly with the minister telling us they are still consulting at Cabinet level on this law, and we have to go ahead and get this money with this vacuum? Is she proceeding well to lead us into anticipation? Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know that sometimes the Government causes us problems. There are many laws that we have passed in this House that we have not implemented, and we are actually paying sanctions because sometimes we have moved ahead of procedures. 

What is the matter with this law? Why have you taken almost 10 years? Every Parliament is told that the matter is in Cabinet. Leader of Government Business, I think that this House and the country would want to know when that law is coming. We want you to commit yourself here because for 10 years now, it has been before Cabinet.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I would like on behalf of Government to undertake that we will come back here ready to move within three months from today.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking guidance from the Prime Minister. He is telling us that we should wait for about three months. Is he trying to tell us that we can as well wait to have this passed in Parliament after the three months?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe then it is not a priority for Government. If it was a priority, I think he would have said one month. Three months will mean December. Is it a priority for the Government?

MR KYOOMA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. We have heard from Government, but can Government commit itself because the project has three components. It has strengthening SACCOs, then the rural groups and the regulatory framework. Can Government therefore commit itself that it will start with the component of the regulatory framework before implementing these other components and then we move along those lines? 

MS BAKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened very carefully yesterday when they were giving a justification for this loan. The argument was that lending rates for agriculture stand at six percent in this country. By so doing, they would be alleviating matters of food insecurity and that once this loan is acquired and this glamorous sensitisation and financial access deepening takes place, about 225,000 Ugandan households will be in position to have access, and therefore, poverty rates will decline. 

The other issue was the pathetic situation of poverty in the North. The other was that women are going to benefit and half of the people who are going to benefit are young people. 

Madam Speaker, Government, and particularly the Ministry of Finance, has always used these very vulnerable segments to appeal to us to pass these kinds of loans. In the Public Accounts Committee, we dealt with the monies that were accorded to the ministry and were abused because it was preceding an election year. 

Madam Speaker, from today to the next year, you will be left with a few months. In the absence of a law, this is a clear indication that Government wants to arm-twist Parliament so that Parliament accords it that money and it abuses the resources and it will never be held responsible because there is a legal vacuum. Therefore, we could easily even go into litigation because somebody will say, “Why did you as an institution do this knowing very well that you were not supposed to do it?” 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, now that the Leader of Government Business has promised us that in three months they will be able to table the Bill here, it would be prudent upon this House to also wait. This is because if we were going to pass a supplementary here, we would be arm-twisted here and in three days, we would have gotten a loan to do some politicking, if anything. But because they know that the equations are not what they are justifying, they want to arm-twist us. 

Therefore, my plea is that we stay these resources until the law is brought here and we do the right thing at the right time. This is not a project that is a priority and if you look at it, it is only going to – 

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MS BAKO: Yes, Madam Speaker. We have talked about capacity building since 1986 and up to now, they are still building my capacity. What is that? I will just –(Member timed out.)

MR BIGIRWA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. It is unfortunate that I was let down by my Leader of Government Business; otherwise, I stand here to support this loan request because we have been moving around the country, particularly in my constituency, and I would love for this to come. 

The SACCOs are there and they need to be empowered and they need to be strengthened, if our people really must get cheap loans. However, the big challenge we have, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, my friend is a lawmaker and we are at pains because we are about to do something without a legal framework. Is he in order, therefore, to try to persuade this House to go to an illegitimate undertaking yet he is a lawmaker?

THE SPEAKER: He has just started talking; I do not know what else he was going to say. (Laughter)

MR BIGIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not think it is the law only; we have other laws to support this very arrangement –(Interjections)- If members could only allow me build a point. 

I began from a point where I was disappointed by my Leader of Government Business and I need to be very clear on this. I have been interacting with the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy and my question has been this: if this Parliament passed a resolution now allowing Government to borrow, how long does it take for the actual receipt of that money from that bank, institution or agency? That is why I am saying if only this Parliament could urge the government to do all it can within a period of one month or for a maximum of two months and bring this law, by the time this loan matures on the government accounts, we would be ready. But to begin the process at that time when the law is ready, we will have delayed. We would have done a disservice to our people who got us here. 

I would really appeal to Members because I have listened to all of you, and I take long to answer back before I have understood the issue. So, I would propose that Members of – (Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect, we all support this loan and we do appreciate the needs of our people. Everybody here would want their SACCOs to have the money. However, we must also not forget that it is high time we became serious for once because, sincerely speaking, every time we have to pass these monies and monies go without a legal framework, we are encouraging corruption, we are encouraging misappropriation of money. 

I just want to urge the Government and the Leader of Government Business to help us; instead of talking about three months, let them endeavour to at least bring it in the shortest time possible for at least one month. Also, let us know whether we should wait until they bring the law. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, if we continue like this all the time, we shall always be talking about monies getting lost. I support the motion on condition that we prioritise activities like this law we need. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is either fortunate or unfortunate that I have been here for a long time and we have been urging the Government to bring this law since the Seventh Parliament. Yes, every Parliament has been told the matter is in Cabinet. Why is the Government disinterested in this law? Since the Seventh Parliament, we have been told it is before Cabinet. Why is it not a priority?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I want to modify my statement to accommodate the concerns expressed in the House so that we both have a win-win situation. We are going to come back within three months. That, therefore, means – (Interjections) - No listen, let me explain. This means that we shall work around the clock to come back even within one month.  However, should we fail to come back within one month at least we should report back in one and a half months or so. 

We should say three months because we have experience here in this very House that when you say two weeks, they will tell you, “Have you forgotten; it is two weeks?” Two weeks is a short period and there may be many issues. This law may bring up some other issues and I want to pray that the House accepts that we come back within three months, meaning that we will work hard. It is now up to us; it is this undertaking that will allow us to work hard and come back within one month. 

We have three months behind us; should we slide on the slippery road and not come, at least we have something to go with. That is the honest position I want to give.

MS ALUM SANTA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I like the way the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is trying to persuade this House, and I would highly suggest that we start the negotiation and then the law comes – it is give and take. If the Government feels that this is a priority, that this loan is very necessary for our disadvantaged group of people, even within two weeks let them show us that it is a priority in their Cabinet meeting. For us, we are ready to approve this loan provided we have the law.

I really pray that the Executive does not really involve us in a situation where we pass this loan request and the next minute, the money is swindled. How shall we account, as Members of Parliament, to our people and even to the people out there? I highly suggest that if you want the money, yes we are ready, but bring the law. I thank you.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have a bit of a challenge. We have said here that we need the money and we need the law. The committee has made very good recommendations and the minister was conceding virtually to all recommendations. However, I want us to refer to Article 159 - why loans come here for approval. In some parliaments, loans are not approved, like in Tanzania and others, but for us, this is the approval and it reads:

“(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Government may borrow from any source. 

(2) Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament. 

(3)An Act of Parliament under clause (2) of this article shall provide- 

(a) that the terms and conditions of the loan shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless they have been approved by a resolution of Parliament…”

All these institutions that give us this money are aware of the constitutional provisions; they can only dispense the money after receiving a resolution endorsed by Parliament. The challenge we have had, Madam Speaker, for the last many years since this Constitution was made, is that the format of resolution is half a page or one paragraph, that Parliament has approved the loan. 

Whereas the committee makes very good recommendations, the ministers stand here and concede but because it is just one paragraph, loans are approved. All recommendations we make, all the concessions the minister makes, are not transmitted to the lender because the format of the resolutions by this Parliament does not meet international standards.

In the US, the legislation is through Bills; here, we have Bills and resolutions. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to beg you that since there seems to be concession - the minister and the chairperson seem  to be conceding - you use your power under our rules, like you did yesterday, to come up with a standard form for resolutions. It should contain the committee recommendations that the House endorsed and the concessions the minister makes; it is then endorsed by Parliament and transmitted to the lenders so that they know what the House did, so that they do not act outside our recommendations. Otherwise, if we continue with the old method of one paragraph, - “the loan has been approved” - the lender will not be aware of the resolutions and the technical people in Ministry of Finance will ignore the resolutions.

Madam Speaker, I seek for your indulgence that you invoke your powers under the rules, come up with a standard resolution that contains the recommendations, which Government accepts, so that when the donors are releasing the money, they know the conditions. Like now, the Prime Minister has conceded that within one month, we can pass the loan request and say it will not come into operation until the law is in force. The lenders will not release the money because that will have been the resolution of Parliament.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I share the frustration of hon. Ekanya that we have not streamlined the way Government picks our recommendations in as far as these loans are concerned. However, I think we cannot disadvantage the people who are going to benefit from this loan because Government and Parliament have not done their part. 

We know the process of the law; it will be considered in Cabinet and from Cabinet it will come here. So, we are also part of the team that should be blamed when it comes to time management of loans. (Interjections)  Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that let us allow the loan request to proceed and those other processes –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our colleague, hon. Sebunya, has just stated that Parliament is to blame for the non-appearance of the proposed Bill in the House. As hon. Ekanya stated yesterday, we have been lucky because our people where we come from -Tororo, Kamuli and I will add Kasilo- have been bringing us here for the last three terms. I remember in the Seventh Parliament, hon. Omach was a chairperson of the finance committee and in a report that he produced in this House, he was very critical. In that stinging report, he pointed it to the government to bring the law about tier IV to the House.

In the last Parliament, we pushed the Government and Government kept telling us that it is in Cabinet. Today, we have been told the same here by the Leader of Government Business. We have done our part; this law is in the docket of Government. Is the hon. Ssebunya in order to claim to be an authority, apportioning blame to Parliament on this matter, and yet he is the chair of the committee who is supposed to be knowledgeable on this matter?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think Parliament should be blamed for the faults of the Executive; therefore, you are out of order.

MR KASULE: I oblige to your ruling, Madam Speaker. However, what I wanted to say is that there are other laws that we can use to manage these loans. The Public Finance and Accountability Act is there to manage the finances. The Cooperatives Act is there to manage the SACCOs. So, this law that is coming may only come to bridge a gap but there are laws that can govern financial management. Honourable members, I urge you -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: I wish to thank hon. Ssebunya, whom we always refer to as the small mahogany. 

In 2010, as we were about to go for elections, some four members convened in an office and crafted a letter, and that report is already attached to the Public Accounts Committee report which is before Parliament and any time it come here to the Floor. The main sentence is, “Your Excellency, in order to strengthen your position in urban areas, this project of Shs 10 billion will give you support in the forth coming campaign”. Why did they do that? It was because there was no legal framework to guide on how the Microfinance Support Centre could give money to SACCOs in this country? 

Now, we are saying once beaten twice shy. The money was misappropriated because there was no legal framework. All we are trying to do is to safeguard the interests of this country so that there is a yardstick that we shall use to measure the performance of the Executive as we grant them this loan. That will be the yardstick through which we are able to check how they utilise these resources. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR KASULE: I want to thank hon. Kassiano Wadri, and I know very well that he was among the people who investigated that matter. I think this time we shall be keener and the committee shall follow up so that this money is not a political handout. The other money was used as political handout and we know this from the report, but I think this time this is a genuine project and I think the committee will follow through to look at this project and its workings. As MPs, we shall follow up.

Many of our SACCOs are in bad shape; many have been created but have no guiding documents or funds to finance them. Much as we have those gaps, I would suggest that we go ahead and pass this loan request because it is part of the budget that we are financing and we are about to appropriate. That is based on my understanding of the loan request.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the minister. What will happen if we do not pass this loan request now? Does it mean that the donors will cancel the loan? Can’t we wait for three months and get this money? Maybe the fear is that the money will be taken away. What will happen if we wait for three months and we pass the law? We love the money but at the same time we need the rules. Shall we miss the money or we shall still be able to get it in three months’ time?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe just to add to what hon. Baba Diri has said, I want to know, if we pass that loan request today, when will you disburse it?

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Rt Hon. Speaker and members, I stand here to support the proposal brought by hon. Ekanya on the issue of how to write a resolution, especially to include components of what members would have recommended. That is important because the people who are outside this Parliament and are stakeholders on the matter would also get to know what members’ recommendations were.

The loan request we are talking about is for a loan that is going to help the rural women. So I would really suggest that the best way to do it – the Leader of Government Business has committed himself, and there are also recommendations made by the committee and members, especially having the biggest component of this money going to the people and not capacity building. I would really pray that Government comes here after three months and if the Bill is brought earlier, still Government brings a report to explain how they have included the recommendations made by the members. 

I implore you, colleagues, the Leader of Government Business has committed himself, for the sake of the rural people let us pass this loan.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, we do not need to be convinced that we need this money. All of us are agreeable that we need this money so that we can empower our rural women and other people, but what we are really most concerned about is the legal framework.

In the next couple of months, we will be busy with campaigns; the moment we do not put in place a legal framework for this loan, it is not going to be used to better the lives of our rural women. If the loan is crucial and urgent, let the Cabinet present before we release this loan.

We support this request but we do not want a loan to go without any legal framework. We shall be doing a disservice to the people we want to support or to promote if there is no legal framework. Indeed, everybody would blame Parliament for releasing the money without any legal framework under which it is going to be operated. I support the loan request but that is after Government has brought the legal framework under which it is going to be operated.

MR MUHWEZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to get some clarification. When we say that there is no legal framework, what do we mean? This is because SACCOs are controlled by the Cooperatives Act and they regulated by the same law and that is a legal framework. Are we mixing up things? Are we saying that we would like Government to come up with some other details on how this money is going to be disbursed? 

All the money this country disburses definitely has a legal framework by various laws such as the Money Lenders Act, the cooperatives law and so forth. So if there is a legal framework, I would join those who are suggesting that we pass this resolution in principle as we agree with the Government side to bring the details on how this money is going to be managed, regulated and we move on.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, I agree with hon. Muhwezi. Members are talking of a legal framework. The legal framework is going to favour businesses more than that peasant – (Interjections)– Yes! I am saying this with experience. 

The law that is coming in is actually trying to define them so that they can be recognised by Bank of Uganda. They will use that kind of recognition to do business on their behalf and to be able to charge high interest rates. We have enough existing laws that regulate the operations of SACCOs – (Interruptions)

ME EKANYA: Madam Speaker, when we talk about lack of a legal framework for tier IV, it is a result of rulings from both the constitutional and supreme courts – (Interjections) – Yes! There was an organisation called COWE that moved around the country but was not regulated and it ended up robbing people. I am just giving you information because even the Governor of Bank of Uganda could not take action.

MR MAWANDA: Honourable member, I am informed on that. Let me finish my submission.

MR EKANYA: When we talk about this legal framework, it is about a threshold.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for confusing the House. You will be the same people when tier IV is put in place who will charge high interest from our people.  

What is important now, dear colleagues, is for us to look at what this loan is going to do for our people. As was said earlier, we have enough laws -  the Money Lenders Act, the Cooperative Savings Act,  and we actually recently passed the Companies Act that can be able to take into consideration all these concerns in regard to protecting this village banks that are concerned  with this loan.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mawanda, are you saying that one will sit in Isingiro and use the Money Lenders’ Act when another person in Arua will be using the Cooperative Savings Act and the person in Kamuli prefers to use the Companies Act? Really, honourable member!

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In fact –(Interruptions)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you for giving way. I am very interested in your contribution. However, I would like to request you to specifically guide me how my people of Dokolo can legally recover the money that they lost to five SACCOs. I say this with a lot of pain because I took trouble, as a leader in that area, to inject my own money in order to kick-start the activities of those SACOOs but as we talk, all those SACOOs have collapsed with people recovering no money because of the lack of a legal framework to use. So, can you please guide me in finding a specific law that we can use to recover such money?

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much. That is why we are now asking, in this request, for money for training. Your people are not informed –(Interjections)– I am coming to that.

Attorney-General, we have passed the Chattels Act that allows even your household income and movable property to be used as security. The law is very clear and it can conformably cover both the lenders and the borrowers. So, the legal framework being talked about really does not have much effect on this loan. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.08
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama South, County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I spoke yesterday and I still speak today, and there is general consensus from both sides of the House that we need this money. However, what seems to be the problem is the lack of a legal framework, which some people have been trying to define.

Who is going to benefit from this money, the formal or the informal sector? What is the intention of that law when we talk about a legal framework? What is on our minds? Do we want to regulate or control? What is our experience with these small groups in the villages? The default rate in my constituency, and I can attest to that, they have their own formal way of handling.

My only issue with the Government on this matter would have been to know how much of this money is going to directly benefit women groups. The issue of the law is okay and I really respect it as a lawyer; it is okay. However, I want to say that laws alone are not enough. We have people in prisons because they have breached these laws. We have areas where we have laws but those laws are not helpful at all. 

Yes, we need such laws to regulate these small groups, but my issue with Government is about capacity building. I want to see the minister tell us that such component will take a smaller percentage and the bulk of the money will go to support the women groups.

Madam Speaker, a rider on the resolution would have helped. I believe that you are guiding this House rightly, that at the end we put a rider for Government to have a clause for it to commit itself to come back, but I really beg that we should not stop this loan by any way. Thank you.

7.10
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sit on the Committee on Finance and I had a chance to move around the country. I was one of the people who were against this loan. However, considering the magnitude and the importance that I have realised and also considering members’ submissions since yesterday about this loan, I got to realise that the purpose for which we are borrowing this money is not only for the villagers who are running these village SACCOS, but also as Members of Parliament we need some kind of capacity building. 

As you may be aware we have a SACOO here at Parliament –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I am saying that considering the submissions that members have been making since yesterday, I have got to realise that I need to support this loan request. However, the advice I want to give is that the Leader of Government Business should come up with some substantive time in which Cabinet can finalise the draft that is being handled such that we can pass the law immediately. This is important because we need this money very seriously in order to empower our village SACCOs. I thank you.

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been thinking that the responsible minister or Leader of Government Business will have to help us on this. In case we do not pass this loan request today, what happens? 

I think that if we do not pass it, that will put you on pressure to work on that legal framework to be submitted to this House within the shortest possible time. Can we have it next week since it is something that has been in Cabinet for long? Please, work on it and bring it; it is really food for thought. I do not know if that can pressurise you to work faster. We need the loan, so if you can bring that legal framework next week, it would be good. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Since yesterday, we have agreed in principle that we need this money. I want to use the experience of my district, which is Mubende District. This is a very huge district with a very big number of women groups as well as SACCOs, and I am glad to inform you that we have one of the best performing SACCOs in the country as rated by Ministry of Trade and Industry.

Save for the good performance, these women groups and SACCOs lack finances. At the end of the day, we Members of Parliament have been turned into financers of these SACCO and small groups. This is the reason as to why some of our colleagues here are highly indebted; we have to finance the SACCOs and the numerous women groups. So I want to add my voice to that of my colleagues who spoke earlier that we approve this loan request with the condition that the Executive expedites the handling of the regulatory framework.

Experience has shown that at times we fail certain programmes from advancing because of our own mistakes. I can give you an example. Today, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Police Force are grappling with an issue of accommodation of police officers and even office accommodation because we have failed to pass the PPP Bill into law.

Given that, I want to request this House- Sorry, we delayed otherwise police would have moved a million strides in that direction but those are just two steps. I recommend to this House that we approve the loan request conditionally as we give a little time to Cabinet to finalise the regulatory framework. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first, I want to clarify that the resolutions of Parliament are not cast in stone, so it is possible to make an innovation and include conditions. So if we are to approve, I would want us to accept the proposal by the committee of moving- What was that money you wanted to move from capacity to loans? That should be one of the conditions. The condition that the Government must present a Bill here within three months should also be included in the resolutions. Is that okay, members?  Honourable members, I put the question that the loan request be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE POWER BLACKOUT 
AT MANDELA NATIONAL STADIUM, NAMBOOLE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Microfinance, do not go; stay and support your colleague. 

7.14
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Members of Parliament, the House asked Government to make a comprehensive statement on circumstances –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. While the debates were going on, I have been receiving messages on my phone on matters that concern a member of this House and it is something we cannot just ignore. The former Prime Minister’s home has been surrounded by the military and no communication is allowed. I am not saying this because of politics but anything that affects any member of this House is very important for us to note.

I have a video, which has been sent on my iPad, so maybe the former Commander of the Army will recognise some of them or the Minister of Internal Affairs. This is a matter of national importance. I am so sorry, Rt Hon. Speaker, to interrupt but I thought that anything that affects any member from any side of this House is a matter that we cannot ignore. So I think we just need to note this. We may not do anything about it but it is important that we take note of it. Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, do you know what is happening to the Member for Kinkizi West?

THE SECOND PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): First of all, it the first time for me to hear this information. I do not know, but the Government will investigate what is happening. We are not sure and we are not acquainted with all these photos. Maybe it is behind Nakivubo where we do not know, so how can we prove that? If it is true, we shall investigate. (Interruption)

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, this is a security matter and it is very important. Is it really in order for a Leader of Government Business to just ignore and reduce it to something which is not of any importance to him, and yet he is a Ugandan? Is it really in order, knowing very well that all of us here are concerned about human rights? Is it in order for this Leader of Government Business to reduce this as something of non-importance to him?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Leader of Government Business has been sitting here the whole afternoon. I suspect he has no iPad and that is why he does not know. Minister of Internal Affairs, please take the Floor.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Colleagues, on the 10th September this year, there was a football match between Uganda Cranes and the Guinea team at Mandela National Stadium, Namboole. The match started at around 19.30 hours and went through the first half. It was during the second half, 15 minutes towards the end of the match, that a power blackout in the pitch happened between 20.55 hours and 21.02 hours lasting a at least seven minutes.

Since that incident took place, this is what Government has done: The managing director of the stadium was arrested and escorted to the police. He was interviewed, his statement recorded and he was subsequently released on bond. Police case file SD reference 73/10/9/2014 (CRB 1353/2014) was opened to facilitate investigations and the following was established:

1. That there was a football match between Uganda Cranes and Guinea which was scheduled on 10September 2014 between 1930hours to around 2230hours at Mandela National Stadium organised by CAF;

2. The stadium floodlights blacked out at 2055hours and were restored back at 2102hours, giving an interval of seven minutes.

3. It was also established that Mandela National Stadium has two lighting systems namely, the floodlights which light the pitch, and the ordinary lights which serve the offices, the surrounding rooms and the hotel. The floodlights use more voltage than the ordinary lights, thus any slight interruption or change in power voltage automatically affects the function of the floodlighting system. When power goes off, it gradually lights up within an interval between seven to 10 minutes.

4. It was further established that there were two interruptions in the Namugongo 11KV feeder from Kireka, which is shared by Mandela Stadium on the 33/11KV substation Kireka. This interruption occurred between 1500hours and 2053hours, two minutes before the incident in the Mandela Stadium. This could have impacted on the neighbouring areas, including Mandela Stadium. 

5. According to an eyewitness, Ms Namugerwa Hasifa, there were blasts at the substation opposite the stadium and thereafter, she saw darkness all over the stadium and the pitch. 

6. Therefore, there could have been a technical problem within the power substation serving the stadium coupled with an inefficient lighting system. 

Since then, the stadium authorities, the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Police have been working together and have made recommendations:

1. To implore the Mandela Stadium management to consider acquiring a more powerful generator to beef up the existing ones so that it is equivalent to the power demanded by the floodlights during such matches;

2. To upgrade the lighting system to a more stable system which can accommodate any fluctuations in power supply without switching off the lights. 

Madam Speaker, the question arose because of the individual who had been arrested and a statement extracted from him and was required to be reporting to Police from time to time. But now, he has been released on bond and the case is continuing and he is no longer coming.

Madam Speaker, there was also an incident raised here on Buhweju District, where there was violence at Malindi Police Post in Engaju Sub-county, Buhweju District.

Boda boda riders from Bushenyi District stormed the police post to demand for a suspected boda boda thief called Justus Muhangi so that they could lynch him. When the Police refused to hand over the suspect, the boda boda riders became rowdy, cut Corporal Katungi, a UPDF veteran serving as SPC, injured another policeman on the eye and wanted to burn the police post using petrol. 

Corporal Katungi, in the process of defending himself, shot dead one Asaph Ndyamujura and the rest of the boda boda riders ran away, abandoning 28 motorcycles at the police post. The police later impounded the motorcycles as exhibits and took them to Buhweju Police Station.

On 16September 2014, a passenger, later identified as Justus Katungi, hired a boda boda rider, Edon Kwatampora, to take him from Bitooma Sub-County to Kakanju Sub-County in Bushenyi District. On reaching Kasanda Trading Centre in Kakanju Sub-County, the passenger grabbed the motorcycle, registration number UEB 403J, from the boda boda rider and disappeared.

On 17September 2014, a suspect identified as Justus Muhangi was arrested in Buhweju District and detained at Malindi Police Post in Engaju Sub-County. On 18September 2014, about 40 boda boda riders in Bitooma Sub-County, on learning about the arrest of the suspect, organised themselves and rushed to Buhweju District where they were involved in the aforementioned violence.  

The boda boda riders, fearing that they could be arrested for the offenses committed at Malindi Police Post, never went to claim their motorcycles from Buhweju Police Station. They instead reported to hon. Raphael Magyezi, their area MP, who kindly came here and reported to this House and investigations continued. So far, the following are steps which have been taken:

1. Corporal John Bosco Katungi who shot the boda boda cyclist was arrested and is being investigated. He will be produced in a court of law to answer for the action he committed.

2. Two investigations files were opened on the incident at Malindi Police Post. One is CRB 311/2014 of Buhweju, on the damage to property and attack on the police. Another is CRB 320/2014 of Buhweju on the murder of a boda boda cyclist.

3. The files have been concluded and have been forwarded to the DPP for advice.
4. The suspects who attacked the police post are on police bond.

5. On 23September 2014, Buhweju DPC and the DISO met the boda boda owners, sensitised and cautioned them against such violent activities.

6. The suspected motorcycle thief, Justus Muhangi, is pending trial in court. However, due to interference by boda boda riders, the police was not able to quickly thoroughly investigate the theft case and the motorcycle, UEB 403J, is still missing. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker and members. That is the action that has been taken on that violence case. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister.

7.23
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you, honourable minister, for the report. I am the one who raised the issue of the Namboole blackout. 

What the minister has come out with as findings clearly confirms what the MD has been telling us. My concern with the way the security operatives handled the MD leaves a lot to be desired. The way the MD was arrested lacked some civility. The police did not use civilized methods of handling the suspects. The way in which the man was handled was as if the man had committed a crime and they had all the evidence to that effect. 

The charge against him is sabotage and I wonder why the minister has not talked about that. They say that the MD may have connived with some technical officers at Namboole to sabotage the nation. 

My concern and humble appeal is that whenever these cases arise, not only against people like the MD but also other Ugandans, the way you respond as the police must be human; you must put a human face. The man was tortured and was held for around seven hours as he has said. Some of the allegations that were going on and questions being asked were, “Why did you allow the match to be played at 7.00 p.m.? Why did you allow those with Besigye pictures to enter?”It was that kind of nonsense! 

The man reports to the police every two days and according to his friends, the issues are really very technical. I am very happy that the findings have exonerated him, that it was not sabotage but it was because of the problems that we are experiencing as far as power is concerned.

Madam Speaker, the minister has talked about beefing up or making sure that they carry out some kind of technical upgrade as far as Namboole Stadium is concerned. The generator that we have at Namboole is not automatic and whenever power goes off, it needs some 10 minutes so that it can be started.  

Look at the fraudulent lights - it is true, as he has said, and for a national stadium to have that kind of arrangement and yet we are expecting many international matches; I think the earlier we handle those technicalities the better, other than accusing the management of failure yet they do not have enough funds to carry out their duties as they are supposed to. 

Madam Speaker, I hope that the minister will really come out and tell us that the man is free and indeed it was not sabotage, instead of making the man report every two days to the police and yet the minister’s report clearly exonerates him. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Let us just use two minutes each.

7.28
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to thank the minister for the report. 

I also want to get clarification because the report we got after the incident of the blackout was quite interesting. Some members claimed that at the time of the blackout, the match was in favour of Uganda otherwise the other team were about to equalise. This means there is an element of sabotage, still within. This is because the people who were part of the management of the whole programme were also claiming that this was in favour of Uganda. 

We can set that aside, but the minister should have told us the alternatives that they are coming up with in ensuring that we do not have the same scenario again. We are talking of improving the systems technically. Are we now talking of buying generators, which are now going to be automated that they use a sensor and they switch on and improve on the power capacity? Are we at this time talking of mitigation but do not know which ministry is going to facilitate this process? Is it the Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Energy or Ministry of Internal Affairs? These are some of the items that I believe the minister should be telling us about right now so that we take on that ministry to pursue and establish the necessary requirements or the monies that Parliament can appropriate for this. 

However, I would not really think in another way basing on the performance of the Uganda Cranes in Namboole. I believe that has been our hunting ground. If there is anybody who has tried to cause any sabotage, he was just trying to create a bad image of the Government of Uganda and the sports fraternity within this county. So, I just want the minister to clarify on where we go in terms of providing a better battery which can facilitate the lighting. 

7.30
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to also thank the minister for the report. 

Early this afternoon, we listened to hon. Dombo who told us about the resolutions of the IPU Assembly. Among those resolutions was the respect for human rights. The way the police handle Ugandans is a great shame for this country. Madam Speaker, you led a delegation to the IPU in Geneva; Geneva has got a number of the UN organs based there and among those is the United Nations Human Rights Commission and Uganda is always accused. They point fingers at Uganda because of the violation of human rights. 

This was a just a technical problem that could have happened anywhere; even in your houses, power can go off. If there was a problem with the generator and power went off at Namboole, was that the right way to arrest the manager of the stadium? You cause problems for this country! It is the Police, and it is on record - how you arrest and mishandle our people. Everybody knows that you have got safe houses yet we have got official prisons where people should be taken. Why should people be held in safe houses?

Secondly, this afternoon we celebrated the wonderful performance of the She Cranes and they were very happy and we were proud that they made us proud as a country. But how much money have they put in sports? We have been hosting international games at Namboole and for this country to fail to put up a generator which can within seconds give alternative power when electricity is off to save the face of this country –(Member timed out) 

7.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY (Mr James Mutende): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the minister for the good report. 

We should all be cautious about our country and where we are right now. Like any other country, today the issue of security cannot be underestimated. Any form of happenings of that nature can obviously cause excitement among the population and not only in Uganda here. 

I will give you an example from a very developed country; around 2005, there was a problem in the USA when there was a power blackout in the afternoon. Because in America almost everything runs on electricity – the trains, the banks, everything is electronic - there was a shutdown of the system and it was a power failure right from the generation. 

America is a very advanced country by all means, but there was total chaos. The police cordoned off many places because they thought it was terrorism. Buses were cordoned and passengers walked to their destinations. People had to walk across long distances. So, the point is that you cannot condemn the police in a situation where it was total darkness. 

How many people were in Namboole? How could you rule out any possibility that there has been sabotage, and if you are going to get down to who could have participated they have to start somewhere. They had to get management to be sure that they are not the ones who actually switched it off or that there was a problem. 

By the way, the stadium had over 45,000 people in it, including members of Cabinet and Parliament. The Prime Minister was also there; so, really, I think the police acted perfectly to try and get people who could be held responsible so that they could ask them. It is only proper. 

Certainly, the minister’s report is very clear that actually, it was not necessarily a management problem but a technical error. If the man had disappeared into safe houses as they seem to be claiming here, it would be another story, but he is a gentleman and he has been reporting –(Member timed out_)

7.35
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to react on the violence that the minister has reported about, which took place in Buhweju.  

Madam Speaker, looking at the distance between Engaju Sub-county and hon. Magyezi’s place, for the boda boda riders to ride all the way from Igara to Buhweju, really, this is a very big message to the security organs in this country. The rate at which we have mob justice amongst the boda bodas – Our people have suffered; they have killed very many people. One time I was going home and they called me; somebody who was going to graduate in a few months was killed just because one day he went along with one a boda boda man who disappeared and they suspected that he killed him. After something like two weeks, the person whom they thought was killed re-appeared on that stage. 

Madam Speaker, the rate at which we have undisciplined boda boda riders at these stages, the way people are behaving, shows that really, police and the security organs we need to do something. Look at the distance in this particular incident, where people ride over 50 kms to go and attack a police post, they almost overran it; this is a very big message. What would happen if there is something in Kampala here? How many boda boda riders do we have in Kampala?

Therefore, I want to request the Minister of Internal Affairs, together with other relevant ministries, to organise, train and sensitise the boda boda people in Kampala and even other districts in the whole country. Otherwise, we are sitting on a time bomb; any slight mistake, they just erupt. 

One time a Member of Parliament had lost an iPad just here on Kampala Road. They had just suspected her driver and they attacked the vehicle, smashed it and they took the iPad and everything in the car, including her phone. They said, “We suspected that one day your driver knocked one of us”, which was not even true. This is happening; people are suffering at the hands of these boda boda riders. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.39
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for the statement. I will lay emphasis on the Namboole saga. 

Unlike some members who are contributing and they were not there, I was there in person. I am one of those who had gone there to support our team and I want that also to be on record. The issue of malice and sabotage cannot be ruled out one hundred percent; why? This is because I sat next to an interpreter and they were saying that this was deliberate, that because we were leading there was a plot for us to maintain our lead by switching off the lights. So, they were suspicious. This could lead to the banning of our stadium. So, by the police acting, it gives a ray of hope, reassuring our visitors that the country was indeed concerned. 

There was also a rumour after the match that Umeme has got arrears to claim from the management of the stadium, which have never been paid. So, they were trying to negotiate and demand for payment. So, they had to engage the management. This also came up. Finally, there was also an issue to do with FUFA not paying money to the management; they are also in arrears. 

All those issues could not be ruled out; hence the issue of malice and sabotage cannot be avoided in this matter. So, we should not condemn the police because they were doing their work to protect the people, the supporters and the country as well; more so, reassuring the country that government is in charge.

Members, let us not politicise this issue. It was done in good faith and we should support the cause because next month we are hosting another match. (Member timed out_)

7.41
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to most sincerely thank the minister for the report and for capturing the Malindi incident in Buhweju.  

We have a big problem, which we need to address with the boda bodas. The exact distance from Kyamuhunga to Malindi is 73 kms, and this stretch is from Igara West via Igara East, via Sheema North, and from Buhweju to the western side towards the eastern side where there are two constituencies. So, the boda bodas really travelled a very long distance. The team of boda bodas I was told about were 40 who rode from Kyamuhunga. 

My concern is, they passed - I have counted on my fingers - ten police posts on the road, you know we have very poor roads. All the police posts are by the road, stretching from Kyamuhunga, Butare, Kigoma and onwards. So, I just wonder at these police posts they could not detect that there was a problem, because these boda bodas were shouting, carrying pangas and small hoes, going to invade and these police officers along the way did not detect this and follow them.

However, I would like to quickly thank the police at Malindi; they fought gallantly because this is a police post of about five people. Actually, if Katungi had not reacted in shooting the man, all the police would have perished. I am told one of the boys was climbing on the roof trying to tear off an iron sheet to get the prisoner from inside, and this is a suspect who had stolen the motorcycle from Kyamuhunga and he was hiding in Buhweju.

Madam Speaker, we need to do something, and my concerns are: One, even when an incident is so bad, and I plead with the police - On Saturday, I went to Malindi and I counted 12 boda bodas being held there. I was told but I have not proved it, that for each boda boda to be recovered, they pay Shs 200,000. I would request the minister to investigate that allegation. 

Two, we also need to look into the conduct of the boda boda riders because they always take the law into their hands; they are all powerful, they have absolute powers. Three, we need the vigilance of the police to be able to detect and prevent crime and such incidents. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.44
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Biraaro from Buhweju, yes, it is quite a distance; those characters can really be daring. However, measures of community policing, crime preventers, district security committees will all be consolidated to ensure that this mindset of mob justice is taken away. We want to inculcate lawfulness and a sense of legality, but some of these boys are quite hard headed, but they will be dealt with.

Police does its work professionally. There is a word used by civilisation, I do not know what it means, but they are trained to handle their work professionally and those who do not, action is taken against them. This morning we had a high-level consultation meeting organised by the Uganda Human Rights Commission on sensitising the public on anti-torture, which law was passed here in 2012. The police leadership was there and also the prisons and intelligence from all over, and I had an opportunity to address them. They are quite vigilant about matters of human rights. So, honourable colleagues, on the matters of human rights training, they have leadership and there are courts; if you commit a crime, then you are tried.

On Namboole, Madam Speaker, a technical matter happened but lessons have been learnt. I think Ministry of Education is the lead ministry with others in the management and I think we will see an improvement in the stadium. The investigations will continue, no doubt, and ultimately it will be the DPP to determine which way to go. It is not up to me to exonerate x and y. The police took action and they worked with the Ministry of Education and we hope it will be better handled if the Ministry of Education takes further action. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us go to item No.8; there is something we had not concluded. There was that motion; we were supposed to conclude it after listening to the Government and also reflecting on the prayers

CONSIDERATION OF THE MOTION MOVED BY HON. GERALD K. KARUHANGA, 
YOUTH REPRESENTATIVE, WESTERN (INDEPENDENT) THAT:

        I) PARLIAMENT  REJECTS THE STATEMENT PRESENTED BY THE 2ND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS ON THE BORDER CONFLICTS IN MOYO DISTRICT

        II) PARLIAMENT CONSTITUTE A SELECT COMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE THE ISSUES SURROUNDING THE BORDER CONFLICT IN MOYO DISTRICT

        III) GOVERNMENT CONSIDERS WITHDRAWING THE UPDF FROM SOUTH SUDAN

7.46
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You referred the fate of the report to today. We had a government assurance on his statement yesterday, and we have an action plan that we want to inform the House about.

The Government of Uganda has taken note of the serious concerns expressed by the august House in regard to the relations between the two sister republics of South Sudan and Uganda. This is in particular reference to four issues: 

    • The regrettable tragic and unfortunate events that recently took place in Moyo District; 
    • The security for the people in Moyo and more generally along the border with Sudan; 
    • The border issue between the two neighbouring republics; 
    • The money owed to Ugandan exporters by South Sudan.

Assistance to People Affected by Violence in Moyo District 

Government of Uganda extends thanks to Parliament for the views expressed and Government will consolidate its response as follows - some information was lacking but we are now able to provide it: The records we have show the following impact on our people: 14 people were killed; 32 people were injured and admitted in hospital; 16 people are missing, reportedly abducted; and 19,000 people displaced -(Interjection)– Yes, 19,000; this is English I thought so -(Laughter)- 484 houses were burnt down and one church with a grass roof was also burnt; 225 cattle raided; and 72 schools closed. 

Intermediate Interventions (While awaiting the Comprehensive Report which is now in Place)
The Interventions in Adjumani

Government transported fleeing people from the Lapropi Ferry to Adjumani Town Council.  On that day, the Minister of State for Disaster was in Adjumani celebrating the International Peace Day. I asked him to go with the ferry because the previous night I was coming from Moyo and I found so many people on the way trekking down. I sent the minister to find out how many people were on the ferry. He found that there were many people because the ferry could not move at night on that side, and the following morning they were being ferried. 

The minister sent vehicles to bring them to Adjumani. Government discouraged creating IDPs, so those people were accommodated in town council halls and later on moved to some other schools. A hot meal was being served as these people were arriving without anything. We encouraged the local community to host the displaced people and many of them seemed to have relatives and they went there.

The Minister for Disaster Preparedness intervened with WFP, which has a branch there. We have over 7000 refugees in Adjumani District so there is a big store of food in Adjumani. We gave these people food immediately: 2340 kilogrammes of posho; 420 kilogrammes of peas; 300 kilogrammes of corn soya for making porridge - this is for very weak children; 200 litres of cooking oil; and 30 kilogrammes of salt. In Moyo, the OPM has so far provided 150 bags of 100 kilos of posho and 15 bags of 100 kilogrammes of beans.

Intervention to be done after the Assessment

The CAO and his disaster team have submitted a report. The minister, having seen the report, is planning to decongest the schools by providing some tarpaulins. The walls of the burnt houses are still standing; if we give the owners a tarpaulin then they can easily cover the house. That is how we are going help them to move back to their homes. This is a quick solution as Government is planning to acquire iron sheets and distribute them.

Transporting Displaced People Back to their Homes 

The people in Adjumani had actually crossed from the other side, so they have to be taken back. Adequate food will be delivered to the affected people and we have informed the Minister of Agriculture to provide seeds and materials to them.

As for the security at the border, the deployment of the police and the army has been beefed up in Moyo District. Patrols have been instituted on the Ugandan side of the border by the national troops. The South Sudan authorities have been in meetings with the Uganda Government to put in place patrols along the border. Both sides of the border are being patrolled and they are sharing intelligence reports. Any suspected area where people think they want to go is going to be sealed off by the security forces on both sides. So since these joint patrols have been instituted, the situation is coming back to normal very fast.

Border Re-marking

Government of Uganda is fully aware about the borders of Uganda as described in the country’s Constitution. However, because a dispute has arisen, it is necessary to have the border re-verified and re-marked. This will be done by the joint technical committee that is to be setup immediately after the signing of the memorandum of understanding as already agreed to by the two heads of state. The task at hand will include re-opening the boundaries and putting core boundary pillars to make the boundary more visible.

Payment of Uganda’s Exporters to South Sudan

On this, I want to inform the House that President Salva Kiir directed the South Sudan Minister of Finance to pay all verified claims for Ugandan traders and businessmen. We hope payments will be effected soon. The Uganda Minister of Finance has been directed to follow up on these payments.

Ugandans Troops in South Sudan

Honourable Members of Parliament will recall that Uganda deployed a contingent of the UPDF in line with our Constitution. The objectives of this deployment were mainly to avert genocide; to protect and evacuate Ugandans, and many were evacuated; and to take care of Uganda’s security and economic interests. The UPDF has conducted the mission with diligence and honour.

In the mean time, Uganda has been active in bilateral, regional and international efforts to assist the Republic of South Sudan re-establish political stability and security back home. The IGAD has taken a decision to deploy a deterrent and stabilisation force to South Sudan. As members of the IGAD, Uganda has agreed to hold that position as IGAD forces deploy. Once the IGAD force is in place, the UPDF will withdraw back home. 

Given this position and given the fact that the deployment of the UPDF in the South Sudan is governed by an agreement, we will have to act within this understanding.

Urgent Convening of the JPC

We have invited the Government of South Sudan to an urgent Joint Permanent Commission (JPC) meeting so that this situation can be thoroughly discussed.

Conclusion

This response is aimed at assuring all our people in the affected areas of the continued support and commitment to avert insecurity and restore peace and strengthen bilateral relations for mutual benefit. I would like to thank colleagues for all the support and contributions towards that objective. With this added information, I hope that the report I tabled yesterday is now not shallow any more. (Laughter) I thank you, Madam Speaker.

8.00
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister for coming up with such a good report. However, I want to say that coming up with such a good report is one thing and implementation of the content of such good reports is another. Many times implementation of the content of such reports is usually difficult.

Madam Speaker, I want to inform the House that there is need for humanitarian assistance for the people in Moyo District, where people are now living in deplorable conditions. There is limited accommodation, poor sanitation, lack of clean water, shortage of food, and the problem of medication. Currently, most of the displaced people reside in places like churches and schools, and others stay with relatives, friends and so forth. These people keep roaming up and down. 

I am happy the Minister for Disaster Preparedness is here. I am told on Sunday he will be on the ground. Let him come and assess all this for himself so that he can come out with a way forward.

As I talk now, there are 484 huts that have been burnt; i4 people dead; 32 admitted to various health centres and hospitals; three women raped; 225 cattle taken; 16 people abducted; and as he said, 19,000 people have been displaced. 

My worry here is about the schools. Madam Speaker, examinations are around the corner. We have senior six, senior four and the PLE pupils. We call upon Government to come and help settle our people quickly so that schools can resume with conducting their studies.

Lastly, let me say something about the border. Once the re-marking is done, I would prefer to see Uganda do road construction between the two countries. We should have a road to act as a boundary because it will last forever. Thank you very much.

8.04
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Second Deputy Prime Minister for delivering this report. I have particularly liked the recommendations about the demarcation of the border.

I would like to suggest that a URA post also be instituted at or near that border. This is important because one of the causes of these problems is - like in the case of my district - the URA post is about 10 to 14 kilometres inside Uganda. That is why the South Sudanese keep thinking that that is where the boundary for South Sudan starts. They even put up a signpost with the words “Welcome to South Sudan.” It has been put at a primary school in my district, but as we talk it was removed by the brigade commander. 

So, I wish the URA post is placed at the right border point. Like when you look at the Malaba border, the URA post is placed at the border. That is my only addition to what the Second Deputy Prime Minister has said. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It means we have given the impression that we are 14 kilometres away. 

8.04
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister for tabling an improved report. I think for now, we can accept his report because it has given details of the atrocities caused in Moyo District and also it has indicated what Government has planned to do. That was what I wanted to hear. 

He did not point out the three women who were raped in his report and I really do not know why, but it is a very serious thing and I think the Ministry of Health should pick it up. Those women are psychologically tortured and they need to be helped to regain their dignity. They should not be left just like that.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to propose that Government should not take this issue lightly. They should investigate the continuous harassment, torture, rape and murder of not only Moyo people but Ugandans, as expressed by members here yesterday.

The minister has said they have deployed at the border. The Uganda-Sudan border is very porous and it is long. I do not know whether they have deployed an equivalent force that the South Sudanese have applied. If not, Madam Speaker, I will appeal that Government allows the local government along the South Sudan border with Uganda to deploy local defence units. 

Yesterday, members suggested that maybe the UPDF should be removed from South Sudan. I do not think that it is because we have few UPDF soldiers in Uganda that Government has delayed to send us the UPDF. That is not the reason. They may be recalled but they may not be sent to the border. Let the people be empowered to take care and protect themselves.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

8.08
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the following questions to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. First of all, in his statement he did not indicate whether the Government of South Sudan owned up to this. It is very important that we know that the Government of South Sudan owned up to this mistake and said it was done by their forces. We need to know whether they owned up or they held that it was done by the rebels. 

Secondly, our people were displaced from their homes and we are accommodating them in schools. Why are we not returning our people to their homes? These are people who came to attack and they moved away. Does it mean that when these people attacked, they occupied our territory? If they did not occupy our territory, why are you hosting these people in schools? Why don’t you take these people back to their homes? If you are in charge and we have chased out these people, why don’t you encourage these people to go back to their homes and then you protect them from the border? This means that when they are attacked from where they are today, at the end of the day we shall see them in Kampala because wherever they have attacked, we move them. Are we really in charge of our border? If we have taken over and disciplined these people, why don’t we tell these people to go back to their homes?

Madam Speaker, finally, we know that there are political problems in South Sudan. Who owns this part? Is it under the hands of the rebels or under the hands of the Government of South Sudan? What is going on, because it can be sabotage? It might be played by the rebels wanting to disorganise the relationship between Uganda and South Sudan -(Member timed out_)

8.10
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the report. 

Yesterday, we clearly heard from Members of Parliament who come from West Nile that some people are still missing up to now. I would like to find out the Government’s plan to find out where these missing people are. What are the interventions that Government is coming up with? When over 20 people are still missing, this is a very serious issue, Madam Speaker.

Secondly, on the people who lost their lives, what is the Government’s plan for the families of those people? Does Government have any plan for compensating those who lost their lives? I really feel that that plan should also come out very clearly because I assume those who died might have left orphans, widows and many other problems. So let the Government come out very clearly and clarify on what plans they have as far as those who died are concerned.

Madam Speaker, one of the interventions the minister talked about was that Government still plans to keep people in the IDP camps. As hon. Mawanda said, instead of keeping them in camps, why not take them back to their homes? We know the problems that are associated with camps. We in Acholi grew up in camps and we know what camps are all about. So Madam Speaker, instead of keeping the people in camps, let them go back to their homes.

We got a report that the situation is now fair and we have enough security personnel to take care of the population. If the situation is now okay, why do you still want to keep people in camps? Let the people be protected in their homes so that the farmers can continue growing their crops and other people continue with their businesses.

Madam Speaker, we really need Government to come out very clearly on the issue of borders; let it not only be the border between Moyo and South Sudan. We have border problems like in Amuru where I come from. Let the demarcation be made clear in Lamwo and the Karamoja side as well. Let the Ugandan boundary be properly demarcated for future progress. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

8.13
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Second Deputy Prime Minister for his report today and I acknowledge that there is some substance in the report today. You will agree that there was no substance at all in yesterday’s report.

Madam Speaker, the issue is very serious when you hear of 19,000 people displaced. These people have no water, no toilets, no food, and therefore, disease is going to come in. So this is a very serious matter. What was the Government doing, waiting until the situation has got out of hand? What were you thinking about because the South Sudan people have been across killing and destroying and we have the police and the army? What were you waiting for? Now the situation has got out of hand. We have just heard that the children are preparing for their exams. What are you going to do for those who are ready to sit exams in October? This is a very serious issue.

Secondly, there are Sudanese we hosted as refugees in Uganda and you gave them land. They settled on that land and now they claim that that land belongs to Sudan. Have those people gone away from Uganda or are they still on that land, which they claim belongs to them? I am saying this because when our Committee on Foreign Affairs went to the North - to Moyo and all these districts - the Sudanese said that that was their land. This is right inside Uganda where they were given land to live on as refugees. You did not address that issue.

Lastly, we have got a committee of Parliament that is preparing to travel to the region. I want to ask, is it safe for us to travel to the region starting next week? Madam Speaker, as far as we can see, the South Sudanese are armed on the other side and the border is porous. So I do not know how ready the Ugandan side is to give safety to Ugandans with such a porous border. This is so serious, and we see a catastrophe looming for all these people. 

Our colleagues, the South Sudanese on the other side, have got arms and I saw Gen. Kayihura telling Ugandans with their arrows not to defend themselves. He said, “If we find you with an arrow, you will be arrested immediately.” Are the other people also being controlled, because Ugandans need security?

I can see the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs here. Does the mission in Juba give you reports about the political situation, about the Ugandans in a radius of about three kilometres who have been told -(Member timed out_)

8.17
FR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must thank the Second Deputy Prime Minister for the report that he has given. 

We appreciate the efforts that the Government is putting in place to see that the material needs of our people at the border are catered for. However, I think that at the moment, I would like to call upon the Government to take care of the other side of the problem or coin. We should begin to pay attention to the spiritual and psychological needs of our people. 

I am aware now that people are now very deeply hurt and psychologically and spiritually wounded. There is a feeling of anger, bitterness and revenge. I would personally call upon the ministries involved to mobilise counsellors and send them at the same time as they are sending material help. Secondly, I think that it is also good to mobilise religious leaders from different denominations to go there to counsel and talk to the people.

Thirdly, I know that our elected leaders were deeply involved in defending the people. I think that it is also time that we sober up as elected leaders and go onto radio programmes and try to talk to the people in the local languages. We the Madi and Kuku on the other side – try to talk and convince the people that we need a peaceful co-existence at the border if we have to live in harmony and – (Interruption)

MS AURU: Thank you for giving way. I feel hurt and disturbed when the honourable member, the Reverend Father, says that it is high time the leaders from that area sober up. It is as if we have not been sober. 

It is me who applied for the peaceful demonstration because tempers were very high and the people were really ready to do destruction if they were left like that; the destruction would have started right on 5th September but because of that peaceful demonstration - Indeed it ended peacefully because I was given five hours from 10.30 a.m. to 3.30 p.m. in which we had completed and had handed over the petition of the district to the Deputy RDC to be brought to His Excellency the President. The burning of the houses happened even later.   

So, is it really in order for the honourable Reverend to say that hon. Anne Auru and the other leaders should sober up? Am I not sober? Is he really in order? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you justify whether they are sober or not and if you cannot, you withdraw.

FR OGWAL: Well, maybe I am mixing Italian and German but what I wanted to say is that we should rationally handle the situation calmly and peacefully. 

THE SPEAKER: But did you say that they were not sober? Just withdraw it.

FR OGWAL: Well, I think that they were sober and I withdraw the word “sober”. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

8.21
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much. General, thank you so much for making an improvement as it is a better statement and I accept it. 

There are three issues here: One, there is an IDP camp at Yenga Primary School for people who mainly came from Lefori Sub-County and those who came from Moyo Sub-County on the side on Obongi, and at the former base camp of the UNHCR at Paralinya. You need to take care of that.

Two, we need to empower Government. The face of government there is weak; for example, the institutions of Government like the local councils and offices like the RDC, Chairperson LCV – the embodiment of authority there. If you compare the face of government on the side of Uganda and that on the side of South Sudan, Ugandans are intimidated. There is a bigger force and visibility of government on the side of South Sudan. Remove that – (Interjections) - Yes, in Moyo’s case. Look at the Chairperson LCV, for example, who does not have security, who is made to be seen like he cannot talk to the President of his country but it is easier for the commissioner or somebody from South Sudan to say that they will call your President. 

On Monday when the Chairperson LCV, the DISO and RDC went to retrieve two bodies in Lefori, they were put under gun point and all of them were made to kneel down! Is that not intimidation of government?  Madam Speaker, you were elected just like that chairperson and any undermining of any elected person even of it is the LCI, is undermining the power of the people. The chairperson should, first of all, be thanked for defending the territorial integrity of Uganda; whether wrongly or with mistakes made, at least he stood up to say that there was a problem.

Secondly, the RDC should be withdrawn from there. Empower the deputy RDC. I have secretly and privately – (Interjections) - Yes, I have talked to the minister in charge of RDCs. We have individual strengths and weaknesses. The deputy RDC that His Excellency the President posted there recently is a more active leader than the RDC. Go to the ground and find out for yourself. If you have an RDC who represents the President but stays in his bedroom and compound and does not go out, do you have a representative? No! 

Transfer the DPC and RPC and bring other people. Empower the local people – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Take half a minute to conclude.

MR FUNGAROO: Those are your people and your face, and if Uganda has a strong government, then the strong government begins from there.  

Lastly, we must also not disempower the local people. The local people must have the high spirit of Uganda. The protection and defence of the property and dignity of the people and Government of Uganda is not only the work of Government but also the work of the people. So, if you keep the people high and guide them that this is the way we protect Uganda, then the people will be patriotic. Patriotism should be in practice other than the theory that you teach in Kyankwanzi. Thank you. 

8.25
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you so much. I would like to thank Government for the intervention so far undertaken.  

I come from Karamoja where we have been having problems of drought and Government has been coming in with relief aid. However, the experience is that sometimes, the food rations that they bring are not sufficient and you find people struggling for food. So, I request that as Government struggles to bring the situation back to normal, the people should be given enough quantities of these food items.

The Prime Minister did mention that some schools were closed but there was no mention of the plans that Government has for the education of the children. Madam Speaker, this is third term, like some members have observed, and the candidates are doing their final exams. I am aware that in such a situation, people are traumatised - the parents, the children and the teachers. 

I would imagine that these children should be helped in some way. Even in that situation wherever they are, some temporary learning should take place. Where the temporary learning is to take place as they await to be taken back, security can be provided to those learners so that they do not lag behind the rest of the children. I thank you. 

8.27
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Government for coming up with a report acceptable to the concerned members. 

Madam Speaker, for some of us who do not come from Moyo, we have heard stories, but my concern is that we hear people talking of South Sudan but we also know South Sudan is a contested territory between two countries. It is a militarised political region. I would like to find out and I pray Government also does further investigation and establishes whose troops invaded Uganda. 

In a militarised political situation, you may find that those people could have other people. Maybe Riek Machar could have done a clandestine move to come and invade and also cause the clashing of heads between Uganda and the government of Salva Kiir. This is something that we need to establish. Like hon. Kiwanda asked, did the established Government of South Sudan own up? Who are these people who invaded? 

I appeal that Government does everything possible to see that people are returned to their villages and to facilitate the schools to open such that children can go to school. Thank you.

8.29
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Leader of Government Business for the good report they have come out with. 

My main concern is that the people of Moyo are facing a problem which is similar to problems which we faced sometime back in Bukwo. I was born in Bukwo District and even before I was born, the main problem was the Pokot of Kenya crossing over to Bukwo District. They killed our people, destroyed property and caused a lot of damage for so many years and I am equating this to what is happening in Moyo. Their main objective is to kill and destroy and raid the animals. This really is very painful and annoying especially when we see that our people are suffering because of hostile tribes. 

I want to thank the NRM Government for the work they did in Bukwo. I will never forget what this government has done. I am independent but the government has done something. (Laughter) I will never forget the suffering that we used to have in Bukwo. I feel the same thing that Government did for the people of Bukwo should also be done for the people of Moyo. (Applause)

8.31
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the army for the report today. 

One thing I just want to put before this House and probably, before Government is the perception of the South Sudanese people originating from the demarcation of the border. First of all, if you moved to that area, you will find that there is a very big problem because of where the customs point is located. They create an assumption that it is the border point. I think these are some of the things we should be looking at - the demarcation, the posting of the customs border point at the exact border point, so that it creates a demarcation.

Secondly, while we talk about Government creating boundaries or establishing the boundaries with South Sudan, we should not only look at the South Sudan border with Uganda. This is a big problem in Uganda. My constituency borders with Kenya and my neighbours in Namayingo have a problem with Migingo. We do not yet know who owns Migingo, whether it is in Uganda or in Kenya. So, I just want us to create a bigger outlook as Government. Let it become a bigger national programme whereby we demarcate all the boundaries of Uganda so that we do not have this conflict which would emerge thereafter. 

Lastly, the involvement of the local leadership in the community should be the background on which Government should build. The background on which we can relate and enhance security around the border points is to create a good working relationship between the local leadership. We have done it in Busia; we have quarterly meetings with the local leadership on the Kenya side and we do not have that problem. We are even able to arrest the thieves who have stolen from Uganda and crossed to Kenya or otherwise. (Member timed out_)

8.32
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is not the first time Uganda has suffered under the hands of the undisciplined South Sudanese, and I hope this will be the last time. I just want to find out from Government why they have not sent a very strong message to the people of South Sudan. The more we pretend and massage the people of South Sudan, the more the reoccurrence of these incidents continues. I want my government to send a strong message to the Government of South Sudan such that these acts stop. It is not the first time. We have lost so many people and we have lost property. 

There is a lady who lost her child to a South Sudanese friend whom she was living with. I raised this issue with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, hon. Oryem Okello. I wanted to bring up the matter in Parliament and he said, “No, we are going to handle it”. It is now two years and this lady from Mbale has not got back her child; her former boyfriend has refused to give her back her child. He is not even the father of the child but up to today, this lady has failed to get back her child. Our mission in South Sudan has failed to get back the child for this lady. She is back in this country but no one is helping her. So, there are those who are suffering with such pain. When shall Ugandans stop suffering at the hands of the people of South Sudan? Please, help the Ugandans. 

Yesterday, colleagues raised the issue of a South Sudanese soldier –(Member timed out_) 

8.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Leader of Government Business for the much improved comprehensive report. 

The crisis you are discussing in Moyo was exported to us by a foreign country and as we noted yesterday and today and in the statement of the Leader of Government Business, people were killed and property destroyed. Many Ugandans have been killed not only in Moyo but in South Sudan. In the report of government, they have not said anything about compensation. When lives are lost, there must be compensation. Men and women have left children when property is destroyed; there must be compensation. 

Who is going to compensate the Ugandan taxpayers on behalf of these South Sudanese whom we are helping? The minister or government should come clear on this. Maybe part of the harsh or strong statement hon. Okupa is talking about should include compiling the bill for the Government of South Sudan.

Hon. Kiwanda asked, “Has the Government of South Sudan owned up?” or they are going to call them terrorists. We need to know who is going to compensate for the life and the property lost. We also need to get an apology, if they own up, from the Government of South Sudan. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask Government to make concluding remarks in three minutes?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank colleagues who are appreciating the improvement. 

I want to respond to the question on whether the South Sudanese showed any remorse. Indeed, in our meeting, the leader of the delegation categorically stood up and apologised for what happened to the LCV chairperson and his team. At our press conference, he even spoke in his local dialect to his own people across. So, as for the apology, they were sorry. The special envoy to Juba also told us the President was really surprised. He even said even if these people were South Sudanese, since they were getting services in Uganda why wouldn’t they allow them to be registered because they are getting services from Uganda and this census is for planning for provision of services. 

Anyhow, on this matter, we isolated two issues. One is the arrest of the Moyo leaders by the South Sudanese Government; that was clear and we insisted they have to apologise. On the murdering and burning of houses, we cannot easily know who did it because it was done at night and it was kind of retaliatory. Ugandans also burnt some houses. It was also done by one group of people.

I have talked about the plan to decongest the schools because we want those people who are occupying the schools and whose huts were burnt, to go back. We said we shall provide them with tarpaulin in the mean time to cover the burnt huts. So, as they were doing that, they should leave the school and the schools should start. The distance from Moyo to Adjumani is 29 miles and it is easier to run if you are running for your life but it becomes difficult to go back. That is why the Minister of Disaster Preparedness is planning to ferry these people back to their various places.

The land at the border is disputed land, and that is why there is this dispute. The border must be opened; until it is opened, it becomes really a big problem. So, when it is open, then both sides of the people will know where exactly the border is. 

Those people who are missing – Actually, as we speak, the security people are being charged to find out what happened. This is the responsibility of these joint patrols, to find out where these people are. So, we hope very soon, they will be found.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the honourable member was saying Ugandan authorities are handling the South Sudanese with a soft hand. That shows there is law and order in your country. That is why you would not use the system that these people are using.

Madam Speaker, the other time when you were in the chair, I said if you found somebody taking a shower and the usual mad man in the village comes and takes the towel, the other person in the shelter should wait and ask for another towel instead of coming out naked to chase this man. So, you do not know who is really mad; otherwise, both of you will be considered mad. 

I do not think it will be fair for us to behave like the South Sudanese because we are protecting rights of everybody - Ugandans and non-Ugandans. So, this should have been an example to these people. So, the question is: should we behave like them? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we acknowledge what you are saying but I think what the Ugandans are asking for is that you should be more visible and vocal in protecting the interests of the people of Uganda -(Applause)- not to carry somebody’s towel. (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Is it now safe for us to travel to those areas to see what is happening? What about those South Sudanese who are occupying Uganda land and they claim it is theirs; what have you done about it?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, it is safe to go not only to that border but even to Juba. I believe you are not going to go to this very area of dispute. However, before you go to the border, write to the RDC or DPC and they will help you and you will be protected. There is security. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We have done quite a lot of work today. The rest of the items will be handled on Tuesday. House adjourned until Tuesday at 2 o’clock. On Tuesday, we may handle the consideration and approval of the Prime Minister. So, members should be here in big numbers.

(The House rose at 8.43 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 September 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)

