Tuesday, 3 September 2019

Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. With deep regrets, I wish to inform you of the demise of retired Supreme Court Judge, Justice Alfred Karokora which occurred on Friday, 30 August 2019.

The deceased had a great career in the judiciary spanning over 43 uninterrupted years with vast experience on the Bench. He first studied pharmacy at Mulago Hospital Paramedical School, 1959-1962 before proceeding to intermittent law school for a lay magistrate’s diploma course in 1967. He then proceeded to Makerere University, where he received a degree in law in 1972 and a diploma in legal practice from the Law Development Centre in 1973. 

In 1978, he was made chief magistrate, handling civil and criminal matters which were above the jurisdiction of grade 1 magistrates including appeals from lay magistrates. 

In 1981, he was appointed acting judge of the High Court of Uganda and in 1984 he was confirmed Judge of the High Court of Uganda. 

Between 1996 and 2006, he was Justice of the Supreme Court of Uganda where he greatly contributed to the development of our jurisprudence. 

In November 2006, he retired from the judiciary after serving for 43 years. 

In 2008, he served as an arbitrator with the Centre for Arbitration and Conflict Resolution as a legal consultant. 

Justice Karokora was a member of the Judicial Service Commission during which, he diligently contributed to the selection and recruitment of judicial officers in Uganda. He was also a member of the International Association of Refugee Law Judges where he represented the judiciary and the country at various judicial conferences on matters touching refugees.

He has been involved in the training of judges of Government of South Sudan on the newly adopted common law legal system with particular emphasis on human rights.

The burial arrangements will be communicated in due course. On behalf of the Parliament of Uganda and on my own behalf, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to his family, relatives and all Ugandans for this great loss and pray that the deceased secures eternal peace and rest.

Honourable members, let us rise and observe a moment of silence. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

2.10
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for bringing to the attention of Ugandans, the death of Justice Alfred Karokora. 

I would like to ask that the Prime Minister and the Government will make a formal request so that Parliament will have an opportunity to pay tribute to the son of our land that has served in many capacities and has raised the profile of legal professionalism in other countries. You have just mentioned South Sudan and I would like to mention that he also served in the United Nations for two terms after he retired. I, therefore, request for an opportunity for us to pay tribute as Parliament.

I would also like to mention that Justice Karokora was our dyera. This means somebody that marries from our family. One of Justice Karokora’s sons is married to our daughter – the daughter of the late Prof. Michael Owiny who was the University Secretary. I have known him more as a family man.

I am particularly grateful to him because after Prof. Owiny and his wife passed on, he remained a father figure to the family of Prof. Owiny. I appreciate the care that he has extended to our daughter Susan and to the entire Owiny family. 

Mr Speaker, if you collaborate with the Prime Minister, you will definitely give us opportunity to pay tribute formally. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. On your first request, which you repeated at the end, it is usually a request from the Members and in this case, when it is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister’s request that a motion of this nature be accepted and presented in the House, we will always accommodate. Therefore, any time that the Government is ready to move this motion, we will be able to pay tribute to Justice Karokora whose distinguished service we all know and remember. We will do this at an appropriate time. Thank you. 

In the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery this afternoon, we have the following delegates from the Parliament of Zambia. Hon. Brian Mundubile, Government Chief Whip and Mr Jimmy Sabbi, Deputy Principal Clerk – Journals and Table Office. They are here to benchmark on issues to do with the office of the Government Chief Whip, the operations of our committees and the way we do our budget. You are welcome (Applause)

2.14
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

The people of Labwor County, Abim District are living in total fear. They have fear of two things: the repeated attacks by the Karimojong warriors. There are new attacks every day. You hear that they have either killed somebody or raided cows.

Another message we get every day is the repeated attacks and destruction of properties by elephants that come from Kidepo National Park. 

On Sunday, the Karimojong warriors went to a place called Alerek, tortured four women in the garden and raped one. When I asked the commanders of the security team in the district, they said they did not have adequate manpower to deploy in all those hotspots where the Karimojong pass. This is what happens to our people every day.

My Speaker, my prayer is that the Government deploys adequately in all those hotspots in Abim District. 

The other prayer is that the Government reinstates the 301 Local Defence Unit (LDU) personnel who were retrenched around January to provide enough security for the people and their property. If we do not deploy adequately, the people of Agago, Otuke and Alebtong will all suffer because Abim is the gateway to all these places in northern Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.16
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Member for bringing up that issue. 

It is a tragedy and a pity that cattle rustling is still taking place in this age and time. I was with the Minister of State for Internal Affairs in the canteen and I thought that he was sloping down here. I would have wanted him to give a categorical statement on this issue but I will still take up the matter with them. I am sure he is coming. 

As for the elephants, this issue has been coming up and we have told the relevant ministry to take it up. However, I have taken note of it and it will be worked upon, at least as soon as possible. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there were even more worrying reports that came to Parliament last week from Ik County, where the Member said people from Turkana were coming in with guns and the situation of rearming could actually be taking place without us knowing, yet we have just spent a long time doing disarmament and peace building in Karamoja. This whole work will come to naught if we do not focus on these issues and deal with them before they grow out of proportion. This matter was raised last week as well.

MS KAROORO: I entirely agree with that view, Mr Speaker. As soon as the Minister of State for Internal Affairs comes in, please, give him an opportunity because with these armed gangs coming in, we cannot take anything for granted. I am going to call him so that he comes and makes a statement. It does not have to be written; but he has to come and give a response. Thank you.

2.18
MR HERBERT KINOBERE (Independent, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance regarding the Tugende Motorcycles - one of the companies giving our people motorcycles on loan. 

Mr Speaker, soon, we are going to experience a very bad demonstration, especially in Mbale where Kibuku boda boda riders are getting these motorcycles from this company. Why the demonstration against this company? This company is cheating our people by asking them to deposit Shs 490,000 for one to be given a motorcycle. Thereafter, one is asked to pay for this motorcycle within two years and nine months. The rider is asked to pay Shs 76,000 per week. 

Shs 76,000 per week means there is no falling sick or any other incident. These people are being taken advantage of. Most of them are illiterate and the company is making them sign documents. After riding these motorcycles for about six months, the company tells them the Shs 490,000 they deposited will be paid back upon the completion of payment for the motorcycle.

Mr Speaker, if you compute the payment of Shs 76,000 every week over the period of two years and nine months, it comes to around Shs 10,032,000 per motorcycle.

I would like to inform this House that since this company came, I doubt that 10 or 20 per cent of the recipients have repaid the full amount for the motorcycles because they keep on impounding the motorcycles. These people are selling their land and most of them are running away, leaving their families to suffer in fear of the motorcycles being taken away yet they are about to finish paying for them.

For example, if I fall sick and I give my brother the motorcycle to ride – they have their spies who will call, saying: “So-and-so is not riding his motorcycle.” They will come and impound that motorcycle and when they take it to Mbale, one has to pay Shs 100,000. The money that one was supposed to pay for that month is taken as a fine. At the end of the day, you cannot pay for the motorcycle in full. These people are selling their land and losing their money to repay these loans and families are suffering. These boda boda riders are asking: “If I have paid for my motorcycle and I am remaining with about 20 per cent to complete, why come and impound it?”

My prayer is that this company be investigated - whether it is genuine. If it is a genuine company, there is need to investigate its terms and conditions of operation. By law, if you are working with an illiterate, there must be a certificate of interpretation to interpret for them so that whatever they are signing is true. For most of these boda boda riders, they keep telling them – like we see in banks: “Sign here.” “Sign here.” “Sign here.” “Sign here.” They do not know what they are signing and at the end of the day they are tying themselves.

My second prayer is that the minister concerned brings a report about Tugende Company. I know there is somewhere where they belong. The company did not come from heaven and land in Uganda. The concerned party should bring a report to this House. We are all affected. Tugende boda bodas are everywhere in the country. If they pick motorcycles from Kibuku, they will take them to Gulu or western and they bring those ones from western to Mbale.

Mr Speaker, those are my prayers and I request that this be treated as a matter of urgency. Otherwise, boda boda riders are likely to storm that office. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the first thing that has got to be done is for this matter to be reported to police. When you say “investigations”, investigations by who? Let the police do the investigations. If there is bad practice by one company the police should investigate and get us the reports. I do not see any other institution getting involved in investigating one private company. 

Please, take it up as the representative of your people and let this matter be handled by the police. Of course they will take their time but at least report there so that they know that this problem is there, especially now that the boda boda people are threatening to hold a big demonstration.

On the other aspect of the ministry, I do not know which minister will be able to deal with this issue. Could it be the minister in charge of trade?

2.24
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES (Mr Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I could get more information from the honourable member and try to follow up and come back with a report. However, as you guided, it is important that they raise it up as a criminal case with the police. However, we could follow up on the company as well as the irregular terms of operations that they are applying. We will come in and I will submit a document or paper here after maybe two weeks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you do not have to come back to Parliament. Just solve that matter.

MS KYAMBADDE: Okay, thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We would not like to bother you to come back here again to tell us about this same company. Solve the matter and we will all be happy; hon. Kinobere will be able to brief us that the matter has been settled.

MS KAYMBADDE: I concede, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have children from Kasangati Child Development Centre, Wakiso District. They are represented by hon. Kyagulanyi Robert Ssentamu and hon. Seninde Rosemary. They are here to observe the proceedings. (Applause)
 
We also have pupils from Cornerstone Nursery and Primary School from Arua District, Terego West Constituency, represented by hon. Osoru Maurine, hon. Angundru Moses and hon. Obiga Kania Mario. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you. Can I have the Member for Busongora South?

2.25
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I stand here to present an urgent matter of national importance. Two years ago, The Human Rights Commission opened up offices in the Rwenzori Sub Region particularly Kasese and Bundibugyo.

These offices have been working well putting in mind that Kasese and Bundibugyo are some of the districts that are affected by human rights abuses.

Unfortunately, the Human Rights Commission gave notice of closure of these offices. The community in Rwenzori Sub Region and Kasese in particular, is concerned because that Rwenzori Sub Region is one of the areas that have been affected by torture and other human rights abuses.

We would like to know why the offices have been closed and on the same note request that if there is no proper justification as to why they are closed, these offices be re-opened. Thank you.
	
2.27
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, honourable Member for Busongora West. We shall take up the matter with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Indeed if they have been closed, why? And if there is no sufficient reason, they should be opened. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we hear from the Member for Bushenyi/Ishaka?

2.28
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. On Sunday, 1 September 2019, I received a delegation of elders at my home in Bushenyi, led by a one Zachariah Rwankore in regard to the disappearance of the retired Rev. Nathan Rwankore.

The members were in total fear and devastated by the disappearance of their father. As we speak, it is almost one and a half months after the disappearance. They reported to police but so far no recovery of Rev. Nathan Rwankore.

My prayer is that the minister concerned and all intelligence agencies should widen up their network, nationally and regionally, to trace the whereabouts of Rev. Nathan Rwankore. Otherwise the people of Bushenyi and the whole village are in fear because they cannot trace this man and they are very much concerned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, who is also a Member of Parliament for Bushenyi District.

2.29
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I am going to speak as a Member of Parliament for Bushenyi before I come in as the acting Prime Minister. 

This was a reverend in my local church. I thank my hon. Gordon Arinda for bringing up this issue and I know that a delegation indeed went to him. It is something that has been of great concern.

At a personal level, I have taken the matter to the IGP because as a former Minister for Security I still have a lot of contact there. On official note I contacted the CMI Chief.

However, speaking as the acting Prime Minister, I am going to further take it up because it is battling -(Interjections)- there is no conflict of interest, honourable members, when we talk about human rights, humanity and those issues that touch the uttermost bit of our hearts. Thank you.

2.31
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to raise an important matter about the Entebbe Express Highway. 

In 2012, the Government embarked on the construction of the Kampala-Entebbe Express Highway; a 51 kilometre stretch at a cost of Shs 1.19 trillion of which Shs 875 billion was borrowed from the Exim Bank of China.

The matter of national concern I am raising is: why at the Abaita Ababiri the express highway has joined the normal road and queues with the normal traffic yet as you take off from Kampala you know that you will get to the airport on schedule.

Can the design aspects be reconsidered to get it off the traditional Entebbe highway from Abaita Ababiri to the airport?

Two, when will the project be completed? This is because there are robbers on that road as of now. So, we would like to know when the project will be completed.

Lastly, we would like the Government to give us an official position because we learnt that they are waiting for a piece of legislation on the road toll.
	
However, if it is a loan that is going to be paid for by all Ugandans, we wonder why there should be a toll because to me it sounds like a kind of apartheid. 

Every Ugandan, even the one in Pader who has never reached Kampala will pay for that loan at a rate of two per cent per annum to the Exim Bank of China. So, can the Government clarify to us why we have roads where those who have money will use it while those who do not have money will not use yet it is a loan borrowed from the Exim Bank of China? Thank you, so much.

2.33
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, hon. Odonga-Otto and thank you, Mr Speaker. I will put to the attention of the Minister of Transport and Communications, this issue because there are very pertinent points that you raised. The minister should be able to come and give us the rightful answers to what you have raised. Thank you.

MS AMERO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a point of procedure regarding an issue that was raised last week on some refugees who are in Malaba. They were discovered in the bushes of Tororo at around 2 o’clock but the condition under which they are living is pathetic. 

I just wanted to know – because this issue was raised on the Floor last week – what Government is doing. Yesterday, I was there and I saw where these refugees are being accommodated. It is actually a cell for juveniles. When they are put in there, they cannot even sleep. They sleep while sitting because it is a small place and the group has 27 refugees with 22 juveniles.

I would like to know what Government is doing to help these people despite the fact that even the police in Malaba are complaining that they do not have food to feed these people. They are literally living on handouts. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedural matter has turned into a question for you, honourable minister.

2.35
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is very inhuman. The matter was raised with the ministers concerned; the Ministry, Office of the Prime Minister (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees) and I thought one of them would be here. 

I would like to promise my honourable colleague that I am contacting those ministers right away and if I do not get them, tomorrow, I will be here personally. 

Today, I will communicate to see that something is done. Even though there is no food for 27 people, by this evening, there will be some food until the situation gets cleared. 

What is happening there is inhuman. Being a refugee does not mean it is a sentence on you. Thank you, honourable member. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we go to the Order Paper now? 

2.36
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am presenting a matter of national concern regarding the rampant kidnap/abduction and murder of Ugandans without any meaningful intervention by the security agencies.

As a country, we are still recovering from the recent kidnap of Mr Lungujja and the subsequent murder of Ms Maria Nagirinya and Mr Richard Kitayimbwa whose bodies were discovered in Mukono.

A similar incident was registered in a month in Kajjansi where a resident by the name of James Kalumba was kidnapped from his home. He was later murdered and his body was also discovered just last Sunday dumped in a nearby trench. 

As you aware, this country has always been interfaced with these various cases of kidnap where people disappear and would later be discovered when they have been killed already.

We have seen these cases in the Entebbe area where women were murdered. In this House, different ministers came to explain these matters.  They have, however, never been concluded to know who has killed these Ugandans. Also, the ministers came to this House and presented to us someone by the name of Ivan Katongole, a renowned fish exporter, as the person who was responsible for the Entebbe murder of women.

Court, however, pronounced itself and Mr Ivan Katongole was not only acquitted in that case but also the court said he was maliciously prosecuted.

So, this is becoming too much. For example, in this case of Kajjansi, we found out that the relatives of the person who was killed, Mr James Kalumba, were in contact with the Kajjansi Police Station. We have read in the newspapers, especially the New Vision of today that the police personnel at Kajjansi did not help out. Instead, they connected the relatives to the State House trackers to track the murderers or kidnappers. 

What I can reveal to you, Mr Speaker, is that I have the evidence; the screenshots of these State House controllers’ or trackers’ messages asking for money from the families. The relatives of the victims have been sending money to the following State House controllers: Mr Lawrence Ssenyonga, Mr Willy Kasirye and Ms Eva Mutesasira. These State House controllers have been asking for money from the relatives of the people who had been kidnapped and killed –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is only one State House Comptroller. 

MR ZAAKE: I mean the State House trackers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, do not drag other titles into this.

MR ZAAKE: It is the State House trackers who were connected to the relatives by the Kajjansi Police Station and I have read some of the names of the State House trackers. The family member is by the name of Herbert – I have forgotten the other name but I think Herbert is enough. I can provide you the evidence because I got this information from him in the case of Lungujja.

My prayer is that the line ministers should come up with a statement to explain to us the anomalies of these cases clearly. They should also explain to us who is behind the murder of the Ugandans. Our people are being kept in fear. 

These are some of the few cases that are heard of but there are so many other unseen cases all over the country. People are being kidnapped, tortured and killed. At least I am a victim of torture and we are sure that this Government tortures and kills people. I can prove this and you know it.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you. I have all the evidences and I can put them at your disposal. 

2.41
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo):  Mr Speaker, first and foremost, let me take this opportunity to thank the honourable member for raising this matter. Secondly, let me state that quite a number of points, which he has raised, have been issues that were discussed on the Floor of this House. I do not think I will go back to them.

However, there are new issues that he has raised. First, I would like to invite him to share with me the details of those matters. Secondly, I undertake to come with a statement by Thursday on the current status of the development of these issues which he has just raised. I have been in meetings since last Friday in relation to these matters and we are developing a statement to comprehensively respond to them. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we go to the Order Paper now? 

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.42
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the delegation on benchmarking visit to Northern Island Assembly.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. We will find an appropriate time to have this debate.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I would like to give a sketch of the content of the report, if you allow me to do that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, the rules allow you to do that.

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In principle, the strategic plan of the Parliament of Uganda allows Members of Parliament to visit other countries in order to share experiences and skills. That is in line with strategic objective one of the strategic plan of our Parliament.

Mr Speaker, the visit that we undertook was to learn modern technology in presenting complicated reports to Parliament; that will help us to understand reports faster than we have been doing. We all know that parliaments are crowded with too many activities – however, we are bombarded with too much information which we are required to have if we are to take decisions on critical matters.

Mr Speaker, as a member of the Committee on Budget, I know that there are a number of reports that we normally present to Parliament which require a lot of reading, analysing the statistics in order to arrive at a decision. However, the technology we have learnt will help our Parliament to comprehend things faster in a more modern manner and will help us in taking decisions in a more balanced form.

Allow me to explain the two technologies: First of all, the use of Geographical Information System (GIS) in parliamentary business; GIS, as it is normally known, is software that aids institutions harness the geographical elements of data. Not only to map data but to analyse it in new and powerful ways. The software has been crucial in guiding decision-making in South Africa, Ethiopia, Australia, Canada, United Kingdom and other countries, including Malaysia and Indonesia.

It was demonstrated that within Parliament, GIS is an efficient tool that facilitates evidence-based decision-making through –

answering Members of Parliament and public queries that require geographical information;
provision of geographical information for research papers;
analysis of likely impact of parliamentary decisions;
visualisation and review analysis and understanding of unseen patterns, which may be hidden in the process of decision-making.

The delegation was advised that for Parliament of Uganda to incorporate the use of geographical information in its processes, it requires to attend and maintain the following:

GIS software.
Reliable geographical information data; which I hope that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will be able to do.
Support from data and mapping agencies.
Hardware and computer and data storage.
Staff training and exposure. 
Finances for licensing and updating of software.

The Northern Island Assembly was willing to offer support in terms of collaborations, attachments and mentoring. However, this necessitated a formal arrangement in the form of Memorandum of Understanding between the Northern Island Assembly and the Parliament of Uganda.

We wish to recommend the following:

Parliament needs to acquire GIS software.
To undertake partnership with relevant agencies such as Uganda Bureau of Statistics so as to access reliable data that can be translated into the geographical information system.
Formalising an attachment and exchange of mentoring programme between the Northern Island Assembly and the Parliament of Uganda. 
The use of infographics in Parliament business.

Mr Speaker, “infographics” were defined as graphic-visual representations that present complex information in a simple and visually engaging manner. I wish I could explain that because I was impressed. If we want to know which of the councils in our districts have more women representation – not that we are only interested in women representation in Parliament; we rarely think about how women are represented in the council. We just come up with a map of Uganda and the districts and we just bring the colour and that colour will show you that this district has put more women in the council than the other districts. Likewise, we will be able to design our mentoring, training and awareness programmes taking care of where the gaps are. This is how useful this modern technology can help us take decisions.

Mr Speaker, it is, therefore, the prayer of the delegation that Parliament embraces modern technology in doing business. (Interjection) - It is not only for the young because I was interested to learn yet I am 70 and above years but I am able to come back and share this information. Therefore, I do not see why we cannot embrace this technology.

Secondly, we need to take accurate decisions based on accurate data. We do not have time to read the statistics. You have seen that whenever we are talking about the Budget and finance reports, we are almost one third or a quarter of Members participating because people get disturbed with figures. If you present the report in a manner that makes it friendly to Members of Parliament, it will help me and other Members to take very well-informed decisions based on facts which are available. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. You promised to do a sketch and ended up with a full picture. We will find time and have a debate on this matter.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2019

2.53
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Mr Speaker, the Bill was already laid on the Table; isn’t it? I, therefore, thought that it should be now the chairperson - Correct me if I am wrong.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill was read for the first time and sent to the committee. Now, it is coming back for second reading and hence the motion for second reading of the Bill.

MS KAROORO: Mr Speaker, I move the motion that the Bill entitled “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2019” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It has been seconded by the Members for West Budama County North, Kumi County, Bunyole East County and Bbaale County. 

Honourable minister, would you like to speak to your motion? Would you like to justify your motion? Honourable members, can I propose the question and then we proceed?
 
MS KAROORO: Much obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2019” be read for the second time. Usually, to start our discussions, we rely on a report from the committee to guide the debate. So, debate starts now with the report.

2.55
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Patrick Opolot): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have the report of the committee. We have only one report; there is no minority report on this Bill.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the committee together with the minutes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of the report and the minutes of the meetings of the committee. 

Mr PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Speaker, permit me to present to you a report of the Committee on Budget on the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2019.

You will recall that on 9 July 2019, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development introduced the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2019 for first reading. It was subsequently referred to the Committee on Budget.

Our methodology involved interaction with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The object of the Bill was to provide supplementary appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund under Article 156(3) of the Constitution and section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 for a sum of Shs 1,709,440,288,000, to meet additional expenditure for the financial year 2017/2018. 

The report of the committee was made after the following observations: 

a) 	On 3 May 2018 and 19 June 2018, Parliament approved supplementary estimates to the approved budget for the financial year 2017/2018. Therefore, in accordance with Article 155(3), the minister is obliged to introduce a Supplementary Appropriation Bill for the supplementary sums to be appropriated for the purposes specified –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, I think we are not proceeding well. Under rule 152 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the motion that should have been moved is for the Committee of Supply to consider the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. The record is corrected accordingly. Proceed, please.

Mr PATRICK OPOLOT:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is important to note that Article 156(3) clearly sets the time within which the Supplementary Appropriation Bill must be laid before Parliament. I hereby reproduce Article 156(3), which states thus: 
“Where, in respect of any financial year, a supplementary estimate or supplementary estimates have been approved by Parliament in accordance with clause (2) of this Article, a Supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced into Parliament in the financial year next following that financial year to which the estimates relate, providing for the appropriation of the sums so approved for the purposes specified in those estimates.” 

b) 	Article 156(3) is further operationalised by section 18(4) of the Public Finance Management Regulations, 2016, which provision mirrors the above constitutional provision.

c) 	The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2019 relating to the financial year 2017/2018 was introduced by the minister on 9 July 2019; and

d) 	This, therefore, is in contravention of Article 156(3) of the Constitution and Regulation 18(4) of the Public Finance Management Act. 

In conclusion, the committee is, therefore, unable to proceed with consideration of the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2019 because it was introduced in contravention of Article 156(3) of the Constitution. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the report of the committee. The committee is insisting that provisions of the law must be obeyed. Their recommendation is that this House should not go to the Committee of Supply because there is no need. The fundamental law has not been followed but instead, it has been treated with disrespect. Therefore, they recommend that we should not proceed with this Supplementary Appropriation Bill. Debate continues.

3.02
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee entirely for the stand they have taken. Your role has defended the role of Parliament on spending money. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, we need to take ourselves seriously. This is a case about us. We are the watchdogs of the funds of the people of Uganda. Any money coming out of the Consolidated Fund must do so with our permission. If anyone takes it out without passing through here, they are given a time limit within which they should report to Parliament and get our permission.

Now that money was removed without the authorisation of Parliament and used by the Executive; now that they have come to Parliament beyond the time limit provided by law and the committee has recommended that we should not approve the appropriation they have requested for, what happens? What should be done to them? Should they refund the money to the Consolidated Fund? What is the way forward?

In my view, the ministers responsible must pay back this money to the Consolidated Fund. I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, for your submission. Maybe the chairperson should have been asked whether he has pursued the provision of section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act to find a solution to that breach. If he did, were any explanations given to him satisfactory or not? He does not make reference to the command of section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Speaker, section 78 (1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 provides thus: “Where any institution or department of Government which receives public money does not meet the requirements of this Act or contravenes this Act, Parliament may request the minister responsible for the institution or department to make a report to Parliament with an explanation on the matter.”

It does not guide –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Thank you for giving me an opportunity to inform the House. Mr Speaker, this situation was brought to the committee and the committee did consider that the Constitution is supreme and therefore, any law that breaches the Constitution would not be complied with. That is the position that the committee took. 

Article 156(3) of the Constitution is supreme. Therefore, any law contained in the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 would not alter the position of the constitutional provision under Article 156 (3). Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, don’t you think you would be giving yourself the powers of court? If there is an inconsistency with the Constitution, it is not Parliament to declare it as such. Usually, if a law is inconsistent with the Constitution, we normally go to the Constitutional Court to have it rectified. 

I looked through the provisions of the Constitution the last time I read it, which was not too long ago, and I have not found a provision which gives Parliament the powers to nullify laws it has made on the basis that it conflicts with the Constitution. That Parliament can nullify laws it has passed because it is inconsistent with the Constitution, I have not found that procedure.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, yes you are right. We can only nullify by way of repeal. However, also you as the Speaker, in that honourable chair, can have a right to refer a matter of this nature that has arisen to the Constitutional Court by way of reference and they will seat and determine the constitutionality of the respective Act. 

Therefore, I invite you, without even giving us the opportunity to debate this matter, to refer the provisions referred to the Constitutional Court for interpretation using your powers. I do so invite.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Constitutional Court does not give that room. What you are talking about, that this Parliament can request for, is what we call a case stated. Parliament can on its own state a case for determination by any court – “please advise us on the following because we have a situation”. However, the Constitutional Court procedures are clear on how you petition the Constitutional Court. Therefore, the Speaker cannot petition the Constitutional Court.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I respectfully want to disagree with the submission of hon. Cecilia Ogwal. The reading of this provision does not point in any way to inconsistency with the Constitution. What we are dealing here is a clear breach of the law as it is. If you read section 78, it does not contravene the Constitution. Therefore, it is my submission that we deal with the issue of the breach of the law that required the minister to come in the next financial year to lay –(Interruption) 

MR OTHIENO: Thank you. The information I would like to give hon. Odur is that indeed, there is no inconsistency which was reported by the committee. The committee’s challenge is that section 78 deals with those who violate the Act itself. Now, the committee’s dilemma is that there is a breach of a constitutional provision. Therefore, the committee has come back to the House. They are saying that the law is dealing with those who breach it but there is also a challenge the committee is facing - breach of a constitutional provision.

Therefore, the committee’s reference to the House is for the House to advise on the way forward. A law has been breached. It is not that there is inconsistency; the law is very clear. The Act talks of a penalty for those who violate it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, the committee creates the confusion. It should have reported as such. Instead of the committee doing that, they said that the committee is therefore unable to proceed with consideration of the Supplementary Appropriation Bill because it was introduced in contravention of Article 156. They should have advised the House that in the circumstances where there is a breach, the law allows them to do that, so Parliament, do that.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Speaker, it is my proposal that we refer this report back to the committee and give them time to process it and advise the House –(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for giving way. Apart from the committee falling short of pulling the trigger, the law is extremely clear. If Members have read the committee report, the spirit of the committee report was to the effect that there is a clear illegality and the Constitution has been breached.

However, before us is a Bill, which must be put in perspective. It is a Supplementary Appropriation Bill. Money which Parliament passed has long been spent. We are only considering a Supplementary Appropriation Bill whose action was taken earlier. However, the Ministry of Finance breached the constitutional provision. 

The committee cannot proceed with the processing of an illegality, which has been identified. The committee says, if it were to proceed with or reject the Bill, since the work they did was given to them by the whole House as they were assigned, now that they have cited an illegality of this nature, let this House that gave them the job throw it out or tell them to proceed with the illegality and process the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let me state it again. A committee of Parliament that has spent time processing a matter cannot come back and say, “You are on your own”. You cannot do that; it is indecent, because you are the one who has interrogated the matter, met people and discussed it. 

Come and tell us that you processed this matter but there are some problems with how it fits with the Constitution so this is your recommendation: throw it out or there are other avenues that can be explored - let the minister come and explain under section 78. However, you cannot say, “House you are on your own; we are Pontius Pilate, we have washed our hands, do as you please”. No. 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Speaker, thank you for the guidance. The spirit with which the committee has come up with this report is that it has no power to proceed when the Bill is not meeting the constitutional provisions.  

Therefore, the spirit with which they brought the report is for the House to guide on the way forward. The committee cannot, on its own, decide to proceed on a matter when its hands are tied. The committee is constrained – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, your hands are not tied. That is why the matter was sent to you to examine and come and advise the House. You could have said, for example, “We have found illegalities with this matter and this is what we recommend.” 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Okay, I think Members must clearly know that this matter came to the House. The schedule for the supplementary was laid on the Table and approved by the House and the monies were spent. The provision by the Constitution to lay the Supplementary Appropriation Bill is what is out of time. 

Mr Speaker, we swear in our offices to protect, uphold and defend the Constitution. Therefore, as a committee, we do not have powers to break that. That is why we have to come back to the House and – (Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the chairman. What exactly stopped you from recommending conclusively to the House? You found a breach and you could have advised the House to reject the Bill. What stopped you from coming with that recommendation rather than leaving it in a way that does not tell us to go left, right or centre? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I would like to give you information, chairperson. In the circumstances, the only way to proceed is for you to ask the Speaker for a little more time, probably a day. Afterwards, we can come up with a clearly defined position of the committee to either accept or reject the Bill. 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Mr Speaker, I believe we can now be guided by section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act, which states that, in case of such a contravention of the existing laws, the minister or the department concerned comes to the House and explains the matter – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you are on the Floor. 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a committee, we stand to say that we follow Section 78(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, which allows the minister to come and explain the matter. 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion without notice. The motion is that the debate on this particular report, under rule 80 of our Rules of Procedure, be closed and the question be put to the effect that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2019” be rejected by this House. I beg to move that the question be put. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a motion without notice so I have the prerogative to look at it. (Laughter) This is because it should fit within the four corners of the laws that govern our operations here.

The motion is brought in good faith, to try and resolve a stalemate. However, in the current circumstances, the motion would not be the solution to the situation that we face. 

First of all, we are dealing with a matter that has not been debated and the committee report has not recommended anything to Parliament. Therefore, the proper way to do this is to give the committee two days - today and tomorrow - and then they come back on Thursday afternoon, so that we can solve this matter, after they have clearly guided Parliament on what to do. The matter has been deferred to Thursday.

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ROBERT NTENDE ON THE STATUS OF PLEDGES BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF INDIA, H.E NARENDRA MODI, DURING HIS ADDRESS TO THE HOUSE ON 25 JULY 2018, NOTABLY BUILDING A CONFERENCE CENTRE IN JINJA IN MEMORY OF MAHATMA GANDHI AND CREDIT EXTENSION TO UGANDA TO ESTABLISH COTTAGE INDUSTRIES

3.22
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you. The Office of the Prime Minister did take up that matter and we are still in consultations. We had to actually get in touch with the Office of the Prime Minister of India. The information is coming in. Next Tuesday, Mr Speaker, we will present what is pertaining as of now. Thank you. 

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. LUCY ACHIRO ON THE DESTRUCTION OF CROPS AND PROPERTY BY HEAVY RAINS IN PADER DISTRICT AND THE NEED FOR RELIEF SUPPORT FOR THE AFFECTED HOUSEHOLDS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the minister in charge of disaster preparedness here? Let us go to the next item. 

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. JULIUS ACON ON THE HIGH SCHOOL DROPOUT RATES IN OTUKE DISTRICT AND THE NEED FOR AN ASSESSMENT OF THE SITUATION AND TARGETED INTERVENTIONS

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The Ministry of Education and Sports appreciates the need to ensure that learners begin and complete the school cycle. 

This matter in Otuke District was raised by my colleague, hon. Julius Acon. In the district, a number of initiatives are ongoing to ensure that these learners are retained in schools and these include: 

1. 	The Go Back to School Campaign, which is being conducted to sensitise parents on their roles and responsibilities. In fact, apart from Otuke, recently, I was in Nebbi, together with the Uganda National Teacher’s Union (UNATU) leadership, on the same Go Back to School Campaign. 

2. 	We are encouraging the elimination of violence against children in schools in the district. This is being done through sensitisation of staff and management in schools around the districts. 

3. 	We are also engaging with stakeholders in the district on the need for more involvement in the education of children through provision of lunch for children, acquisition of scholastic materials and involvement in school management meetings. Special emphasis is being given to school feeding because research has shown that children who have midday meals tend to concentrate more and perform better.

5. 	Schools are also being encouraged to take up co-curricular activities like music, dance and drama, which promote a balance between classroom activities and increase the interest of children in school, so that they are not bored with academics only. 

6. 	The district has also drafted a Bill, which is due for the third reading in council, which hopefully will come up with an ordinance to enforce registration and stay of learners in schools to complete their respective cycles of education.

Mr Speaker, we shall continue engaging with these stakeholders through mass media, including radio announcements, to ensure that this problem is eliminated. We also urge our leaders, including Members of Parliament, to encourage their constituents to retain their children in school. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there any supplementary question from hon. Acon? Since he is not here, there is no supplementary question. Let us go to next item. 

RESPONSE TO AN ISSUE RAISED BY HON. CECILIA OGWAL ON THE PROVISION OF SANITARY PADS TO GIRL STUDENTS

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This question was raised by our sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, District Woman Representative, Dokolo. Here is my response:	

The Ministry of Education and Sports has made efforts to ensure that there is proper menstrual hygiene management among adolescent girls in school.

In 2015, the Ministry of Education and Sports sent out a circular to all schools and institutions on the management of menstruation in schools. Whatever documents I am talking about, I will be laying them on the Table. Among other things, the circular stipulated that schools should provide emergency sanitary ware to girls who undergo menstruation while at school (Circular No. 01/2015).

My ministry has already prioritised menstrual hygiene management through several interventions at the national, district and school levels. Key among these are:

a) 	Development of policies, guidelines and circulars - the Gender in Education Policy (2017) and the National Sexuality Education Framework. These policies tackle menstruation hygiene management among adolescent girls; 

b) 	Construction and provision of gender responsive water, hygiene and sanitation facilities like latrines, bathrooms, changing rooms and hand washing facilities;

c) 	Development of age appropriate information packages in form of readers, animation videos and radio spot messages on proper menstrual hygiene management;

d) 	We are training our learners on making reusable pads using locally available materials; 

e) 	We are also building the capacity of our teachers, especially senior women and men teachers, to support the girls on how to manage the physical and psychosocial changes associated with menstruation;

f) 	We have emphasised community awareness on the importance of girls’ education and provision of basic requirements to girls such as sanitary pads; and 

g) 	We have worked with Uganda Red Cross Society and other partners to pilot an intervention on providing sanitary pads to girls in Mayuge District. We hope to learn from this pilot as we mobilise resources to scale up the intervention to all schools in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a book entitled, “The Ministry of Education and Sports National Strategies for Girls Education”, which incorporates all the ideas I have been mentioning –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is it a book? 

MR BAKKABULINDI: It is a pamphlet, Mr Speaker. I also beg to lay on the Table the Gender in Education Sector Policy to support my argument; the National Sexuality Education Framework, 2018; and the Education Sports Sector Annual Performance Report, which includes all the sections that support my statement. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, do you have a supplementary question?

3.28
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for attempting to brief Parliament about the plans the Government has to provide sanitary towels and train women in proper menstrual hygiene. I would like to say, however, that this was not the purpose of my question. 

My question was based on the fact that very many girls are missing school because of the menstrual cycle. My appeal to Government was that it should do something now to make sure we keep these children in school, not only in primary but also in secondary school.

I would like to inform the minister that final examinations are about to start - Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE), Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) and Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education (UACE) examinations will begin soon. Most of the girls will miss the examinations because if the menstrual cycle starts in the middle of the exams, they will not be able to sit for their examination. 

The minister should inform the House on what can be done as a matter of emergency. What can the Government do to make sure that for this three-month period, the girl-child is kept in class and is be able to perform during examinations? Can the Government tell us? 

If the minister’s problem is the budget, can he inform the House how we can help the ministry to take care of this sensitive matter? It is heart-breaking for a minister who has a girl-child but does not care because he can afford sanitary pads and he is asking the child to learn about hygiene. How do they learn about hygiene when they do not have anything? They do not have the money to buy the sanitary pads, even if they are reusable sanitary towels which cost Shs 1,000.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform you that in Dokolo District, there are some parents who cannot even afford biro pens for their children to write examinations. How are you going to expect a poor parent not only to provide pens for exams but also provide sanitary towels? It does not work. Please, let us be practical; we are human beings. You are a parent; I do not need to lecture you.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ogwal. You are right; children get disorganised during this period, not only in class but even in the field because it is psychological. The question is: What can be done by the Government as a matter of emergency? 

Menstrual periods are not something that started yesterday; they have been part of human beings. The booklets and circular I have laid on the Table are about a process on how to sensitise the parents, the children and leaders. Let us accept that the parents too need to be sensitised. 

Therefore, for something that needs sensitisation, there is no way you can say, “I want an answer from the Government now.” Anyhow, I do appreciate your call and that is why I have laid on the Table different books to show you that the process is taking place. Together, you and I are going to win. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, the question is: What are we going to do in the next three months?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Now that you have just raised it, I will go back to my technical team and see what can be done immediately.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I would like to know when the minister will be reporting back because the process of the examinations has started. Furthermore, I would like to inform the minister that recently, the President of Kenya signed for the distribution of free sanitary towels recently. Why can’t our President do the same? (Interjections)

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our colleague is saying that she would like to know when I will come back and report. I can comfortably say next week, and not because the President of Kenya signed. You know, it is like dancing; we have different styles of dancing. That is his style and if it is good, we shall dance the same. Thank you.

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. NSAMBA PATRICK OSHABE ON THE VACANT POLITICAL OFFICES IN NEWLY CREATED DISTRICTS DUE TO DELAYED ELECTIONS, SAVE FOR HOIMA DISTRICT THAT IS SCHEDULED TO HOLD ELECTIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Justice here? Let us go to the next item.

3.34
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Recently, the Prime Minister had a meeting with the Chairman of the Electoral Commission and his team on this issue of vacant positions which needed elections. 

The Chairman of the Independent Electoral Commission came with very serious problems of vacant offices in districts since 2014; registrars are missing in some districts. They asked for a supplementary, which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was not able to give. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had already given some money to the Electoral Commission in preparation for the forthcoming elections. The chairman was, therefore, asked to write back to the finance ministry to allow them use part of that money to recruit and fill the vacant positions of district registrars of elections so that if there are elections tomorrow, all the districts will be ready. Otherwise, right now, without district registrars, they will not be able to hold elections. 

For the other elections, it was decided that those districts without elected officers will have to wait for the general elections due to lack of money. That is the position. Those districts without chairpersons or women representatives will have to wait because there is no money now to hold these elections and then shortly hold other elections.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Should they, therefore, wait for the general elections? 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: We will wait for the general elections and carry them out at once.

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ROBINAH RWAKOOJO ON THE IMPORTATION OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE-STRICKEN HEADS OF CATTLE FROM TANZANIA AND COUNTERFEIT ACARICIDE – DEXTATIX - FROM ZIMBABWE BY A ONE MR MULINDWA

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms. Joy Kabatsi): Mr Speaker, the importation of cows from Tanzania to Uganda became controversial, so the Ministry for Security has taken over the matter and is investigating thoroughly. Mr Mulindwa says that he got those cows from Uganda, that he bought them from Gen. Otafiire. However, the story is that he got them from Tanzania and brought Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) to Ssembabule. Therefore, the Minister for Security has taken over the matter. He is investigating and he has already arrested the District Veterinary Officer of Ssembabule as investigations go on. When they have ended, we shall come and give a full report. 

However, Mr Mulindwa does not import acaricides and does not have any company that imports acaricides. I think that information was totally incorrect. 

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. OKUPA ELIJAH ON THE INCREASING DEATHS OF DOMESTIC LIVESTOCK OCCASIONED BY WILD ANIMALS IN SERERE DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think this should have been for tourism. Is it still agriculture? I think it is tourism because they are in charge of wildlife. The question has not been properly referred. We will reserve this for the minister in charge of tourism. 

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI SEMAKULA ON THE POWER BLACKOUT AT NSAMBYA POLICE BARRACKS THAT HAS LASTED OVER TWO MONTHS AND ITS CONSEQUENCES ON THE SECURITY OF THE AREA AND ITS SURROUNDINGS

3.39
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo):  Mr Speaker, Nsambya Police Barracks is one of the heavily populated barracks that we have, which frequently suffer from blackouts due to high consumption. Given the policy directive that all Government departments and agencies revert to a prepaid metering system to address the accumulation of domestic arrears, Nsambya barracks reverted to the smart energy metering system. 

On its own, Nsambya requires Shs 1.464 billion to meet the cost of utilities, electricity in particular, per quarter. Unfortunately, the budgetary allocation per quarter for utilities is only Shs 614 million thus the insufficiency to meet the requirement.

Uganda Police Force operates Umeme 579 accounts, including 98 on the smart energy metering system. Nsambya, as I mentioned, is one of the 98. If you took police generally, we would require Shs 6.2 billion per quarter to meet our requirements for electricity for the 579 Umeme accounts that we run every financial year. This burden increases exponentially as the institution expands its operations. 

Mr Speaker, due to these financial constraints, there is no way we can avoid having blackouts, because we run out of funds before the end of the quarter. It is, therefore, my appeal to you all that we need to reconsider giving additional financial support to this institution in order for it to continue to have its operations running seamlessly. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You then need to give a request to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the additional financial requirements. Otherwise, we cannot move on our own to do that. 

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. CATHERINE NDAMIRA ON THE STATE OF FIRE-FIGHTING EQUIPMENT OF THE UGANDA POLICE.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo):  Mr Speaker, this matter was raised by hon. Rehema Watongola on 23 July 2019. 

In the financial years 2019/2020 and 2020/2021, the police is planning to establish fire stations with firefighting equipment as follows: in Kasangati, Mpigi, Buloba, Ntinda, Kasubi, Wakiso and Kyengera. 

We also intend to strengthen and equip upcountry stations:

Kamuli (to cater for Busoga North Region) 
Kapchorwa (to cater for Sipi Region) 
Moyo 
Nebbi
Koboko (to cater for North West Nile)
Kagadi 
Kyenjojo 
Kiryandongo

The equipment I have just mentioned will include fire trucks, water trucks and assorted fire equipment - such as fire extinguishers and hose reels.
 
In addition, the police require massive support – as I have indicated earlier – in order to cater for all municipalities and major towns like Bugiri, Kotido and many others which, as of now, do not have firefighting equipment.

I would like to, again, appeal to you that when we come asking for assistance, understand the burden. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us move to the next item.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. PAUL AKAMBA ON THE ALLEGED ABUSE OF OFFICE BY THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON ACCOUNT THAT HE CAUSED THE ARREST OF A TURKISH NATIONAL, MR AZIZ DURMAN

3.44
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker, on 13 August 2O19, hon. Paul Akamba made allegations to the effect that I, Gen. Al Hajj Abubakhar Jeje Odongo, the Minister of Internal Affairs of the Republic of Uganda, misused my position as minister by attempting to deport a Turkish national, Mr Aziz Durman, in order to satisfy my selfish ends. 

I was not in the House that day. My colleague, hon. Obiga Kania, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, attempted to respond but he was advised that this was a personal matter and I should reply personally. I prepared a personal statement to present to this House on the 20th of August in response to the allegations. I was advised that I could only respond through a ministerial statement and not a personal statement. And today, I am making that statement.

Let me state from the onset that the allegations by hon. Paul Akamba are devoid of facts, a figment of imagination and, therefore, malice aforethought – (Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, when a ministerial statement is housed under this provision, it clearly means the House will not be able to respond to it, other than the person who asked the question. My procedural question is: Will Parliament be able to debate a statement housed under this rule?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Parliament will not be able to debate it. It was a question under Rule 146 and we will handle it as such.

GEN. (RTD) ODONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. During my more than 35 years of public life, I have held quite a number of sensitive positions. I have been a teacher at a girls’ secondary school at quite a tender age. I have had an illustrious military career starting from being a cadet commander and rising to command the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) and attained the rank of a four-star General. 

Since I joined politics, I have served as a legislator in this very august House and served in the Executive branch of Government and served in various positions, rising to the position of Cabinet Minister. Throughout these 35 years, never once have I been involved in any scandal. Even during my school days, I did not involve myself in anything untoward. The Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, who is my “OG”, will bear me witness. 

Isn't it, therefore, strange that throughout the 35 years, I did not get involved in anything shady, only now for hon. Akamba to accuse me of doing something shady? This is completely out of the norm of the person I am and the character and the name I have worked very hard to build for the last 35 years.

On Thursday, 15 August 2019, I had the surprising but pleasant honour and privilege to receive the Second Deputy Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Ali Kivejinja, in my humble office. He was accompanied by a gentleman whom he introduced as Mr Isa Musoke, the chairperson of the Muslim Community in Iganga District. The Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister wanted me to listen to the allegations by the Iganga District Muslim Community to the effect that by attempting to deport a Turkish national, Mr Aziz Durman, I was depriving the Iganga Muslim Community anticipated benefits from charitable projects that this individual was sponsoring and had promised to sponsor. I was intrigued. 

I asked the chairman how old Aziz was. The chairman informed me that Aziz is a young man, hardly 30 years old. I further asked the chairman for about how long he had known Aziz. He told me he had known Aziz for about four months. I further asked the chairman for about how long those charitable projects, including building mosques, sinking boreholes, distributing Korans and – during eid al-adha – slaughtering animals had been going on. He told me it had been going on for about five years. 

I put it to the chairman whether it did not appear strange to him that a person who has been in Iganga for hardly five months was claiming to be responsible for those projects which had been running for five years. I then told him that I had actually known Aziz for five years.

Aziz initially came here as a student in a school run by the Turks here in Uganda. He became an English interpreter to three Turks, namely; Mr Ayan, Mr Mehmet and Mr Saleh, with whom he was living. 

About two and a half years ago, these three Turks had a misunderstanding and split. Mr Saleh went to live by himself. After the departure of Mr Saleh, three or so months later, Ayan and Mehmet accused Aziz of stealing Shs 17 million. When I asked Aziz, he indeed admitted he had lost this money but he claimed he did not steal it. Mr Ayan and Mr Mehmet wanted Aziz imprisoned for the theft. I pleaded with these two Turks to forgive Aziz on grounds that Aziz was young, was dependent on them and had a young wife with a young baby.

They accepted to forgive Aziz on condition that Aziz relocated from their house. Aziz moved and started living with Saleh – the Turk who I earlier said had moved to live by himself.
Two and a half years later, about six months ago, Saleh accused Aziz of breaking into his room while he was in Turkey and he accused him of stealing Shs 60 million. I advised Saleh to report to police. Meanwhile Aziz disappeared from Kampala. 

Later, I learnt that he was now living in Iganga. While in Iganga, Aziz called me to help him in this theft case. I advised him to come to Kampala to resolve this matter with the police. He, however, expressed fear that he would be arrested. I advised him to come to my office so that I would invite police to take his statement. On three occasions, after asking me to make arrangements with police to take his statement, he did not come nor did not bother to explain to me why he could not come or even apologise.

In the meantime I begun to hear that Aziz was soliciting support from local politicians in Iganga to protect him against what he claimed was a plan to arrest him.  

Early in July, Madam Babalanda, the lady running the NRM chairman’s office in Kyambogo, came to my office to plead for Aziz but I told her that he had a case at Kisugu Police Station, which he needed to resolve and it had nothing to do with me as a person.

I also later learnt that he was waving around a Ugandan passport claiming to be a citizen. Knowing Aziz came here as a student and he had not met the stipulated requirements to become a Ugandan citizen, this was very disturbing to me.

Against the background of accusations of corruption against the Immigration Department, I called the Director of Immigration Department and demanded a report on the immigration status of Mr Aziz Durman.

After hearing all these, the Second Deputy Prime Minister assured the Chairman of Iganga Muslim Community that the allegations he was mentioning and his fears were “hot air.”

That very Thursday afternoon, a group of Muslim elders from Iganga, whom Aziz had mobilised to escort him to Kampala, came to my office, in the company of Mr Musoke, the Chairman of the Iganga Muslim Community, in the company of the Director of the Immigration Department and the Regional Police Commander, Iganga who had come a long with Aziz.

After hearing what I had told the chairman in the presence of the Second Deputy Prime Minster and Aziz, who was now present in this meeting not contradicting even a single word I had said, the Muslim elders including the Iganga District Kadhi were extremely apologetic for the utterances they had made. 

Just to recap: one is that Aziz has an outstanding case of breaking into his friend's room and stealing money, which case he is avoiding but instead soliciting the support of Iganga Muslim Community and local politicians to shield him from the course of justice.

Two, Aziz has unresolved issues regarding his immigration status. Rather than misleading the local politicians, he should resolve this matter.

Three, Aziz is here. He is not under arrest; he is not deported but depending on the determination of his immigration status, deportation remains an option. Why is deportation such a problem for Aziz and now an issue anyway?
Aziz is a young man still in his twenties. He came here in his teens. According to Turkish law, every Turk must serve two years of compulsory national service with the Turkish military. 

Aziz has not yet done this and does not seem anxious to do it; thus his wanting to avoid going back to Turkey at any cost because if he does so, he could easily be arrested and put in jail for avoiding his national service duty.

In conclusion let me say this: one is that we have the privilege to speak on the Floor of this august House. However, let us use it carefully and responsibly. (Applause)

Two, I have never before heard of Niver Investment Ltd, which hon. Akamba said I am a member of, let alone belonging to it.
	
Three, hon. Paul Akamba made unsubstantiated and malicious allegations against my person. I demand he apologises and withdraws them. 

Four, I demand his allegations be struck off the Hansard, which is the record of proceedings of this august House. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity you have granted me to explain myself. For God and my country. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Honourable minister, I instruct the Clerk to extract this response by the minister and hand it over to hon. Paul Akamba so that he can make prayers that are clear. 

At a convenient date when the hon. Paul Akamba is in the House, he will make responses to what has been said by the minister including whether he will be able to deal with some of the prayers that have been raised by the minister but him not being here today, we pause this matter and go to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON CERTIFIED ENERGY DRINKS


4.01
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just a moment and let me recognise the presence of these students since they might want to go. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have students of Kampala International University Human Resource Association from Kampala District, represented by hon. Muhammad Nsereko and hon. Nabilah Sempala. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Honourable minister, proceed.

MS KAYMBADDE: Mr Speaker, I rise to respond to hon. Mbwatekamwa Gafa’s matter raised on certified energy drinks. Mr Speaker, energy drinks have been defined in the Uganda standards with specification for carbonated and non-carbonated soft drinks as soft drinks that typically contain high levels of nutrients and other ingredients such as caffeine, taurine and carnitine and are marketed as energy boosters.
		
Energy drinks are generally non-alcoholic drinks and contain water soluble vitamins such as niacin, Vitamin B6 and Vitamin B12.

What are the benefits of energy drinks? They have the ability to boost energy levels. They provide mental alertness by use of such ingredients as caffeine or taurine and they have also been approved as dietary supplements in several countries. Caffeine is the World’s most widely consumed legal psycho-active substance, having the effects of temporarily restoring alertness. 

The health effects of energy drinks

Energy drinks normally contain high level of caffeine, which stimulates the nervous system and may be accompanied with symptoms like rapid heart rates, anxiety, insomnia, nausea and vomiting, restlessness, tremors and even death in rare cases. 

In large amounts, especially in over extended periods of time, caffeine can lead to a condition known as caffeinism with a wide range of unpleasant physical and mental condition including intoxication, anxiety and sleep disorder. Another condition is that caffeine is also highly addictive. 

Regulation of energy drinks

Uganda National Bureau of Statistics has developed and uses the specifications for carbonated and non-carbonated soft drinks, which is US 47:2011 to regulate energy drinks. The Uganda’s standard, among other requirements, sets a limit on the amount of caffeine in energy drinks at 320mg and also specifies the labeling requirements. 

The labeling requirements of energy drinks include a warning to the consumers that the product is not suitable to children and pregnant women or persons sensitive to caffeine. 

The National Drug Authority is mandated to verify health/therapeutic claims made by the manufacturers on energy drinks and related products. 

UNBS conducts market surveillance, testing and certification audits for local manufacturers. 

Mr Speaker, my honourable colleague wanted to know the certified energy drinks. The imported energy drinks such as Red Bull, Monster, Rockstar and Full Throttle are regulated through the Pre-export Verification of Conformity (PVoC) programme where they test the products on the points of origin.

The following brands of energy drinks have today been certified by UNBS: 

Under Century Bottling Company Limited, there is a carbonated energy drink called Power Play. 
Under Harris International Limited, there are two carbonated energy drinks called Riham Rock Boom and Riham X Energy. 
Under Kiri Bottling Company Limited, there is a caffeinated energy drink called Thunder.
Under Yaket International Limited, there is a non-carbonated energy drink called Yaket.
Under Crown Beverage Limited, the carbonated energy drinks are caffeinated mixed fruit flavour called Sting Gold Rush and strawberry flavoured Sting Red Rush.
Under BESI (Uganda) Limited, there is an energy drink called Kirungi Kazi Booster.
Under Canaan Investment Limited, there is an energy drink called Canaan Bulls. This is a carbonated energy drink. 

These are the only energy drinks that are certified by UNBS.

However, we have noted that there are other products that have illegally accessed the market and have not been certified by UNBS. Our market surveillance programme is closely following up and we intend to close some of these factories that are manufacturing them.

What is the international perspective on energy drinks?  

There is no international consensus on energy drinks and different countries have different regulations to address the associated risk and diseases. For example, in Canada, beverages containing 320mg of caffeine have been approved by Canadian Health Authority. USA’s Food and Drug Authority lists caffeine as a multiple-purpose, generally recognised as a safe food substance. European Union, Denmark and Norway banned Red Bull and yet, it is sold here. 

Due to the ingredients, taurine is not being allowed in Denmark and Norway since 2014. In UK, according to the Food Standard Agency, drinks containing more than 150mg of caffeine are required to be labeled as high caffeine content and with the amount of caffeine used put in the same field as the name of the product. In Australia, in August 2008, a study conducted by the Cardiovascular Research Centre at the Royal Adelaide Hospital found that energy drinks could increase the risk of strokes and heart attacks.

Challenges

Energy drinks are heavily marketed to young adults and marketing messages sometimes compare the effects of the drinks to the use of drugs. Many of these drinks are promoted in bars or for use in combination with alcohol or other substances dependence, which could further increase the health risk to consumers. I have noted that parents even buy energy drinks for their children. 

Some manufacturers do not declare precautionary information on labels or at times presented in small font sizes and therefore, not easily read. 

Another danger is that not many consumers are able to read labels to get precautionary information, for example, “not for consumption by children”, “not for consumption by pregnant women” or “not for consumption by lactating women”. 

Recommendations

The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, in collaboration with UNBS, will undertake the following measures:

Enhance market surveillance activities to clean the market of uncertified products and unscrupulous traders and importers.
We will undertake awareness campaigns to consumers and other stakeholders to ensure proper use of energy drinks. This will be achieved through the media and collaboration with other stakeholders including associations and other regulators. 
We intend to train manufacturers on the applicable standards.
Enhance UNBS’ capacity in testing of the different components in energy drinks. I seek your support as legislators in the budget.
Uganda, through UNBS, continues to follow ongoing work at the international level to inform standards development and regulation considering risk assessment for the ingredients used in such drinks.

I would like to thank the honourable Member of Parliament for raising this matter. We are going to aggressively follow up on it and ensure that we close off all those unscrupulous manufacturers. I thank you for listening to me and I would like to lay this statement on Table. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the very elaborate statement. The honourable member might have a supplementary question.

4.12
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank you, honourable minister, for giving us elaborate and educative information. However, my biggest concern is that, according to my question, you have come here to confirm that most of the so-called herbal energy drinks in Uganda - all of them and you have not mentioned any here - are not certified, yet Ugandans consume them every day.

Funny enough, my major concern is that they go ahead to advertise in all media houses like television stations and even mention - like I would like to cite one Ahu advertises itself that it is even certified by UNBS when the ministry is watching, putting the lives of Ugandans at risk. Who should we sue in case of any problem? 

Of recent, someone consumed it in my constituency and he died when the “central government” was stiff. (Interjections)- Yes, the “central government”. I must use parliamentary language. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that the honourable minister should go ahead and release a press statement in newspapers indicating all the certified drinks. Can you also run adverts and announcements over the televisions, warning Ugandans because even the ones who are selling, do not indicate the eligible ages to take these drinks for fear of losing the market.

Honourable minister, I thank you. But I will not be happy until you come out to see that even those who are selling these products are arrested and prosecuted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, let me correct part of the record that the reference to “central government” is not a reference the Central Government of Uganda.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of leaders from Kyankwanzi Interuniversity Students Association from Kyankwanzi District, represented by their patron, hon. Pentagon Kamusiime and hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause) 

We also have pupils and teachers from Obia Primary School from Kwania District. They are represented by hon. Tony Ayoo and are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, I thank you for the elaborate statement that you have made. However, the honourable member has raised many gaps which you have to deal with so that our people are safe and part of what we focus on as Parliament and Government. Thank you.

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a professional nutritionist and I know the challenges that we may get from uncertified consumables taken by our people. In view of hon. Mbwatekamwa who raised the matter and the presentation of the minister, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the minister goes ahead to immediately stop the distribution and sale of all uncertified drinks, until UNBS has certified whether they are suitable for consumption? Otherwise we shall let this open and people will consume and at the end of the day, we may get medical challenges. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is exactly what I have said without using those words. I told the minister that there are gaps that have been raised and need to be worked on to guarantee the safety of all Ugandans.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED ON THE INVASION OF THE WATER HYACINTH ON RIVER RWIZI THAT HAS AFFECTED THE LIVELIHOODS OF THE RESIDENTS OF MBARARA DISTRICT BY HON. ROSETTE MUJUNGU

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I received notification on both item 8 and 9 but the ministers are not here.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED ON REDUCTION IN THE FREQUENCY OF TRIPS MADE BY THE FERRY LINKING ISLANDS ON LAKE VICTORIA, RAISED BY HON. ROBERT MIGADDE NDUGWA

4.18
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Eng. Monica Ntege): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to respond to the concern raised by hon. Robert Migadde concerning the reduction in the frequency of trips made by the ferry linking the islands on Lake Victoria.

Mr Speaker, at the 19th Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament, which was held on Thursday 1 August 2019, hon. Migadde raised concern over the reduction in the frequency of trips made by the ferry linking the islands on Lake Victoria, which has left the people of Buvuma Islands stranded.

I would like to inform you that the ferry linking the islands of Lake Victoria is operational. Its trips have not been reduced and neither has there been any contemplation of reducing the trips. The ferry continues to make its trips as follows; on Monday to Thursday, there are three trips that have not changed. Due to heavy traffic on Friday - since there is a market day - they are four trips and two trips on Saturday. However, whenever there is heavy traffic, a third trip is added. And on Sundays, there is only one trip.

Mr Speaker, as a result of the concern raised by hon. Migadde, a week later, Uganda National Roads Roads Authority (UNRA) management engaged Buvuma leadership and the leaders were led by hon. Migadde. It was confirmed to them and they agreed that the above schedule is on with emphasis on the fact that there has not been any reduction since the complaint was raised.

We went further to inform them that there have been breaks at times but we are repairing and rehabilitating the ferry. The current ferry is in inadequate capacity. Therefore, plans to replace it with another ferry currently at Port Bell are under rehabilitation and upgrade. They went and visited that ferry.

In addition, there is another ferry that is funded by the Vegetable Oil Development Project normally referred to as BIDCO. Procurement has been finalised and this is earmarked for Buvuma crossing within the Calendar Year 2021. Therefore, there has not been any intention and it has not happened that the frequencies were reduced. In actual fact, we are increasing the capacity of the ferry, which is coming, from 120 passengers to 200. Thank you. Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. That is clear and the honourable member is not here. Therefore, we will leave it at that.

Honourable members, there is an urgent matter that has just come up now. Now that the Minister of Health is here, I would like the Member of Parliament for Busia District to raise it so that we see how to handle it.

4.22
Ms jane nabulindo (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a cholera outbreak in Busia District. Right now, eight people from the same family are admitted in Dabani Mission Hospital.

When the rainy season comes, our counterparts in Kenya open up their sewage. That sewerage runs and collects in Uganda’s border areas of Sophia, Arubaine, Maracha and Madibira. In the whole of Busia District, we do not have any sewerage system. 
My prayer is that the Ministry of Health should help us with the sewerage system and equip the health facilities with protective gears. 

The complaint from the health workers is that they do not have any protective equipment. There are no gloves or boots and drugs in our health facilities, especially in Busia Municipality Health Centre IV, Masafu and the district referral hospital.  Thank you.

4.24
The Minister of state for Health (General Duties) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Member has raised the issue regarding Cholera in Busia. It is not the first time we have this outbreak.

About two years ago, I was informed about the challenge of the sewerage from the Kenyan side. We went to the ground and found out that while that was a problem, there was also a general problem of hygiene; the latrine coverage in Busia was quite low.

I remember even appealing to the leaders that they needed to take that up because the Government cannot go to construct latrines for the populace; it is their responsibility. The President visited the district after my visit. I also mentioned it there and asked him to repeat it. 

The latrine coverage in Busia at that time was less than 60 per cent. Busia Municipality town itself was very dirty at the time I went there. The taxi park did not have a latrine. People were using other means of disposing their faecal matter.

There was a general problem of hygiene and sanitation in Busia yet, it is the responsibility of leaders to come up with a by-law so that the households can have latrines.

However, on our side, the financial year has just started. I am aware that samples were taken from about eight members of one family to Mbale Regional Referral Hospital. It is true they turned positive for Cholera. However, the members who had been admitted have improved and been discharged. Anyhow, during rainy seasons, especially in areas where latrine coverage is low, this is a challenge. 

Otherwise, I would like to inform the House that the supplies are available. We have not received any request from Busia regarding shortage of supplies. The two-monthly supplies have been sent to all health centres IV and most of you have got these messages.

Therefore, if there is any emergency and need for any supplies, we shall be able to respond accordingly. Otherwise, as of now, we have not got any such information but we need to deal with issues of hygiene and latrine coverage in Busia generally.  Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. 
 
MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO DEVISE LONG-TERM MEANS OF STOPPING THE RAMPANT MURDERS AND ROBBERIES SUFFERED BY BODA-BODA RIDERS

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, my brief is that this matter was debated, questions were raised and of course, the question had been proposed for debate. What was left were some responses from some key ministries or sectors governing this particular problem.

I think it was the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Security and I do not know what others. Honourable minister, do you have a response to these issues?

4.28
The Minister of Internal Affairs (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I did indicate earlier on this afternoon, I am preparing a statement on matters relating to security. The points and issues that Members have raised are being addressed in that statement, which I will present on Thursday this week.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, this was a motion. Debate took place and there were some specific responses to facilitate the conclusion of the motion. Your statement will come with its own debate in time.

gen. (rTD) odongo: Unfortunately, I was not privy to the debate and so, I missed those specific points. I will get to my colleague who was on the Floor that day and I will subsequently be able to respond.

The Deputy Speaker:  Thank you. Any minister who has a response to issues raised in the debate on this motion? The debate was finished and there were just responses from ministers whose sectors are involved.

Honourable members, in that case, the honourable minister will be back on Tuesday. Please, get the specific issues that affect your sector and he should be able to response. I do not know whether you can do it on Thursday so that we conclude this motion because it has been here waiting for the ministers. The debate is finished; there is no reason we should still keep it.

gen. (RTD) odongo: Most obliged. If we could do that, I will be able to respond.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, this matter is deferred to Thursday. Let us conclude this motion and proceed.

Having concluded the Order Paper, House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 4.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 September 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
