
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 14 September 2021

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. It is one of those sittings, where you have a guest who is important. I will be introducing the guest, who is in attendance, a little later.

Honourable members, on 11th of September this year, the Kingdom of Tooro marked 26 years of the coronation of their king, Omukama Oyo Nyimba Kabamba Iguru Rukidi IV. The Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, alongside Members from the Tooro Subregion, effectively represented the institution of the Legislature at the commemoration at the Karuzika Palace in Fort Portal City.

We thank the Deputy Speaker and all the honourable members who represented us on this occasion. I do congratulate King Oyo and the Tooro people and wish him many more anniversaries of great deed to his people and Uganda as a whole.

On another happy note, the Kyabazinga of Busoga Kingdom, William Wilberforce Kadhumbula Gabula Nadiope IV celebrated the seventh coronation anniversary in Jinja. I congratulate him and the people of the Kingdom of Busoga and wish him many more anniversaries of great deed for his people and Uganda as a whole.

On a somber note, let me inform you of the demise of Dr Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige, popularly known as BMK, an illustrious investor in the East and Central African region and eminent business person, who died on 10 September 2021. He was laid to rest on Sunday.

Let me also inform you of the demise of the widow of a former member of the Presidential Commission, wife to His Excellency Nyamuconco Poly - Mrs Seferoza Nyamuconco - which occurred on Saturday, 11 September 2021.

We condole with the bereaved families and pray for the repose of the souls of the deceased. Honourable members, for these two and those that we know and we may not know, let us rise and observe a moment of silence.

(Members observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, hon. Rwakoojo came here and requested the House for an extension for the committee to finish with the two Bills that had been returned by H.E. the President. One is the Sexual Offences Bill and the second one is the Succession (Amendment) Bill. 

You will recall that those two pieces of legislation were passed by Parliament in the last Parliament. However, when we started this Parliament, we received notification from H.E. the President, communicated through the Minister and with a letter to the Speaker, that those two Bills had been returned for various reasons.

The Sexual Offences Bill had its own reasons and also the Succession (Amendment) Bill had proposals for amendment. However, as with many of the Bills returned by the President, we have not been able to heed the timelines that are provided, both under Article 91 of the Constitution and also our own Rules of Procedure. 

We have had difficulties with the Sugar Bill, which was returned by the President; the Biotechnology Bill – the name changed a bit – and several others. What we have not been able to achieve very well is the timeline. We are not able to tell with certainty when the President received the sent copies of the Bill. There are gaps in the legislation and these gaps have always caused us unease when we handle these legislations signed by the President.

These two Bills that have been returned by the President have the same objections – we call them a “minority report” – raised by Members who thought the timelines provided will serve no purpose. The timelines must be heeded to. So, we have a minority report on the report that is coming from hon. Rwakoojo’s committee. 

We are trying to find ways of how we handle this, the way we handled the Sugar Bill and Biotechnology Bill - we kind of look at the bigger purpose of the legislation; who it is going to serve, what it is going to regulate. So, we kind of serve the bigger purpose. I think time has come for us to look at the law again and try to stick by it.

We had a meeting today with the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the authors of the minority report, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba and hon. Anna Adeke Ebaju. We came to some arrangement; things I need to do with hon. Rwakoojo, to make sure that we are in sync with the law. How we process this thing should be within the law. I will be communicating this in the course of this week.
 
I am saying this because time continues to run but the matter is already before Parliament. We will be able to handle it at an appropriate time.

Honourable members, in the VIP Gallery today, we have a special guest, like I said. He is accompanied by very many people – 23 – but I have two lists; I have to choose. There is a list of 23 and there is a list of nine. Do I go with 23 and introduce all of them or do I go with nine? (Interjection) It is 23.

I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, I will go with the full list of the 23 –(Laughter)– having been guided by the House. It is an honour.

I had a meeting with the President, Rotary International. That is part of why this House is starting at the time it has started. 

In the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery this afternoon, we have the Rotary International President, Mr Shekhar Mehta and his wife, First Lady Rashi Mehta, who are here to observe the proceedings of the House. (Applause)

Like many presidents, they go with many people escorting them. They are accompanied by:

    1. Mr Geeta Manek – the Rotary Foundation Trustee;
    2. Mr Yinka Babalola – the Past Rotary International Director;
    3. Mr John Magezi Ndamira - District Governor;
    4. Mr Ian Kimaro - District Governor;
    5. Hon. Mike Sebalu - District Governor Elect;

    6. Ms Margaret Sebalu - Past President;
    7. Ms Peace Taremwa - District Governor Elect;
    8. Mr Allan Lukoda - District Rotaract Representative;
    9. Mr Noah Nyabwana - District Rotaract Representative;
    10. Ms Sharmila Bhatt -  Past District Governor;

    11. Mr Eric Kimani - Past District Governor;
    12. Mr Alex Nyaga - District Governor;
    13. Mr Robert Waggwa - Past District Governor;
    14. Ms Rosetti Nabbumba - Past District Governor;
    15. Mr Ken Mugisha - Past District Governor;

    16. Ms Joan Else - Immediate Past President;
    17. Mr Ronald Kawaddwa - Past Assistant Governor;
    18. Mr Richard Kalugi – Medical;
    19. Mr Ivan Koreta - Charter President;
    20. Mr Fred Masadde - Past Assistant Governor;

    21. Ms Sarah Owembabazi - District Rotaract Representative Elect;
    22. Ms Josephine Kabyesiza - Member of Delegation; and
    23. Mr Sanjiv Patel - Member of the delegation.

They have all escorted the President of Rotary International to observe the proceedings of the House. This House is also honoured that a request has been made by one of its Members, who is also a Rotarian, that in honour of this visit, which is very important - we all know what Rotary has been able to do in the communities where we come from. 

In my short speech to the President of Rotary International, I said that Rotary is a human response system, created by volunteers who feel, in their hearts, that they need support humanity, especially people who find themselves disadvantaged by natural causes and factors of ordinary human life. They come in to help to deal with diseases. Rotary is a response system where when earthquake, for example, strikes, they respond. When disasters strike, Rotary responds; and when diseases strike, Rotary responds. So, it is a response system and we will now have the motion, which has been presented, debated. 

However, before we do that, there are some urgent matters, which are the types that would fit very well – and I would like the President of Rotary International to listen to some of the things that affect our communities here. It might inform some of the things that we do in the future. I have some urgent matters that Members would like to raise. 

MR MAWANDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance in respect to your communication. You talked about the Bills that were brought back by the President and that the chairperson was seeking leave of Parliament to extend the time for her to manage those Bills. 

There are Members of Parliament who moved Private Member’s Bills. I have personally been to your office in respect to my Bills and you have guided me that I write to the Clerk to Parliament to reprint the Bills and I bring them to the House.

However, when I looked at Rule 235, I noticed that what I am trying to reprint lapsed because it was not saved. I am wondering what I am going to reprint and distribute to Members.

Secondly, which procedure will I use in order to reprint and reintroduce my Bills? That is the guidance I am seeking. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Mawanda. I thought the motion was to save all business. Was the business listed or was it just an entire lot of business that had not been completed by Parliament? All business – so, the mere fact that you are missing on the list does not mean you are not on the list. Virtually, you are on the list because the – I think the motion that passed business on to the Eleventh Parliament took care of all the business that had been pending. 

In the case of these two Bills, they were returned to this Parliament by the President and so, their category is different. Business that had been saved, however, I had given guidance on what needs to be done under Rule 235 - [Member rose_] - on what matter do you rise? 

MR NIWAGABA: On that very matter, Mr Speaker. It is because I, too, have had a pending Bill that was saved by the last Parliament. I want to know when that motion is going to be tabled or if it has been considered amongst the saved business to move on. 

THE SPEAKER: You know we have a challenge. That same motion should have been moved within a timeline. However, the motion was not moved at the time it should have been moved. Anyhow, there is a substantive motion that has been approved by Parliament to cover the time that – because we were supposed to have discussed this motion of reintroduction by this Parliament within a certain time, which time has passed. 

So, we will now use the other motion to empower the other Members who have Bills to have them reprinted and brought to the House under Rule 235. We are just trying to be creative to deal with the gap. [Member rose.] Same matter? You do not seek clarification from me. The rules do not allow you to do that. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think hon. Mawanda has asked a question that most of us have been pondering about and thank you for the guidance. 
Anyhow, the question is: when we present the motions here for first reading, we also seek leave of the House to prepare a Bill - when we get leave of the House, we come back with a Bill. As for me, the Local Content Bill was just returned by the President to the House and we had worked on it with the committee and they just needed to report. 

Mr Speaker, I find myself with hon. Mawanda – at what level, when I come to this House, do I present it as something that has come from the President? Do I start all over from stage one? I think more guidance is required because when I consulted with the department, they asked the same question. 

THE SPEAKER: No. Just like I had stated about the Bills that are being processed by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, your Bill was returned by the President. That is the stage at which it is. You move the motion – I am sure you are the one who moved the motion for reconsideration of the Bill. That is the motion that is saved. 

So, when we come back, we are going to deal with the motion for reconsideration of your Bill only and nothing else. If the committee was ready – of course that motion should be reintroduced and taken to the new committee so that they look at what has transpired; what the President’s comments on the Bill are. Thereafter, they come back to the House. They should be satisfied with what the other committee did. Of course, if they are not okay with it, they might have to look at it again. It does not, however, take you back to the original Bill. It is now the Bill as passed by Parliament. 

Yes, hon. Solomon Silwany – 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise? 

MR SILWANY: On a procedural matter, Mr Speaker. 

I would like to thank very you much for recognising the importance and role of kingdoms in Uganda because in your speech, you recognised and congratulated Tooro and Busoga kingdoms.

The procedural issue I am raising is, whenever there are coronation celebrations of the different kings, these kingdoms make demands. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you to guide the Government, as the Speaker of this Parliament, that this time round, the Government should at least fulfil this? The best example would be Busoga Kingdom. We have made demands to the Government for a long time. On every coronation celebration, we talk about these demands but they are never responded to by the Government.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you to guide the Government that: “I congratulate Tooro. This time, this should be done as they have requested; I congratulate Busoga and this time, this should be done?” Wouldn’t that be procedurally right – (Laughter)- to say that for Busoga, Tooro and the other kingdoms, including Buganda which is the biggest?

THE SPEAKER: I think you have already ruled on it. (Laughter) However, I disagree with your ruling. Honourable member, this would be the right time for you to, later on, bring a motion to the House and that can be discussed. It can hardly be the Speaker’s ruling to withdraw money from the Consolidated Fund to implement some background agreements or commitments that have been made outside this House, which is not to the knowledge of the Speaker.

You are just bringing it now so, at an appropriate time, please prepare and come under the rules - appropriately - and we can have that debate. Thank you.

2.37
MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent importance about the poor status of Kumi-Ongino-Akide Road. It is a UNRA road but it is poorly managed. It is the road that connects to the former leprosy centre and now Kumi Hospital, Ongino. 

As I speak, the road is impassable and patients cannot reach the hospital for immediate attention. Right now, it is the local communities trying to make interventions. Worst of all, it is the children who hold hoes every day to fill potholes to allow patients and relatives to reach the hospital.

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask this House to support me on this because we are aware that where service delivery is not strictly observed, the Government in power takes the blame.

My prayer is that your office directs the honourable Minister of Works and Transport to urgently take action so that this road is worked on. Then we shall be able to rescue lives. It is also very important that monitoring is intensified regarding UNRA and district roads so that we ensure value for money, as the Government. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We do not direct people to do what they are mandated to do. (Laughter) It is the mandate of the Minister of Works and Transport to make sure that these roads are okay. 

Do I have any minister from the Ministry of Works and Transport? I would like a commitment on this.

2.39
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Mr Speaker, I have taken note of this and I am going to link up with the Minister of Works and Transport to ensure it is followed up urgently.

Mr Speaker, what we are also doing is to ensure that UNRA meets Members of Parliament per sub-region and urgently looks into their issues and takes action. However, this is very urgent and I am going to ensure thatf today, I link up with the minister and action is taken.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The minister should not come here with a report but should head to the field and have that road fixed.

2.40
MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Over 4,000 people residing along the railway line have been given up to the 31st of this month to vacate their homes.

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, we all know the effects of COVID-19. People are suffering, the household income is low, they have no money to rent new houses and therefore, it is important for us to rethink the eviction order that Uganda Railways Corporation gave these people.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, it is also known that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development gave a directive that no person should evict anyone from land. Therefore, it is important that we should, as a House, think of requesting Uganda Railways Corporation to give these people a grace period until the situation normalises. Otherwise, they have nowhere to sleep yet there is even a court order stopping any person from evicting these people.

My prayer is, can the minister or the Attorney-General tell us or give an explanation as to why -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I think your prayer is for extension of time.

MR BALIMWEZO: Not only extension of time -

THE SPEAKER: No, we have to stay within the law when we are making requests. How do you explain somebody settling in a place that should not be settled in? You are asking that they should be given more time because of COVID-19 so that they can see how to get out of there and other places.

You cannot pray that - I don’t even know who issued the court order. How do you issue an order on the railway reserve and they are saying they should not? Please, let us deal with what we can handle. Your prayer, which you told me, was that these people should be given more time as they move out slowly. That is the prayer that would be accepted and we move on. If you complicate your matter with things that the law cannot support then it becomes very complicated.

MR BALIMWEZO: Mr Speaker, I would also like to know from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development the resettlement plan they have for these people; these are Ugandans. We have seen people from outside the country being resettled. These are our poor Ugandans and we need to give them attention. Some of these people have not been compensated. These are Ugandans that we need to respect because they are taxpayers. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (BUNYORO AFFAIRS) (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the concerns of hon. Balimwezo. However, as a country, we are looking at developing infrastructure, for example, the railway to ease transport. The businesspeople are having issues with the high cost of transport.

Right now, as the Government plans to develop the railway infrastructure, we must be the ones, as leaders, advising our people not to settle on the Government land –(Applause)- that we have to develop the infrastructure. But when we are going to encourage them, then it will be difficult for the Government to develop infrastructure. 

Therefore, I am uncomfortable, when my dear friend and a former colleague in the Local Government who knows that we must develop the infrastructure for the business community and develop our country, cannot advise his voters to vacate these areas to enable the Government to develop the infrastructure. It will be costly to the Government, if we are going to encourage people to settle in the protected areas or Government land and then look for money to compensate them, when most of these people even have where they came from. It will be very unfair.

I would like to encourage him and other leaders that we should talk to our voters to avoid settling on the Government land to enable the Government to develop the infrastructure. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am offering free advice. Instead of going back without holding anything in your hand, you might need to review your request because the eviction is pending at the end of this month. However, since you have not done and you are not about to do it, I will leave it at that.

2.46
MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Mr Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs. I am rising on a point of urgent national importance. 

On 24 August 2021, a joint force, comprising the Police, Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI) invaded Luweero District, specifically, Markaz Hanfizhu Ibun Hajari Orphanage Centre in the wee hours, with drones and took off with 50 children, between the age of seven and 12 years. They took them to Mbuya and thereafter, the children were dropped and detained at Kyampisi Childcare Centre with the heavy deployment of the UPDF. It is where they have continued to be detained up to this hour. Kyampisi Childcare Centre is located within Mukono District and Mukono North Constituency. 

Personally, it was a tug of war to enter and observe the status of the children. In fact, I was denied the opportunity to talk to them. Mr Speaker, I discussed this issue with hon. Jim Muhwezi, the Minister of Security, who had promised that the children were to be released the following day; that was on Saturday. Up to now, the relatives of these orphans are on my back demanding for their release.

Therefore, can the Minister of Internal Affairs, who is in this House, explain to the House and the country the reasons these children have continued to be detained without being taken to court, if there is any case against them?

Last week, the Minister of Internal Affairs, Gen. Kahinda Otafiire, while aware that this House had delegated the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to visit Masaka and ascertain – 

THE SPEAKER: No, honour member. Minister of Internal Affairs.

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker, I have heard the concern of the honourable member. I will verify and revert with an explanation regarding those children.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this matter was raised the other week by one member - was it hon. Luttamaguzi? You might want to interest yourself in it. You do not have to come back to the House. Just do the needful and we will pick it from there.

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise?

MR MPUUGA: On a procedural matter. I would not have risen after your ruling but matters of security, internal affairs and defence have many outfits. 

We thought initially, that the bijambiya issue that prompted a long debate here had brought the attention of security to bear and you did demand that they make a statement here on the same matter. We are now descending into children and for a whole week, since the statement was made here, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is not alive to this fact. Are we safe?

I did rise the same week and requested of the Speaker to humbly demand that the minister has a timeline to give this House a comprehensive report on national security. Now that we have started arresting infants and detaining them, not for a day or a week but weeks, will the Ministry of Internal Affairs assure this country that we can still trust them with ourselves and our children, especially? It is very disturbing. We have never obtained that statement and there seems to be no timeline to that statement coming here and being debated by the House. Mr Speaker, we need your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all requests that have been made by the House through the Speaker for statements or explanations of circumstances, we notify the responsible people to prepare statements and bring. However, we only put on the Order Paper statements that are ready. Sometimes, they are doing research and have not got time to come back to us within the time. Also, you do not want a premature debate on a matter that does not solve the problem. 

Once they are ready, unless the timeline is fixed, then we say, “Next Wednesday,” that is a different matter. However, when you say, “I’m coming back with a comprehensive statement to cover all aspects of matters raised,” it is different because there is no specific timeline but we expect a statement. Therefore, as soon as they are ready, I am sure they will come back with a statement and we will have a debate on this matter.

For the urgent aspects of these things like the one of these children, I am saying there should be a solution found quickly. They may be coming as part of the bigger statement but all we need is that they should happen. The Member who raised the issue would come back and tell us, “The matter has been solved” so we are okay with that. We are focussing on that. 

Of course, we would have been interested in the reasons they were moved from Luweero to Mukono and circumstances under which they were moved.
We would have been interested in those things.

Honourable minister, these matters are within your hands and it is good manners to let people know what happened to others when they request to know. Even when you are not directed, you have a mandate and responsibility to tell Ugandans what is going on. Thank you.

2.55
MR MUWADA NKUNYINGI (NUP, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance on the status and condition of Kampala Capital City Authority landfill at Kiteezi - its state and effect on surrounding communities. 

There has been ongoing excavation by land owners led by a one Kiconco around Kiteezi KCCA landfill. This has led to an overflow of contagious drainage from the landfill to nearby communities of Lusanja, Kiteezi, including my home. This contagious flow of drainage has also made its way to people’s homes without any intervention by KCCA, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Water and Environment. 

My prayer is that we urge the Kampala Capital City Authority, the ministries of Health and Environment to come up with urgent measures to contain the overflow from Kiteezi landfill. 

The access to Kiteezi is from Mpererwe; so the road has been highly damaged by garbage trucks. The Kampala Capital City Authority should also be urged – 

THE SPEAKER: That is now another matter. 

MR NKUNYINGI: Mr Speaker, it has become a dead – 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable. You came to me and made a request. When you come here and change the framework of our agreement, you run into trouble because I am part of the agreement and I see you violating it in my presence. (Laughter)

Honourable minister, do you have a response on landfills and overflows? 

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank you, my colleague for raising that concern. 

Mr Speaker, I am aware of the Kiteezi problem. I have asked my team, among others – it is not only one. I just pray that my colleague gets in touch with you and my ministry does its part. We are already aware of that situation. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

2.58
MR MOSES ALEPER (NRM, Chekwii County Kadam, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent importance. I would like to bring to your attention that this is my maiden speech in this august House. 

THE SPEAKER: You are protected. 

MR MOSES ALEPER: I would like you to give me an adequate opportunity to share the views, which time, I will use responsibly. 

THE SPEAKER: No, this is an urgent matter and it stays there. (Laughter)

MR MOSES ALEPER: For the record, I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate you upon the attainment of that position. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, it is no mean fit, given what we went through to get you there –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, for now, let us deal with the urgent matter.  

MR MOSES ALEPER: Now let me direct myself to the serious issue concerning the people of Chekwii. On 9 September 2021, heavy rains caused a crisis in the subcounties of Kawach and Namalu in Nakapiripirit District. This involved flooding of the areas and washing away of one of the bridges in Namalu. 

The heavy downpour ravaged the crop gardens, which destroyed the ready-to-harvest crops. The residential houses were flooded and people got displaced. 

Secondly, the bridge in Namalera was washed away and it is the only bridge that connects the three districts of Nakapiripirit, Amudat and Nabilatuk to the eastern part of Uganda. 

Right now, because of crop failure, the people of the three districts rely on the traffic between eastern Uganda and Karamoja for livelihood. The washing away of the bridge has definitely affected the livelihood of those people. 

Right now, for them to move to Karamoja from Mbale, they have to move an additional 400 kilometres, through Soroti, which is quite a distance and puts a burden on the transport costs. 

In fact, in a desperate move, the locals have erected a makeshift bridge which is a disaster looming in itself and we are cautioning them against it. 

What ought to be done is the immediate provision of a relief bridge by the responsible agency, so that the flow of traffic is restored to reconnect the three districts to the eastern part of Uganda. 

There needs to be provision of relief food to save the affected persons from starvation since the crops and the harvested food has been destroyed. 

There needs to be immediate provision of items for shelter like tarpaulins for the affected persons. 

The road contractor on the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road needs to provide adequate passage for vehicles during rainy seasons. This is because at that time, the traffic there is halted and it has become a haven for thieves. On 14 August 2021, a tourist van was robbed of items and money. 

My prayers are: 

    1. The Minister of Disaster Preparedness needs to dispatch a team to carry out on-spot assessment of the damage in order to come up with a comprehensive solution to this problem. 

    2. The Government agency responsible for the roads and transport carries out an immediate visit to the site to ensure that the cut-off bridge is restored to restore the traffic along the road. 

I beg to submit. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I always request the Minister of Works to be here at this time because the matters of rains are affecting many people and the roads. 

3.02 
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Works is going to be linked up with the concerned to ensure they go to the site immediately – 

THE SPEAKER: No, who is going to link up with them? You are using third persons in this. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: It is I, the Government Chief Whip; I am going to do that. Then the Minister in charge of disaster preparedness – and for that ministry, I am also happy to inform colleagues that the Ministry of Finance released some emergency funds for us and we are going to get into action and handle the pending issues to address Members’ concerns. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, if you noticed, most of the issues being raised by Members as matters of urgent national importance either touch on disasters or poor road network.

Is it not procedurally right for you to direct the Minister of Works to come up with a comprehensive statement on all roads and bridges managed by UNRA, giving their current state, to enable Members see how to move, especially in view of the oncoming merger? 

We have literally had disasters every rainy season and I think places like Bugisu and Kigezi get disasters each rainy season. Can we also order the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to come up with a comprehensive statement on areas that have been hit by disasters? We need to know the action that has been taken and the future plans so that we minimise time on matters of national importance, when it is largely those two areas. 

THE SPEAKER: Sometimes, these matters are just for information to the House; for example, Chekwii has been hit by rains and bridges have collapsed. Even if you already have troops on the ground solving the matter, colleagues need to know what has happened to you. 

However, most importantly, you have raised an issue of disaster preparedness and response. We received that statement last week and the minister asked Members to help beef up that statement by actuals from their specific areas so that he can expand his response system to cover the new areas that were not within his statement.

On the roads and bridges, he raised the issue of the merger of institutions, UNRA being one of those being considered. I have just been informed that they are already compiling a statement to deal with the state of roads and bridges so that Members can get to know. Do you have a timeline for that statement, Government Chief Whip, since you have put yourself on the line? Please give us a timeline.

MR TAYEBWA: Mr Speaker, we are doing it for all ministries. Therefore, next week on Wednesday, we shall have the one in regard to the works ministry.

THE SPEAKER: So, next week on Wednesday, we will have a statement from the Ministry of Works and Transport regarding roads and bridges. Thank you. Let us move on to next item. Oh, there was a matter from Gulu City.

3.06
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Mr Speaker, on Thursday last week, we had a crisis at Gulu School of Health Science - we usually refer to it as Gulu Clinical Officers’ Training School. Police went there and tear gassed students when they were peacefully in their hostels – (Interjections)– it was on the 9th. 

That prompted me to interact with stakeholders. The first was the District Police Commander who asked me to go and talk to the Principal. I also decided to talk to the Regional Police Commander (RPC) who also directed me to go and talk to the Principal of the school.

On 10th, I went and discussed this matter with the Permanent Secretary and asked her whether she knew what was happening. She told me she had sent the Commissioner in-charge of Higher Education there. 

However, on that same day, the school was closed. I wanted to interact with the Principal but she was busy in a meeting with a normal meeting and not an urgent meeting. This normal meeting was an appointment committee meeting, which the Chairman of the Governing Council was chairing. 

After sitting for more than an hour, I decided to go and try to understand what the meeting was all about. However, the Chairman, Governing Council told me that our work, as Members of Parliament, is to receive reports from the Ministry of Education and Sports in Parliament. I further asked him whether when my house is on fire -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please help us and state the urgent matter.

MS BETTY AOL: The urgent matter is – and I even interacted with Minister of State for Higher Education regarding this on Saturday - that students are on the streets and the girls are even more vulnerable because they have nowhere to sleep; they can easily get into problems. 

If these students were in the wrong, it would be understandable but they were very peaceful. Yesterday, we decided to go, as Acholi Parliamentary Group, to the school to try to dialogue with the Principal. However, in our dialogue, the Principal said that while they had seen that there is no big problem, students would continue sleeping in the hostel as they complete the process of returning to school to have normal lectures. Given the situation of COVID-19, our students have suffered so much with education.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what do you want the ministry to do?

MS BETTY AOL: It is my prayer that the Committee of Education and Sports should take note and the Minister of Education and Sports should explain to us why 900 students have been sent on the streets when they complained about an extra Shs 200,000 for sanitizers -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have always guided on urgent matters. The person raising the matter has all the information so she does not require any information from any Member because she is rising on an urgent matter. 

Therefore, I want the honourable member to finish so that we can have the responsible minister respond. If there is need that the committee goes to investigate these matters, they will go and investigate. I am aware of what has happened and the involvement of Members of Parliament but I do not want to bring it on the Floor here. 

Please speak and let the minister speak too. If there is need to refer this matter to the Committee on Education and Sports, we will send the committee there to find out what is going on. That is how we handle business in an orderly way.

MS BETTY AOL: Mr Speaker, my other prayer is that the minister should explain to us why they have taken too long. Some kind people like Sister Angelina - 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, you are exhausting my - The issue is, students were thrown out of the hostel. You negotiated, they went back and there was a strike. Can you finish so that the minister responds? Why are we going to the sister? Please, let us be orderly. If you are done, let me have the minister to explain.

MS BETTY AOL: Mr Speaker, I am explaining in order to let people know that these students are on the streets and have nowhere to lay their heads yet some of them come from far. You Kabale and Mbarara people, your students are there -

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. You know the former Leader of the Opposition has a situation similar to yours, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Honourable former Leader of the Opposition was my teacher and so, she normally tries to teach me here also. (Laughter) Yes, honourable minister -

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John C. Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank my sister for raising this matter and for the love she has for the children of this country.

Mr Speaker, what is true is that Gulu College of Health Sciences has been closed. My officers travelled to Gulu and they are on the ground. They are doing everything possible, together with the governing council and the leadership of the area, to put order in the system so that we can have the school reopened.

I would like to share with you that the problem of unrest started in June 2021, with the students protesting an increase in fees. They also alleged that the college had inadequate teaching staff as well as poor feeding. 

The management of the institution, in collaboration with my ministry, started looking into and investigating the allegations when schools were closed, as part of the second lockdown. During the lockdown, the principal, Madam Grace Aninge, passed away. Subsequently, my ministry deployed a new principal and deputy principal. 

Unfortunately, when the health training institutions were allowed to reopen in mid-August this year, the students returned to their unrest; boycotting classes. 

My ministry immediately dispatched an officer to establish the facts on the ground. The officer listened to the students and appealed to them to return to class as the ministry addresses their grievances. These students did not accept but continued with their strike.

Therefore, on 9 September 2021, after all efforts had failed to calm down the students, at the request of the governing council, my ministry closed the college. The ministry, together with the Gulu Resident City Commissioner and the District Police Commander, worked hard to enforce the closure. Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, on Monday, 13 September 2021, the leaders from that region stormed the college and claimed to have reopened the college, called back the students –(Member rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have accessed the microphone before I allowed you. Please sit. Honourable minister?

DR MUYINGO: They came along with some students and the ministry was very disturbed by this unfortunate incident that was tantamount to usurping our mandate. 

Mr Speaker, why I am saying this is to inform you that Gulu College Health Science is closed. My ministry is on the ground working with all the stakeholders to ensure a smooth resolution to this problem. 

I submit, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, it is clarification; what happened to the order? (Laughter)

MR OLANYA: Yes! Point of order, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter on Table is very crucial – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a situation and I need to resolve it. Our guest, the President of Rotary International, has a meeting at 4.00 p.m. with His Excellency the President. There is a motion, which he needs to listen to. 

Therefore, can I call this motion, we debate and finish it and then we come back to this issue, which seems to be taking a discussable – let us pause this here. Honourable minister, clarifications will be raised. Let us go to the next item, we finish with the motion and then we come back to this. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO COMMEND THE WORK OF ROTARY INTERNATIONAL IN UGANDA

3.19
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This motion is moved under Rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Rotary International is a worldwide organisation of business, professional and community leaders, who provide humanitarian service, encourage high ethical standards in all vocations and help build good will and peace in the world through the following Seven areas of focus:

    1. Maternal and child health; 
    2. Disease prevention and treatment; 
    3. Water, sanitation and hygiene; 
    4. Economic and community development; 
    5. Basic education and literacy; 
    6. Peace and conflict prevention; 
    7. Protecting the environment;

AWARE that since 1957 when the first club, the Rotary Club of Kampala, was chartered by Rotary International, Uganda now boasts of 142 Rotary clubs and 198 Rotaract clubs with membership of over 4,000 Rotarians and over 3,000 rotaractors, spread in all regions of the country;

RECOGNISING that Rotary clubs in Uganda have over the years taken action and proposed solutions to problems faced by our communities, for example, in the last five years, Rotary clubs have, in collaboration with a wide range of partners, undertaken transformative projects across the country, totalling approximately to Shs 80 billion, including:

    a) Support for regular immunisation drives, provision of life-saving equipment, birth kits, support to pregnant and post-partum women and children under age five, renovation of maternity and children’s wards and advocacy for safe motherhood programmes and training of healthcare workers in different parts of the country; 

    b) The construction, rehabilitation and equipping of health facilities such as:

    (i) St Theresa Ayiko Hospital in Amuru District; 
    (ii) The Rotary Hospital in Mukono District, constructed at an estimated cost of Shs 2 billion;
    (iii) The rehabilitation of the theatre and maternity ward at Freda Ngora Hospital in Kumi District; 
    (iv) The construction and establishment of a 36-bed Cancer Treatment Centre at Nsambya Hospital at a cost of Shs 2 billion; 
    (v) Construction and equipping of the Mengo Hospital Rotary Blood Bank at a tune of Shs l.3 billion; and 
    (vi) The provision of equipment for Haemodialysis Centre at Mengo Hospital worth Shs 300 million; 

c)	 The eradication, treatment and prevention of life-threatening communicable and non-communicable diseases such as polio, malaria, HIV/AIDS and cancer, through awareness campaigns, regular blood donation drives and health camps; 

(d) The mobilisation of resources to deal with health emergencies as well as the acquisition of vital medical equipment including: 

(i) 	The mobilisation of Shs 2.6 billion out of the required Shs l8 billion for the acquisition of two state-of-the-art Linear Accelerators and construction of two cancer radiotherapy bunkers at the Uganda Cancer Institute; 

(ii) 	The mobilisation of $272,500 to support the Uganda Heart Institute’s project on Rheumatic Heart Disease (RHD), surgical missions and heart surgeries on over 350 children; 

(iii) 	In 2020, Rotary joined efforts to fight COVID-I9 in Uganda and donated Shs 1.2 billion in the form of handwashing equipment, Personal Protection Equipment (PPE), foodstuff and other supplies to the Government and communities around the country; 

(e) 	Support for projects aimed at improving access to clean water, sanitation and hygiene, include the installation of piped water systems, boreholes and other water points in communities and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) facilities in schools and health centres; 

(f) 	Promotion of livelihoods and household incomes through the establishment of loan schemes, skills training, provision of agricultural inputs and appropriate technology, introduction of modern farming practices, enterprise development and apprenticeships;

APPRECIATING that this outstanding contribution of Rotary to the social and economic transformation of Uganda has earned Uganda a special visit by Rotarian Shekhar Mehta, the President of Rotary International and his dear wife;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved as follows:

1. 	That Parliament commends Rotary International, Rotary clubs and Rotaract clubs in Uganda for the outstanding achievements in all the seven Rotary areas of focus.

2. 	Parliament appreciates the Rotary International President, Rtn. Shekhar Mehta and his dear wife, for honouring Uganda with this special visit.

3. 	Parliament pays glowing tribute to one of its own, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, for his selfless service and contribution to the Rotary Foundation earning him the prestigious title of “Major Donor Level Two”. Colleagues, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the honourable member for Kole District. It is seconded by the Whole House – hon. Bahati, honourable member for Luweero District, the honourable member for Chekwii County. Can you justify your motion in a short time? Otherwise, we need a short debate on this.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a special visit that involved various activities, such as the inauguration of the Board of Trustees for Owori Rotary Vijana Poa Village, empower Girls Initiative, the ground-breaking for the construction of the Linear Accelerator Bunker at Nsambya Hospital, the launch of the Maternal and Child Health Programme and visiting the Rotary Mengo Hospital Blood Bank, among others.

Mr Speaker, rotary activities have been in existence for all the time I have talked about and indeed, we have contributed as Rotarians in this country, over Shs 80 billion, in terms of the projects, which I listed much earlier.

However, I must put on record that this Parliament has been supporting rotary activities and billions have been raised by Members –(Applause)- to contribute during the Rotary Cancer Run. Colleagues, I am happy to inform you that the District Governor, Mr Magezi Ndamira has today recognised the role of Parliament in contributing to rotary activities.

Colleagues, what you have heard of whatever has been done- the only thing I can request is that each one of us should be a Rotarian. (Applause) That is the only place you reach and you will find no politics and division. It is all about humanity.

Rotary has been supporting some activities in your own constituencies yet you are not Rotarians. So, let us join hands and agree that each one of us is going to become Rotarian. Let us recruit Rotarians. You do not need to give much. However small, it will help.

With that, Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Seconder of the motion, hon. Judith Alyek, Kole District. Briefly -

3.27
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion of commending Rotary International for the great work they have done in Uganda.

I stand here, Mr Speaker, to testify to this Parliament and the whole world about the greatness of Rotary International. We are very grateful for the visit of the Rotary International President 2021/2022, Rtn. Shekhar Mehta and his dear wife, First Lady, Rashi.

I am a Rotarian. I am a member of the Rotary Club of Lira Metropolitan. I stand here to commend the good works of Rotary to humanity around the world and most particularly, in Uganda. Most of us in this House are aware that the north suffered war for 21 years. The first humanitarian service that came and supported our people in the internally displaced camps was Rotary. 

Rotary provided clean water in the IDP camps in Aloi, Barlonyo and some parts of Acholi. They provided water, sanitation and hygiene projects in the subcounties of Aber, Minakulu and many others in Oyam and other places. The total projects, by that time, cost about $500,000. This was the contribution that Rotary International gave to Northern Uganda. 

Not only that, Mr Speaker. There was a project of keeping girls at school in Kakira Primary School in Alebtong District - This one happened and then procuring ambulances for Christina Health Centre IV in Otuke District, where Rtn. Hon. Julius Acon is the mentor. This cost about $15,000 that was donated from Washington State.

Mr Speaker, there were even free medical camps, where many of our people get free medical services. Free eye care treatment and counselling services were all given by Rotary International. Rotary International went ahead and established Jaipur Limb workshops to rehabilitate people’s limbs. This was given free of charge in Kuluva Hospital in Arua. In Lira, the same workshop was constructed. In Bukoba in Tanzania, it was constructed.
Many communities in Acholi, Lango and Uganda at large can stand and testify to this Parliament and the whole world the good works that Rotary International has done through the Rotary Foundation. I, therefore, appeal to honourable colleagues to stand up and support Rotary International, by first joining and becoming members of a local club in their constituencies or areas of residence or even their areas of work.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, there is financial support. When you are a member, you have to contribute. For example, when you contribute $1,000, you become a Paul Harris Fellow. You are already a golden member, Mr Speaker. We thank you for your contribution and for being a permanent member of Rotary.

What we give cannot be measured from what we get in return for the different projects that we do in our districts. We have District 9213 and District 9214. Let us have many active clubs in different parts of this country.

I would like to say that about 85 per cent of our clubs in Uganda are within Kampala and neighbouring districts. Very few, if at all, are in the north. Can we support, guide and help to charter as many clubs as possible in the new cities like Lira, Gulu, Arua and Soroti. 

As Parliament, we share in the Rotary International vision of doing good in the world through service above self, while we exercise the Four-Way Test. First, is it the truth? Secondly, is it fair to all concerned? Thirdly, will it build goodwill and better friendship? Fourthly, will it be beneficial to all concerned?

Mr Speaker, to add on to what the Government Chief Whip presented, Rotary International even contributed to the establishment of a modern blood bank at Mengo Hospital and Peace Centre at Makerere University, amongst many uncounted achievements of Rotary in our districts, regions, country and even Africa.

Additionally, we are all in Parliament because we want to give quality humanitarian service to our constituencies. If we all join Rotary and become Rotarians, then we could serve our people better. 

Rotary is an international service organisation of professional and business people, who have come together to discuss pertinent problems affecting them and then charting solutions to those problems by pulling resources together. 

Members, let us go back and join our local clubs today. For those who have been attending fellowship and different Rotary trainings, I hereby request that the Rotary International President inducts them officially. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, for seconding the motion. The question that I propose for your debate is that the motion for a resolution of Parliament to commend the work of Rotary International in Uganda be adopted. That is the motion for debate and the debate starts now. 

I know that all of us want to speak; it is even sufficient to say that you second the motion. (Laughter) This is because the President of Rotary International has to go and meet the President of the Republic of Uganda at 4:00 p.m. so, if we can finish the debate by – It is part of a big problem because they need about 15 minutes to go through the security clearance at Nakasero. Therefore, unfortunately, we will have a debate of about 10 minutes only. 

Even if you just rise to confirm your support for the motion, that will be sufficient. Is that okay? Let us have a very limited debate. 

3.35
MS SHARTSI MUSHERURE (Independent, Mawogoola North County, Ssembabule): This is my maiden speech so, I ask that you bear with me for a few minutes. I take this opportunity to extend my sincere gratitude to the people of Mawogoola North County for believing in me to represent their aspirations and I congratulate you, Mr Speaker, for your great leadership and assumption of office. 

Allow me to recognise and salute the 2021-2022 Rotary International President, Mr Shekhar Mehta and his wife, Rashi; the Rotary District Governors, Mr Young Kimaro and Mr John Magezi Ndamira from Tanzania and Uganda respectively, and all other Rotarians present. 

It is with utmost humility that I add my voice of appreciation to the previous speakers to recognise and commend the great work of Rotary Club, especially in responding to the impact of the global COVID-19 crisis. I recognise the work of Rotary and especially Woodbury Rotary Club in Minnesota where I was a member in the United States. This club supported the women of Ntungamo with US$ 10,400 to help with the heifer project. So, I commend them for that work. 

Mr Speaker, you tasked us recently to think about the kind of country we want. One of the ideals of Rotary all over the world is service before self. If we remember this tenet, it will go a long way in guiding us as we think about the country we want. 

I rise to support the motion that a resolution of Parliament be made to commend the work of Rotary International in Uganda. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.37
MS CHRISTINE NDIWALANA (NUP, Bukomansimbi North County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I welcome our dear President of the Rotary International. I am a Rotarian of Bunga Rotary Club and I am the Director of Service Project. We do not have enough time but I would have liked to say much about Rotary. I invite my colleagues to join Rotary – according to whatever they have been mentioned, we have very many Rotary projects in our communities.

As Members of Parliament, we are supposed to give back to the community. In Bukomansimbi District, we have a water project which is running; Rotary Club is drilling boreholes and connecting tap water. 

Rotary is not political. However, even if you are a politician and you are under Rotary, people in the community would think that you have given them the project. So, kindly join Rotary; you are going to benefit a lot. People in the community are going to appreciate you. Thank you. I am not marketing it but just give back to the community. 

3.39
MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a Paul Harris Fellow (PHF) from the Rotary Club of Bweyogerere, Namboole. On a special note, I join Parliament to welcome our President of Rotary International to Uganda. I also second the motion.

It is high time, as we consider the different activities we do as Rotary International in Uganda, that we requested Government of the Republic of Uganda – because many of our activities are hindered. Presidents of Rotary Clubs convene meetings but the online meetings have some gaps. You may recall that most of our meetings take place in the evenings; after 7:00 p.m. and somehow, we are now limited to meet around that time.

Mr Speaker, I request Government to consider Rotarians as essential people so that the executives of Rotary clubs meet in the evening such that the work of Rotary International in Uganda can go on. It is because when Rotarians physically meet, they are able to do several activities and projects that aid each and every person in the community.

I beg that Government considers extending curfew time so that Rotarians are able to meet and help someone. I beg to submit. (Laughter)

3.41
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and to commend the work of the Rotary International for the service that they have rendered especially to our country. I also commend the spirit of voluntarism and the values of Rotary that they serve with. 

The President of Rotary International seated in a special place in the public gallery – I am afraid to call it the Strangers’ Gallery because there is a president in there – was quoted in his speech – When Mr Mehta took over the presidency of Rotary International, he said, “Rotary kindled the spark within me to look beyond myself and embrace humanity. I adopted the guiding principle that service is the rent I pay for the space I occupy on this earth and I want to be a good tenant of this earth.” 

At the end of the 11th Parliament, we need to choose whether we shall be good or bad tenants of this country we call Uganda. We can be good tenants if we work together to uplift the lives of the 39 per cent of the population that lives in the subsistence economy and the 21 per cent that lives in poverty. I beg to submit. 

3.43
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join all those that have spoken to second this motion. As a past President of the Rotary Club of Bukoto, President of Rotary International and your dear wife, I join my colleagues in welcoming you to Uganda, the Pearl of Africa. 

Rotary, as said, is a voluntary association of people that come together to serve humanity. Rotary has done a lot in different parts of the world. Much has been said but let us note that Rotary is guided by principles and values and most important of these is integrity.

You must be an honest person if you are to be a good Rotarian.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that Rotary has done a lot. In health specifically, what we keep or what most people do not know about is the polio eradication programme and which I would like to talk about. The journey started in 1979 in the Philippines when the then RI President, together with the Minister of Health, decided to have a programme to eradicate polio in the Philippines.

From then, in 1985, Rotary flagged off the campaign to eradicate polio from the globe as one of its core activities to undertake. Rotary International became one of the founders of the global initiative to eradicate polio. Today, we are glad that we have almost eradicated polio from the globe. This has been as a result of the various fundraising efforts by the Rotarians joined by other good people and companies that joined in this effort.

Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I would like to appreciate Rotary for also starting the peace centre that has been mentioned. This is a postgraduate certificate course at Makerere University. You all know that we are living in a world where peace is important. We cannot develop, as a country or community, without peace.

Therefore, this initiative focuses on peace and educating various leaders. It also aims to equip them with knowledge and skills and the various conflict resolution skills, which is an important step in ensuring that we have a peaceful world where we can all live and develop. 

In the interest of time, I would like to end there. Thank you, Mr Speaker, Rotarians and non-Rotarians that have supported this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I had desired that this motion be adopted in the presence of the president. However, now that the time is running out, we will continue with the debate for the short while; the Rotary International President can leave to go and meet the President of Uganda at the right time.

The rest of the delegation will remain; it is only the President and a few people who will go to meet the President of Uganda. 

In the circumstances, we will adopt this motion in your absence although my desire was to adopt it in your presence. But that is not going to be possible now. Therefore, we will continue with the motion for a short time [Member rose_] the Speaker is talking and usually, Members sit down when the Speaker is talking. Thank you.

3.47
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion but to also warmly welcome the President of Rotary International and his dear wife, to Uganda. You are welcome!

I would also like to commend the Rotary movement worldwide and in Uganda for the provision of essential humanitarian services like water, health facilities, equipment and drugs, education, protection of widows and orphans, hygiene campaigns, networking at national, regional and international levels.

The fellowship brings about a Rotary family that knows no political, religious, ethnic and racial or gender balance for which we are proud; a disciplined oneness to advance goodwill and peace.

I commend their generosity and big hearts - the service above self and I ask that we spread it to our constituencies. Long live Rotary International. I second the motion and I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Mr President, this is the time for you to leave; I wish you a very good stay in Uganda. My prayer is - and I know that your visit to Uganda will change the face of Rotary in this country.

Once again, you are welcome and you may now go to meet the President of Uganda. We will continue in your absence. (Applause) 

3.49
MS ROSE ABIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I join the House in commending Rotary because when we speak about Kulva Hospital, the number of people with eye defects who have been operated on is enormous yet this has been through Rotary.

You find so many experts coming into the country and going directly to serve the most rural. It is indeed service above self. They have done a lot of work in Arua Hospital, especially in the maternity and the children wards, in addition to cleaning up Arua City through garbage collection. 

Mr Speaker, I join the rest to congratulate and thank Rotary. Thank you.

3.50
MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity. I rise to support the motion on grounds that for the last three years, the Rotary Club of Lyantonde was chartering. They have managed to touch and support the communities.

They built four VIP latrines in one of the four subcounties in my constituency; they planted trees in two of the parishes in my constituency and provided energy-saving stoves to the communities. They conducted family health days in two of the subcounties and recently, they held a cancer screening session within the constituency.

Based on that, Mr Speaker, I stand to support the motion because of the activities that have been executed within my constituency for the last three years by Rotarians. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.51
MR LUTTAMAGUZI SEMAKULA (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion. There is a verse in the Bible that says, “When I was naked, you clothed me; when I was hungry, you fed me; when I was in prison, you visited me.” Therefore, Rotary clubs have come to answer the call by God to love our neighbours as we love ourselves. I would like to commend them for that.

Secondly, they have always been there to fill the gaps where the Government has been absent. We will always thank you so much for your great work. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.52
MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a direct beneficiary of Rotary International. When I got involved in an accident, about 20 years ago, I lost hope because I had lost my leg. I am donned with an artificial limb but my first artificial limb was donated to me by Rotary International.

I am able to favourably compete with the so-called normal people because of that leg. Therefore, I would like to commend and support Rotary International. We appreciate it. I beg to submit.

3.53
DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion but to most importantly, share with you the fact that Uganda is the third most malaria burdened country in the whole world.

Rotary International has done a lot. It has come up with the Rotarian Malaria Partners Uganda, who are doing a lot to fight malaria. 

Mr Speaker, I also do sit on the Parliamentary Forum on Malaria, where I am the interim chairperson. In one of those meetings, we were informed that COVID-19 had killed 1,000 Ugandans but in the same period of time, malaria had killed 5,000. Therefore, for Rotary to come up against malaria is a very noble thing and we associate with it. 

I support and thank hon. Tayebwa, who came up with that motion from the Government side. I know that they are challenged, most especially in the health sector; many things are not going on well so when these people come in to help, we support the motion. Thank you.

3.54
Ms hellen nakimuli (NUP, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. Rotary International has been good to us the Islanders, especially those in Kalangala District that I am very well versed with.

The Sesse-Kampala Rotary Club and Kalangala Rotary Club have done us good. They have constructed a health centre in Bweza/Ddajje in Bufumira Subcounty and a primary school. These islands are very far from the health facilities and different services provided by the Government because they are dispersed in different areas.

They have also done medical outreaches and I am sure they are still doing so. They have as well given us drugs. I am also very sure that they are going to do so in Bukasa Health Centre IV because the Government is still relaxed about providing equipment in one of the – they are still relaxed. I do not know if they are relaxed or sleeping about giving us materials in one of the health centres IV. Like I said before, we make referrals from one health centre to another health centre IV, not a hospital. I support the motion. Thank you.

3.56
Dr lulume bayigga (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. First of all, apart from everything that Rotary has done to this country and world over, there are certain values that they have instilled in the populations that they have been working with. I am one of the persons that have been working very closely with Rotary.

One of the values that they talk about is: whether in everything that we do, it is the truth, fair to all concerned and will build good relations to all persons concerned. Those values have been instilled in the populations that have been working closely with Rotary.

At times, many people think that to be a Rotarian, you need to be a rich person. Far from it. You just need to be a person with a big heart, a heart that gives and is willing to help. That is how they have won the respect of all persons in the world; of the people who may not be earning a lot but are willing to give something to help another person to have a better life.

In Buikwe District and Buike South in particular, they have assisted our populations to get water, especially in the schools in the far-to-reach areas. They have assisted us to get medicines and gather doctors and nurses - all professionals - to come around and give help in hard-to-reach areas. They reach them with health facilities, do cancer screening etcetera. They have donated machines; x-rays, operation tables in the health sector and so on.

Mr Speaker, it is this generosity exhibited by Rotary International that we need to cherish. Indeed, I support the motion. Thank you.

3.59
Ms joyce acan (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion on the ground that Rotary Club has done a lot for people with disabilities. I represent these people in the whole Uganda. Rotary Club always puts advocacy to better the life of people with disabilities, on top of their agenda.

I would like to bring to the attention of this House that the Rotary Club of Uganda has partnered with Katalemwa to manufacture wheel chairs, which they always donate for free.

I, therefore, second the motion.

4.00
Mr Christopher komakech (Independent, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by hon. Tayebwa on behalf of the speechless. Seventy six per cent of the population in Uganda are youth and young children. At that time, if you have ever been a youth - which you have - emotions are high and dreams are unexpected. Youth get lost in addiction, alcohol, heroin and cocaine. 

What Rotary Club has done is to organise the youth in a club known as Interact. Interact Club plays a great role in this nation. I was the president and many youth have become presidents. Having the title “president” alone embedded upon you gives you dreams to become a leader tomorrow. Maybe I am standing here because, once, I was a leader in Interact Club of Luzira Senior Secondary School. (Applause)

I would like to commend Rotary International for coming at a time when the youth need help. Maybe only schools could. I second the motion.

4.02
Mr Jackson atima (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion. I welcome the President of Rotary Club International, his better half and directors to Uganda.

I ask colleagues of this House to join Rotary Club as it is a very prestigious club. I support this motion because I was and still am a beneficially of rotary activities in West Nile region.

When supplies came to Kuluba Hospital, which was talked about, I was the hospital administrator. We established an incubation centre for premature children in the hospital, Arua Hospital, Maracha Hospital and this was done by Rotary International.

Medical equipment and wheel chairs for disabled people were supplied in the region by Rotary Club. School feeding programme was supported by the Rotary Club.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that the Rotary Club is a worthy club to be supported. I move to support this motion. Thank you very much, I beg to submit. 

4.04
MS FAITH KUNIHIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): I rise to support this motion, like all my other colleagues have done and to appreciate the great work that the Rotary has done towards children. In my years of service to my community, Rotary was able to support two children. One of them was butchered by his relatives due to land wrangles and this young girl was taken to the USA by the Rotary Club of Kampala East here. She received corrective surgery, which was very important for her life. 

I rise again to support Rotary International because of a six-year-old young boy who was burnt by his relatives for stealing food. At six years old, this boy was walking on his fours and Rotary International was able to again take this young boy to the USA where he received corrective surgery. Today, he is in senior three and is walking very well and straight. 

I rise as a Rotarian and former President and as a Paul Harris Fellow (PHF) to say that Rotary is one of the best places for anyone to belong. I encourage my colleagues to join the Rotary. I would like to say, I give you all Rotary in this House. We always say “Rotary worldover.”  (Applause)

4.05
MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to contribute to the matter on the Floor. I join the rest of my colleagues to support the motion because each and every one of us here has a reason to support and commend the club for the reasons well elaborated by each and every one of us. 

Mr Speaker, I had two patients in Kayunga; they were little children who needed to be operated on because they had heart complications. That was done by the Rotary Club. (Interjection)

I would like to make a proposal that each and every one of us contributes Shs 200,000 out of our next month’s emoluments as a way of showing that we appreciate what the Rotary Club is doing for this country and especially for our communities.  Honourable members, if Rotary has not impacted you as a person then as a community, you have benefitted in one way or another. Shs 200,000 is very little to raise this alarm that I am seeing here. 

Honourable members, we just cannot support. Let us act and contribute the least amount, which is Shs 200,000 out of our next month’s emoluments. I beg to propose and submit. (Interjections)

4.08 
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion. The act of giving and helping people is a divine activity; it touches the body, soul and spirit. 

When you reflect on the mandate and the principles of the Rotary Club, almost 80 per cent of Ugandan Members of Parliament play that role. The constituencies and the way Members of Parliament always help the needy qualifies almost every Member of Parliament to be a Rotarian. It is just a matter of normalising so that Members of Parliament become lifespan members of the Rotary Club.

The spirit that the Rotary Club holds has a concept behind it and the concept is not only giving but also spiritual; the concept of the truth, being fair and reflecting on what you do that always goes well with humans and the environment.

Mr Speaker, a few minutes ago, you talked and we said all that we do should be above self. The Woman Member of Parliament of Gulu City brought an important matter here for this country. The young people, given that education is crumbling and moving in a very poor state due to COVID-19 – The act, which is taking place to the extent that those students are being denied their education is very far from the spirit of the Rotary Club. 

I call upon all the people responsible to face these kinds of truths and to carry integrity so that we care for these young ones in Gulu School of Health Sciences who are loitering on the streets without anywhere to sleep. 

I stand to second the motion but above all, to request that we rescue those students. I thank you. (Applause)

4.11
MS JENIPHER NAMUYANGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to join colleagues in supporting the motion moved by hon. Tayebwa. 

Last term when I served as the Minister of State for Local Government, I moved throughout the country, at times at the invitation of colleagues to commission projects; health facilities and water projects contributed by the Rotary Club and so, I would like to salute the Rotary Clubs. 

When Kibuku was a constituency, it benefited from the Rotary Club when they gave us 100 wheelchairs. It is a sign of kindness and love to humankind but also a sign of patriotism. 

I would like to encourage all of us – I know we are providing a service, like my colleague mentioned - that we are Rotarians in one way or another. However, I would like to encourage all of us to join the Rotary Clubs wherever we are so that we can continue supporting our people. 

In water, we say, “even a drop counts.” Therefore, whatever contribution we make will have an impact on some individuals. I thank you and I would like to salute all the Rotarians within and outside Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.13
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy to be a Rotarian. I belong to Bukoto Rotary Club. I want to tell you, Members, that Rotary is about humanitarianism; it is about giving and serving. All of us here have been Rotarians in our own capacities. Whether you are a Rotarian by affiliation, but as a Member of Parliament, I am sure, each one of us has been a Rotarian in his/her own capacity.

Rotary being a response system to the human need, I am very grateful to be part of it. I had two of my people in Kagadi who underwent heart surgery under the Rotary fellowship. I am very glad that I belong to a Rotary club.

As a member of Bukoto Fellowship, we have a signature project in Kabutemba village, Gomba District. We have completely transformed this village. We have put up a school and all the facilities that are required for that school. This school has helped very many people; children were walking eight kilometres to reach the nearest school, which was very dangerous especially for the girl child, where they risked being sexually abused on the way.

Mr Speaker, the interventions that create holistic and positive impact on the communities like education, economic empowerment, creation of food security, provision of basic health services, accessibility of clean and safe water and proper sanitation facilities as a result of Rotarians, humble me.

Members, I want to tell you that Rotary is a brotherhood; wherever you go - whether you are out of the country, you do not need to say much, just say “I am a Rotarian,” and you will be welcomed in that fellowship. I, therefore, recommend to all Members to come and share in these core values. I invite you to embrace Rotary. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we should be drawing to a close pretty soon. Can we limit the time we spend on this matter? Should I limit the time to two minutes? (Interjection) One minute? Let us give it two minutes.

4.17
MS HOPE NAKAZIBWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): I would also like to join the honourable members who have commended the work of Rotary International in Uganda. I want to thank the Government Chief Whip for bringing this motion and welcome the President of Rotary International and his dear wife, to Uganda.

Rotary International and Rotary Uganda have done a commendable piece of work especially when it gets to protecting - (Member timed out.)

4.18
MR SANON BWIRE (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion on one ground; that Rotary came to Kaliro District in my constituency, at a time when we had lost hope of getting good service as far as health services were concerned. They have decided to build a modern maternity ward at Bumanya Health Centre IV. This is a service that cannot be forgotten and go unappreciated. I, therefore, stand to support the motion. I want to urge Government to continue protecting the Rotarians. I beg to submit.

4.19
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion. Kapchorwa or Sebei in general, has not had the services you have talked about. However, I would like to take this opportunity to welcome Rotary clubs to Kapchorwa District and to Sebei subregion as a whole. 

I would like to agree with hon. Nantaba for the 200,000. I want to be the first so that the next things that will follow are the activities, which you will bring to my district. You are most welcome. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.20
MR LINOS NGOMPEK (NRM, Kibanda North County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have also been a beneficiary of Rotary Kampala East. In my constituency, they have a project at Silver Village in Bweyale Town Council; health camps, helping schools and school-going children. 

I also benefited by getting deworming tablets on two occasions; we used to have issues with worms but now I think I am okay, just because of Rotary intervention. Therefore, I stand to second the motion and urge Members to join Rotary Kampala South. Thank you.

4.21
MR HILLARY KIYAGA (NUP, Mawokota North, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I represent an area that has an island called Buyiga. Some of us who represent people in the islands think these people have clean water because they live next to water. The Rotary Club of Rubaga Lakeview came and rescued people who were suffering from water-related diseases and gave us over 10 boreholes. Therefore, I rise to support the motion because they have offered a good service to my constituency. I beg to submit.

4.21
MR MICHAEL KAKEMBO (NUP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to thank hon. Tayebwa for the motion and to support the motion on behalf of the people of Entebbe; those who have benefitted and those who are yet to benefit from the good work of these ladies and gentlemen who have decided to serve beyond self. We have seen Rotary International in Entebbe fighting to reduce accidents by painting quite a number of zebra crossings and traffic signs in Entebbe.

In Entebbe Grade B Hospital, which is now a regional referral hospital, we have seen Rotary International coming out to provide a generator that is supplying electricity and a very big water tank to serve us with clean water in the hospital and quite very many schools have benefitted in the activities of Rotary International.

Therefore, on behalf of my people of Entebbe Municipality, those who are benefiting and those yet to benefit, it would be very unfair if I did not stand to thank these ladies and gentlemen, who have sacrificed whatever they have to serve beyond self and to serve our people of Uganda. 

I support this motion, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.23
Mr BENARD SEKYANZI (NRM, Budyebo County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My district is in the central but it is as if in the extreme end of the country because of what is taking place right now; the floods that are making my people landless. 

However, I would like to thank Rotary International because they came to my sub-county and renovated one of the Government Health Centres III called Nakayoza. They even drilled a borehole, where I gave a hand by extending the water from the borehole to the Health Centre. I, therefore, stand to support the motion. Thank you very much, the mover of the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we should be drawing to a close. 

4.24
MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am the Shadow Internal Affairs Minister. I support the motion and I applaud all the activities so far done by Rotary, in areas of health, water and sanitation. 

However, I also call upon Rotary to embrace one of the areas, which is within their mandate and objectives; the issue of peace and conflict resolution has not yet been highly reflected in their activities, especially at this time, when the Government is committed to arm-twist the operations of the NGOs as per today’s Daily Monitor.

All in all, I applaud and support this motion with a call to do more on the issues of conflict resolution, focusing on the Police and army relationships with the public.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.26
MR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to join the others to support the motion. I have never been a member of the Rotary but from the testimonies I have heard here, I am ready to be recruited. I beg to submit. (Applaud)

THE SPEAKER: Can we have more of those similar to the one of hon. Bwanika?

4.27
MS SYLVIA AWAS (NRM, Woman Representative, Nabilatuk): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion but I would like to request Rotary International to extend their services to Karamoja Region, because we have never benefited from the good stories people are talking about here in Parliament. I am ready to join Rotary such that my community, and Karamoja at large, benefits from it. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I want more of those.

4.28
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to join Rotary in the Eighth Parliament because they came, when I had very difficult times in my district and the whole of west Acholi and constructed boreholes. I took one to a place called Abura Munya and one in Palaro called Bongotyet. I was very happy with them. 

When I tried and they told me: “You be a visitor in the club for consecutive times.” However, as you know, the work of our Parliament cannot allow us. In Gulu, it was Thursday yet on every Thursdays I am supposed to be here in Parliament. I visited about once and fell out. I visited the second time, it could not be consecutive.

I wish Rotary could be a little a bit flexible for Members to join. We would like to join because we know that service above self, is very important and this is what we always offer. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: There are clubs all around the country. Join from anywhere; you are likely to stay, for example, in Kampala so that Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, you are within here. The Gulu people can wait because the clubs are networked. Okay?

4.29
MS MARY NAKATO (Independent, Woman Representative, Buyende): Mr Speaker, I am here to support the motion to support Rotarians. I come from Buyende District and I have been seeing a few charitable offers being channelled through Jinja. Since we have the President within the House, I request that Buyende be one of the districts to benefit from Rotary activities. I am ready to join them but on condition that they will also support me. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Rotary is voluntary. Honourable members, because of the difficulties we are facing with this COVID-19, I am advised that hon. Hellen Wandera, Woman Representative Busia, is on zoom. Can you make your contribution? Is that possible, hon. Wandera? Please proceed.    

4.32
MS HELLEN WANDERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia)(On Zoom): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very glad for this opportunity. I am not a member of Rotary but according to what the honourable members have said, I am here to join Rotary. 

Secondly, as Rotary, new Members should also benefit – (Inaudible)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. If this system could work better, we would have more coverage of Members, who are – yes, UPDF representative. That will be the last from the Floor then I have the Leader of the Opposition, Leader of Government Business and we close. We need to close now.

4.33
COL. CHARITY BAINABABO (UPDF REPRESENTATIVE): I rise to commend the good acts of humanity that have been provided by Rotary International. Just like other Members have appreciated them, we seem to be repeating what we have already said. I beg to move that we close the debate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for closure of debate. Each time that motion is moved and in the opinion of the Speaker there is concurrence with the mover of the motion, he is under obligation to put the question to that motion. 

Honourable members, I will now put the question to the motion that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the motion for a resolution of Parliament to commend the work of Rotary International in Uganda be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion, adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. (Applause) Thank you, hon. Charity Bainababo, for dealing with the situation properly. 

We were on the issue of Gulu. The minister is still here but it is not a debatable matter at this stage. A matter has been raised as an urgent one. We can give information and seek clarification, very briefly, so that we go to the motion.

4.35
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Betty Aol Ochan for raising very important issues going on right now in Gulu College of Health Sciences. We call it “clinical school”.

The urgent matter that we wanted the minister to address is that yesterday, we went to the school while performing our oversight role as Members of Parliament. We agreed, in the meeting, that the students should be given accommodation in the hostels and students went to the hostels.

Today at 10.00 a.m., the Regional Police Commander and District Police Commander mobilised security personnel. They went to the students’ hostel and chased all of them from there. As we talk, Mr Speaker, the students are on the streets and have nowhere to go. We are worried for the students who come from far away.

Gulu College of Health Sciences has students from western Uganda, eastern Uganda, central Uganda and West Nile. Yesterday, the students were narrating to us that on the 9th when they were chased away from school, a girl from Mbale had all her property looted.

Right now, ladies who come from far away are on the streets of Gulu City. The urgent matter we need the minister to handle is to allow those students go back to the hostels right now. If not, people who come from distant areas are in problems, Mr Speaker.

As I wind up, the minister has stated very clearly in his submission that Members of Parliament stormed Gulu College of Health Sciences. I really feel that, that statement is not very right. We were doing our constitutional mandate. We went as leaders from Acholi sub-region to make sure the school runs smoothly.

Therefore, I beg the honourable minister to withdraw the statement that we stormed the school. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Please, brief comments on this.

4.37
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Mr Speaker, the statement from the minister was so alarming, especially when he is talking about the increase of tuition fees to be paid by the clinical school’s students at a time when Ugandans are suffering from the COVID-19 pandemic. 

How can you talk about increasing tuition fees in June this year when parents have not been working and students are suffering as they go to school? Above all, we got the petition from the students when we were in Gulu on Sunday as many students from different areas of Uganda were on the streets. They had nowhere to go. They did not even have transport money, given the way the school was closed.

When we realised that the students are not violent, as Chairman of Acholi Parliamentary Group, I appointed hon. Gilbert Olanya and five others to go and sit with the administration. 

The information I got was that the Principal accepted when they explained to him the plight of the students on the streets and they opened the dormitory themselves. I do not know what he is talking about that the leaders stormed the school. Did they go and cut the door to the dormitory and send the students to the dormitories? I need to understand that. Thank you.

4.39
REV. FR CHARLES ONEN (Independent, Laroo-Pece Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. By the grace of God, I am a Member of Parliament in the 11th Parliament. (Applause) I am here as a delegate of God and also a spiritual sanitizer.

Mr Speaker, according to rule 84 of our Rules of Procedure, no offensive, abusive, insulting, blasphemous or unbecoming words can be used by a Member of Parliament or any other person in this august House.

It was an insult from the minister to say that we stormed the school. How do you storm your home? (Laughter) How do you storm your house? We have the constitutional mandate and oversight role to visit those institutions. Do we need permission from you to visit those institutions or that college? You must come and apologise. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, if it is not an escape of lips then it could be the question of age. We need to know from the minister. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Aol, you have submitted, please. 

4.40
MR SHEDRICK OBONG (Independent, Lira West Division, Lira City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to the concerns that have been raised concerning our children at Gulu College of Health Sciences. 

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, the kids we are talking about – 

THE SPEAKER: They are not kids. (Laughter)

MR OBONG: The students that we are talking about come from all over Uganda and beyond. We have female students, for that matter.

People here are talking about COVID-19. Have we forgotten that there is also HIV/AIDS in Uganda and the whole world? The condition that we are subjecting these learners to is very unfair. 

Therefore, it would be imperative for us to elucidate the situation and exacerbate it so that we can be in position to help them. It bothers me a great deal.

Mr Speaker, when we are talking about issues, we have people who are in charge of this country who should have taken into consideration the issues concerning our learners. However, they take time to react to some of these issues. They allow issues to get out of hand before they can come on board to arrest the situation.

Therefore, my prayer is that the honourable Minister of Education and Sports should take charge of this ministry and direct that those students be allowed to get back to the dormitory so that we avert the situation. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this is not a matter of debate. This is an urgent matter. (Member rose) Would you like to sit when the Speaker is speaking? (Laughter)

This is an urgent matter. Usually, these kinds of interactions do not occur when urgent matters are raised. However, this one is unique in its characteristics because students have been locked out and they are on the street. I think we have had sufficient interaction on this matter. The debate we are going to have is without decision. I would like the minister to respond to those issues raised in very clear terms, provide guidance on the way forward and then we see how to conclude this matter. 

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that the college we are talking about attracts students from all over Uganda. The students who come to the college, however, are expected to be prepared to study and the ministry is fully in charge. We have listened to their problems and we are trying to address them. However, when the situation comes where you cannot control who does what, then somebody has to come up and create order. We have asked the students to go back to class as we sort out their problems, but they are saying “no”. The college council has been telling these students that they are handling their matter but they are not prepared – 

Honourable members, we are the professionals. Give us time to sort this problem and I think we have the capacity to do it. We are not going to run this institution from Parliament. I have got people who are highly trained and they are managing the situation. Give us time. We have asked these students to go home; each and every one of them has a home.

My prayer is that you give us time. We will address all the issues these students have raised so that we have an environment that is conducive to learning. We have decided to give all the time that is needed to address this problem.

If you are going to say as it was said yesterday, that we bring back the students who are not willing to cooperate with the administration, it is going to be very difficult to run this institution. I pray that you give us time. We are in charge and we have all the abilities to sort out this matter. I submit. 

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question at hand is about the students who are on the street. The question at hand is to put a human face on those vulnerable students. The minister is narrating a story which is not 100 per cent correct. We went and did our benchmarking on this matter and we got the facts regarding the matter which is at hand now. 

In the first place, the Principal –

THE SPEAKER: I am waiting for the point of order.

MR AMOS OKOT: I am coming to that, Mr Speaker. The Principal said the students had been so peaceful and she agreed to open the dormitory for them. Information and pressure coming from somebody who is not at the college is the one giving all this fear. Is the minister in order to come here and start insinuating that this matter cannot be solved within a day and yet the students are also willing to be at the school? Just in a week’s time, they are supposed to sit examinations. Is he in order, when we are here trying to solve a problem that can be solved here and now? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not believe that that can be solved here and now because there are things that we are not in charge of at all. As Parliament, we do not have all the facts. The facts keep contradicting each other. So, we are not very well placed. Unless our own committee had looked into this issue and if these recommendations were coming from them, then we would be better placed to accept them. To accept the information in that form, from Members who are not very happy about what has happened and take it as facts, contrary to the facts being brought by the minister, would not be a proper place for us to take a decision on this matter.

What I am trying to suggest here is that we need a solution. Those students need to find their way to places that are safe. The safest and the easiest place would be where they were staying. Honourable minister, what would it take for us to find – What timeframe would you need to be able to find a solution? What is the nature of the problem? Is it a complex problem that cannot be resolved immediately? Does it require so much time? When you have to take three months to resolve the matter, then you cannot keep the students in the dormitories. I am also being informed that they have to do examinations in a short time. 

Honourable minister, all those things taken together, what would you suggest should be done? What is the timeframe you need with your technical people and the leadership of the institution to resolve this matter, if they can be involved, so that the matter is resolved amicably? 

DR MUYINGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said, my people are on ground in Gulu. I have told them not to come back until we have a way forward. What I cannot say at the moment is how much time it is going to take us. However, what I know and I am very sure is that the students have been asked to go home. If we all talked the same language, these students would be home. They have already left the dormitories, where they were forced to leave. I am sure that by the end of tomorrow, they will all be home and that will help us. 

We are working with the college council as well and all the stakeholders are accommodated on the council. They will be able to articulate what the students want. Give us – I can come back another day, probably to tell you how long it is going to take. Right now, what I can say is: let the students go home. Otherwise, the most important thing is the safety of the lives of our children and the college property. We cannot be sure of the security and safety of our children, if there is that kind of pulling and pushing. Allow the students to go home, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we need to find a solution to this. So, I am going to request you to consult with your people on the ground and see the possibilities of resolving this matter quickly.
Therefore, I will ask you to come back tomorrow at two o’clock. (Applause) Do the necessary consultation in the interim period to see if a solution can be brought quickly and then we take a decision.

However, if the solution cannot be brought, the implication is then that we cannot be able to handle it as members of Parliament. Nevertheless, if the solution can be in the short-term, then we can advise on what you could do to keep down the temperature in the situation.

Thank you. So, this matter is deferred to tomorrow at two o’clock when the minister will brief us about the actual situation and the possibilities of resolution of this matter; the timeframes - if he can get them. If he cannot, then we will take the next decision. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO DEGAZETTE PART OF THE CENTRAL FOREST RESERVE AT LAROO-PECE DIVISION, GULU CITY, FOR USE BY GULU UNIVERSITY

4.54
MR OJARA MAPENDUZI (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Mr Speaker, allow me to begin by thanking you very sincerely for giving me the opportunity to move this motion. 

Mr Speaker, this motion falls under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. It is a motion for resolution of Parliament urging the Government to degazette part of the central forest reserve at Laroo-Pece Division, Gulu City for use by Gulu University.

The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Government, by Statutory Instrument No.31 of 2003, established Gulu University as a public university in the then Gulu District, with the aim of equitable distribution of education opportunities to the people of Northern Uganda;

AND WHEREAS the main campus of Gulu University is located in Laroo-Pece Division, Gulu City, Gulu University has seen an exponential growth in student numbers, taught and research courses and faculties, necessitating it to establish university branches in Lira, Kitgum and Hoima Districts;

AWARE THAT one of the biggest challenges faced by Gulu University is lack of land on which to expand since it is located near Gulu Central Forest Reserve - a forest reserve sitting on about 243 acres of land at Laroo-Pece Division, Gulu City;

FURTHER AWARE THAT in fulfilment of the requirements for degazetting central forest reserves under the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, No. 8 of 2003, Gulu University entered into a memorandum of understanding with the National Forestry Authority (NFA), wherein, the NFA agreed to degazette 70 out of 243 acres of Gulu Central Forest Reserve in return for Gulu University providing alternative land onto which a new forest reserve will be established; 

NOTING THAT in December, 2012, in fulfilment of its Memorandum of Understanding with the National Forestry Authority, Gulu University procured 500 acres of Land at Pajengo Village, Latoro Parish, Purongo Sub-county, Nwoya District for purposes of relocating the 70 acres of the degazetted Gulu Central Forest Reserve;

FURTHER NOTING THAT in spite of Gulu University fulfilling its obligations under the Memorandum of Understanding with NFA as well as obtaining planning permission from Gulu Municipality to use part of the Gulu Forest Reserve land, Government has not undertaken processes leading to the degazetting of part of Gulu Central Forest Reserve as was agreed upon under the Memorandum of Understanding; 

RECALLING THAT H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda, by a letter dated 03 April, 2020, directed the then Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda to take steps to degazette 70 acres of Gulu Central Forest Reserve and avail the land to Gulu University for its expansion; 

CONCERNED THAT in spite of the President's directive, Government has not commenced processes leading to the degazettement of part of Gulu Central Forest Reserve; 

COGNISANT THAT Gulu Central Forest Reserve can only be degazetted by Government, through presenting a motion for a resolution of Parliament, in accordance with sections 7 and 8 of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, upon satisfaction of various other requirements, including providing alternative land for the establishment of a new forest reserve as well as carrying out an environmental impact assessment; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this House that the Minister responsible for Water and Environment urgently fulfils the President's directive to degazette 70 acres of Gulu Central Forest Reserve and avail the land to Gulu University for its expansion.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Members for Napak, Kitgum, Kyegegwa, Nakaseke, Rubaga, Maruzi North and Kilak and the other parts of Gulu City.

Would you like to briefly speak to your motion, honourable?

MR OJARA MAPENDUZI: Mr Speaker, as I speak to this motion, allow me to inform the House that as I move this motion, we have a team from Gulu University headed by the university vice chancellor, Prof. Openjuru sitting in the gallery. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, when the university started -

THE SPEAKER: You have taken over my job. I should be the one welcoming my guests in the chamber now, I am –(Laughter)

MR OJARA MAPENDUZI: My sincere apologies, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please proceed. (Laughter)

MR OJARA MAPENDUZI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, when the Government saw the need to have this university established, the district council of Gulu generously offered the then district farm institute, which has a total size of land of about 15 acres. That was around 2002/2003.

However, I would like to appreciate what has so far been done to have the university grow and it is important to mention that resources have been provided to put in infrastructural development; there are many faculties.

As I speak, the Government recently commissioned one of the biggest laboratories - the multifunctional laboratory which has been built. 

It is important to mention that immediately when the University got into a memorandum of understanding with NFA, and started the process of getting this land as part of the arrangement I talked about, the Government immediately started providing funds to put in infrastructures. As I speak, the 70 acres that had been provided have those infrastructure built on it because that was part of the arrangement.

However, even if there are already infrastructures built by the Government, the university does not have any proof to show ownership. It would be fair then that this Parliament considers this decision and makes it formal so that the university can have a home.

Also, apart from that, Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that the university has made very positive
steps that should be taken as an example. The fact that the university has provided 500 acres of land to establish another forest in return to the 70 acres that the university is requesting for, is something that we should be able to consider.

Mr Speaker, I would like to also inform the House that the university has made strides in ensuring that the processes for this land acquisition are complete. I will request that you allow me to table some of the documents. We have the land documents for the 500 acres that the university gave in return. The land was equally valued by Government. The Chief Government Valuer did his part and the report is here. 

We also had an Environmental Impact Assessment done on the 70 acres; it is here. I also have documents including the council resolution supporting the need for the university to have this place.

It is therefore my prayer that the honourable members consider and see the need for this university to grow and help in supporting the efforts to scale up the level of education in this country.

Mr Speaker, as I speak, I am a proud product of Gulu University. There are many other people who went through that university who are in this House. Hon. Catherine Lamwaka, the Woman Member of Parliament for Nwoya is a product of this university. Others are hon. Anthony Akol, hon. Gilbert Olanya who is seated here, hon. Judith Peace Achan and my honourable colleague, the Member of Parliament for Erute North. There are many others.

Therefore, even without having what is needed for the university to grow as required, it has already contributed significantly. I think it would be fair that we support the growth of this university. Thank you.

5.05
Ms faith nakut (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to de-gazette part of the central forest reserve at Laroo-Pece Division in Gulu City for use by Gulu University.

Gulu University has continued to exhibit excellence and is currently ranked fifth in the country. To date, the university has produced more than 18,000 graduates who are serving in many parts of the country. Therefore, the university needs adequate space that its alumni and potential students will be proud to identify with.

Gulu University championed the processes for establishing Lira and Arua colleges that are now Lira and Muni universities, which are fully-fledged and serving the communities of Lango and West Nile sub-regions. Currently, the university is working to establish constituent colleges in Moroto and Hoima to serve Karamoja and Bunyoro sub-regions. 

Given the exhibited commitment to extend university education to all sub-regions, Gulu University has not been selfish to think about the Acholi sub-region alone. With the motto, “For Community Transformation,” Gulu University continues to support our agricultural communities. For example, the initiative to process mangoes to give the local fruit farmers income is a good idea. 
Moroto Constituent College is poised to teach agriculture and veterinary medicine with the hope of raising human resources that will help Karamoja decisively on the issue of hunger. A university of this kind, in my view, needs a home of its own. I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to de-gazette part of the Central Forest Reserve at Laroo-Pece Division in Gulu City for use by Gulu University be adopted. The debate starts now.

Honourable minister, would you like to start at this point or will you respond to the debate on the motion? It might be a good idea for you to respond.

Mr keEfa kiwanuka: Mr Speaker, whereas I support the motion, there is a procedural matter I would like to raise. As you may be aware, at the heart of this is a matter of de-gazetting and gazetting. This started way back in the Ninth Parliament. In the Tenth Parliament where I was the Chairperson of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, sadly we failed to carry it through. At a point in time, we decided to have a private member’s motion and hon. Mudiimi moved the motion.

However, the Ministry of Water and Environment had a strong objection to the gazettement and de-gazettement, which we did not understand. 

Also, the mover was moved out of order that this was a matter that should be moved by the Executive. Therefore, it would be very helpful to hear from the Minister for Water and Environment whether this position has changed and also whether we should only be talking about Gulu University. To hon. Mapenduzi and others, I support the motion but should we be talking only about Gulu University or the actual issue of gazettement and de-gazettement?

The Speaker: Thank you. It is true that in the Ninth Parliament, an attempt was made to request for lots of forest reserves to be de-gazetted with alternative land being made available to take care of what the law requires and the need to fill the gap instead of removing land that was under forestry and leaving it bare. That came up and I think the motion was moved by hon. Kwizera who is now a Member of Parliament in the 11th Parliament, and I think I presided over the motion.

At that time, we were running close to the end of the term of the Parliament and there were, of course, objections about how these matters could be handled. The matter stalled and came back in the Tenth Parliament. 

The Member who then moved it in the Tenth Parliament was different. Objections were raised, just like it has been stated by hon. Keefa Kiwanuka, which were upheld by the presiding officer then. The minister said that it should be a Government motion and the Government would be preparing to bring that motion. 

Instead of bringing the motion, the minister submitted a report to Parliament, showing that those areas are under heavy forest coverage; disrupting this eco-system would be bad. The objections were now framed on a report that was made available to Parliament. I was then presiding and part of the request had come from my own district. 

I saw the report and went specifically to my area of Omoro District and the particular location. I would like to try and give information without being part of this process of debate. 

What happened then is, the report said that that particular area, which was requested for de-gazettement, had heavy tree coverage; disrupting the eco-system would be bad. The scientific names of all kinds of trees were mentioned as well as the dates and ages of those forests and trees; 40 and 50 years. 

I am now 56 years old but I have never seen one tree in those areas that were in question. There were trees which were 40 years or 50 years old but my naked eye could not see these trees in the area that the district had requested to get a de-gazettement. 

I asked the minister: “Honourable minister, are you really sure about some of the reports that you bring to the House? I would want us to take a drive to Omoro and look at the area that the district had asked for de-gazettement and see if there is any single tree, apart from a few mango trees that had been planted by people who were settled there.” However, we never had the opportunity to do this.

Therefore, even that objection had issues. The report that was presented to the House was extremely misleading, which is unfair. For example, the one of Mbarara – the report for Mbarara also cited the existence of huge trees that are 50 years old but there is not a single tree there; there are buildings.  

Therefore, in these circumstances, looking at the realities that we have - Gulu University is saying that based on the agreement and directive by the President, they gave out money and went and built on the 70 acres that they were given. You are now saying that they should not de-gazette but there are double-storied and three-floor buildings up there. What are you going to do with them?

The procedural point you have raised touches on these objections that ordinarily have no basis, by the way, because the alternatives being given - 70 acres for 500 acres – if I was the Government, I would jump on it to go and put this under tree coverage because what they are trying to hold onto has not a single tree, apart from – in the case of Gulu - a few Mvule trees along police and other places, which is not part of the 70 acres. The 70 acres being asked for are under buildings. 

Does it make ordinary sense for us to continue pursuing this line or should we go on the ground, if we need to, and have a practical survey and handle this on a case-by-case basis –(Applause) – so that we go to Gulu University and look at this and say, “Eeh, this is the 70 acres; all these buildings! Okay? Where is the land? These are the documents for the land…” - and you solve this matter instead of jamming the system with inaccurate reports - in fact, for being within parliamentary language. I will try to restrict myself to the kind of language I use, especially as presiding officer. 

I think let us be practical on this matter so that – anyway, let me stop here. However, on your procedural matter, that is what happened. If this House feels that we should wait and have the whole forest reserves for other places like Mukono, Mbarara, Lira, Mbale, Arua, Soroti and all the urban areas – they were trying to say that we need room for expansion but we have alternative land. 

However, for the one where they are saying that we have room for expansion, they have already covered it with buildings; most of them. I think we should be practical about this matter so that we remain relevant to what is on the ground rather than citing scientific names of trees that have never even been planted in those places. It does not make sense. It makes us look bad. That is my guidance on that matter. 

If I was to give guidance, I would say that the request from Gulu University has come and they have cited, in the motion, what they have cited. Whether they are factual or not, somebody can contradict them. Did the President make a directive? That can be verified - I am sure the letters are there. Do they have land that they have given as an alternative - the 500 acres for 70 acres? The honourable member was about to lay the document on the Table saying they have the land, which they are ready to do the swapping with. How much land is requested for out of 243 acres? They are asking for 70 acres within Gulu City to accommodate the interest. Therefore, it is up to you, Members. That is my guidance. 

Debate starts and, in these circumstances, given this background, I would like the minister to say something and then we will come and have a debate. 

5.19 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (MS Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank hon. Mapenduzi, one of my sons, for moving this motion.

Mr Speaker, I have listened to your guidance and when I learnt of this motion, as a ministry, we prepared for it. With your guidance, allow me to give facts as they are and then Members are free to debate because this is a House, where debate takes the day. 

As the Government, we do not block debate especially on the issue at hand of forest cover in Gulu for Gulu University. However, we want to follow the law. We want the facts correct and logic to take centre stage. Mr Speaker, give me a bit of patience. This is a very important motion and a very important decision that we want to take, as people’s representatives.

The National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 provides for the conservation, sustainable management and development of forests for the benefit of the people of Uganda and declaration of forest reserves for the purpose of protection and production of forests and forest products, respectively. 

Since the 1970s and 1980s, the political, social and economic problems Ugandans experienced affected the management of this natural resource - I will just go through what I wanted to give details on because of the time factor. 

A lot of encroachment took place. The places we are talking about originally had forest cover but because of political, social and economic problems, they were encroached on.

Subsequently, some urban councils, municipalities and town council sought degazettement of the central forest and local forest reserves of the protected areas situated in their localities and Gulu Forest is one of those under that category.

Mr Speaker, degazettement or request for degazettement of all urban forest reserves in the country was put across to the Government. We evaluated the requests and reported. We even communicated to the urban authorities as a result of their requests.
Mr Speaker, as you had already highlighted and for the record, I have a whole booklet of all the requests, which were made in urban centres to the Government for degazettement and Gulu is among those- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What matter honourable?

MR ABDULLAH KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, I see the minister is reading something to do with a report that is not uploaded -

THE SPEAKER: No, that is just her notes for response to the debate. It is a response to request for the degazettement of Gulu Central Reserve Forest. Those are just notes.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, we are talking about the future of our country and at this point, it is all of us. Thank you for taking time to concentrate on this.

Mr Speaker, as I was submitting, I stated that we have started to evaluate these requests but I will concentrate on Gulu among the many.  We were able to communicate - good enough, the mover of the motion has also indicated that there was communication between my ministry and the authorities in Gulu about this.

What I want to put on record is the alternative land. Mr Speaker, when you are degazetting, there is a procedure to follow. When we were communicating, we even attached what should be followed to enable the request to be made. The latest is the communication from my permanent secretary, who wrote to the Town Clerk of Gulu Municipal, which was in February, 2020. That was also a follow up on one we had written in November 2019.

The issues, which we had raised here is the criteria. The alternative land was not available. It is actually here that what they were giving us was land – let me read it here. It states, “Land for degazettement: The ministry in collaboration with stakeholders did a countryside assessment of all urban forest reserves, Gulu Municipality had secured an exchange land in line with National Forestry and the Tree Plant Act, 2003.” 

This exchanged land was even smaller and supposed to have expired by then. We did respond to that and advised them to go and make it better. As it is being reported in the motion, we do not have a concluded resolution of the land, which is in another district. We hear of a resolution of the land in Gulu yet the land is situated in another district. We would have wanted it to be beefed up. The procedures were not met and that was an issue. Our valuer did not carry out an evaluation of the central forest. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to draw the attention of the House that we are part of Gulu University. I remember when Kitgum branch was opened, I spearheaded the campaign to have the graduation take place in Kitgum to motivate our young generation to go and study and some benefited. As a result, my family, Mzee Ochan Lamola and Mzee Daria Ongori gave 100 acres of free land to Gulu University for expansion. They were supposed to go and establish a constituency college of agriculture. It is now coming to seven years down the road and nothing has been done on the land - 

THE SPEAKER: Clarification is for the Member holding the Floor. So, if she can yield the Floor -

MS ANYWAR: Can I conclude. You are the mover of the motion and we want facts on the ground. As I speak, the ministry is waiting for those to be normalized. However, at a personal level and what we are battling with as a country, I think that we would be doing a lot by conserving every little green that we have in this country so that the beauty of every city coming up is green. With the pollution we have in these cities, we need those trees to help us.

The directive of H.E the President, which is being referred to -I have the current document by the President and it was authored on 20 July 2021 and it is one of the working documents of conservation of the environment.

I pray that we consider many other things like the expansion of the university - actually, even Pader. I am happy that the vice chancellor is here. Pader was willing to give them even more than 200 acres of free land to extend. Gulu University is for Acholi Sub-region and so, it would make sense to have constituencies in all other surrounding districts so that everybody is put on board. 
If we already have the main campus in Gulu, we would go out and have the constituency colleges in other districts so that we are all at per. In addition, we are willing to give even more free land, including my own family. I am not just talking for the sake of talking. Therefore, I think that this motion should not be concluded because we have all those options. Let alone, this report of having degazetted areas not only of Gulu - you see all Members are here; everybody would wish to see their land in the town and maybe get a plot or something of the sort to be degazetted.

We have actually written to our Cabinet Secretariat and we want this decision to be taken next week or in two weeks so that we come back and have a final position, basing on a working document by the President.

I do not think it would be in bad faith, if Gulu University is expanded to have constituency colleges rather than concentrating in a small town. Why should the whole of it be in town?

Mr Speaker, I still think that this House holds natural resources in trust. Ugandans want us to protect – With the effect of climate change, we cannot afford to remove a single tree. We are planting more trees, honourable colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I made a tremendous omission; I do not even know how that happened. I proposed a question without listening to the seconder of the motion. That was a great omission on my part. Maybe at this stage, hon. Ongiertho, who is the seconder of the motion, can speak and then we deal with all those other issues.

5.33
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am happy that as a seconder of the motion, I come after the minister tried to justify her refusal to have this process for degazetting this place completed as requested for by Gulu University. 

I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports. I was a member even in the 10thParliament for all the five years and I have continued because I have a passion for education. We have had several discussions with Gulu University and we could easily see from them how far they want to go. 

What was actually impeding them is the issue of the land we are talking about. Apart from Government providing support for development of the university, because of their innovation and being a science-based university, there are other organisations that want to fund their infrastructural development. However, they cannot proceed because those organisations want to see that the university is on their own land.

Recently, I was on this taskforce, which looked at the COVID-19 support – not the one of the relief fund. When we were there, Gulu University presented and we also saw that apart from what people were talking about; Covidex, Gulu University had also gone far and come up with a concoction that could help with the COVID-19 fight. Therefore, a university that has this kind of innovation should not be stifled. 

Mr Speaker, I feel saddened that in the name of now trying to protect the environment, the minister wants to stifle the university and is providing an alternative by saying: “Now, you put a constituent college there.” They first need to grow within Gulu itself. Go on Bombo Road after Kawanda and look at where Kiri soda is. You mean degazetting the place in Gulu is worse than where Kiri soda is now where a whole wetland was reclaimed and now you have construction there?

How many of such are there in this country and we have been watching? We think for Gulu University we can now say, “You can go here and there.” No, I think if there is something else, you need to tell us. 

By the way, I also know that there are people who are saying, “We have given land here,” because they want to fizzle out Gulu University from its original location. Mr Speaker, I think this should not be allowed. That is my submission. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must confess from the onset that I observed the honourable lady and minister, who is an old friend, make her submission and I got lost. For lack of a better word, not to really ingrate the integrity of the House, I thought that the debate was actually becoming vulgar that a Government minister is submitting on a Government university and between her and the Members bringing a motion on a Government university, they have not found consensus. This really got me a bit lost.

Mr Speaker, we are here debating this because the ministry in charge has let this country down.

THE SPEAKER: The procedure?

MR MPUUGA: Right now, we are wondering whether hon. Mapenduzi is submitting for a personal facility to build a hostel and therefore, he is pleading before the House and the minister is saying “No, you cannot.” 

Wouldn’t it be really safe and decent that you consider sending this matter to the Committee on Education and Sports to evaluate the efficacy of the minister’s seemingly lost submissions? Clearly, the university has put up facilities on this land. The honourable Member is submitting that actually, there is a memorandum of understanding between the university and NFA. I find it a bit problematic that we are going to put the two Members to come here and counter each other on the extent of facts in this whole matter.

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be safe for you to order that a committee evaluates and reports very fast because part of what we are debating is post-mortem since the facility is funded by Government? Government offered money to the university and the Government is still thinking whether it should be or not. 

My procedural matter is, could you guide a better way of housing this so that we can save this House from this very disturbing debate between a minister of Government on a Government university and the Member volunteering to move that a Government university actually puts up infrastructure?

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I rule on this matter? – [MEMBERS: “Yes.”] – Are those Members standing volunteering to rule on my behalf? –(Laughter)– Let me give guidance on this matter and we see if we can proceed with this debate. 

I listened to the honourable minister who focused more on urban authorities seeking expansion of land for the urban settings. I also listened to the motion for a request from Gulu University, which is not an urban authority, seeking part of the 243 acres; they are seeking only 70 of it, leaving 173 still under the National Forestry Authority. That is what the motion is seeking. 

The documents that I need to see are the documents that hon. Ojara Mapenduzi wanted to present on the alternative land that had been found in another district and whether the processes in that particular “thing” had been completed to facilitate a swap.
What is being proposed is certainly going to make sense because right now, Gulu University is only seeking to authenticate its ownership of the land on which its buildings stand. 

Because the buildings are standing, they now want to get under Government regulations that all public institutions should have land titles. I think that is what they are seeking to achieve. Otherwise, the buildings are already there and so, there is no rush.

The minister also still has 173 acres for National Forestry Authority to replant the trees that they are saying they want to replant. In the meantime, the 173 acres can receive tree seedlings, that is if the land is there unused. You can use the 173 acres.

Just pause the 70 acres and I will go with the proposal that has been made by the Member for Masaka. It might look funny, looking at it in another angle with the way we are proceeding - it might look very interesting to observers that we are proceeding the way we are proceeding.

Secondly, the argument that Gulu University was for Acholi is not sustainable because Gulu University is opening up a constituent college in Hoima and Moroto in Karamoja, from the motion that has been read. 

I think we should leave this line because it is a national institution, same with Mbarara University of Science and Technology, where many students study from. Students from West Nile are there. We have graduates of Mbarara University of Science and Technology who come from West Nile. And so, the whole country is just moving around, going to institutions of their choices. Gulu University, as I speak, has so many students from over all the country and abroad.

I think we should abandon the issue of the Acholi for Gulu University and just have it as an institution in Acholi but not for the Acholi. It is there already; it is built on the land, which belongs to the Acholi people. So, we should leave it at that.

I think the best way to proceed with this motion, honourable members, is we should not have two debates on this matter. I am going to suggest that we refer this matter to the Committee on Education and Sports and give it a clear timeline of not 45 days but three weeks. 

The three weeks that we are going to give them – so, we are not going to debate further. We are going to give them three weeks to go and establish some of the facts that are now being contested; while the land already has buildings, the land that had been offered is not actually there and all the surrounding facts. They then can advise us, when they come back after three weeks, on how to handle this matter.

So, the matter is substantially referred to the Committee on Education and Sports to handle and then we proceed from there. The matter is handed over to the committee. Is the chairman of the committee here? Is any member of the Committee on Education and Sports here? 

The instructions are to you to look at these matters and see how you can guide the House to proceed with this particular motion and then the debate on the motion will continue and then we take an appropriate decision.

DR KEEFA KIWANUKA: My procedural matter, Mr Speaker, is that whereas you have rightly ruled on this matter, how are we dealing with the bigger issue of the actual gazettement and degazettement, which has stalled for the last seven years or so?

In my feeling, there is a lot for the natural environment to benefit from. For instance, Gulu University we are talking about is talking about giving land to replace what they already occupy and have already built on. 

However, there are 22 other areas across the country in urban areas, which are talking about the same thing. They are saying, “Let us give you land, in replacement of what we are occupying now so that you can plant the forest there.” However, the ministry is saying, no.

Mr Speaker, can we have clear criteria. The minister - and we have worked very well in the last many years - raised something which is new, according to what came out in July. Can we also know what the new criteria are that have now come up –

THE SPEAKER: Which thing? Was it a document or –(Laughter)– are you referring to a document or just something?

DR KEEFA KIWANUKA: She was waving a document. She said it is from the President or something like that. Wouldn’t it be –? 

THE SPEAKER: You know, you need to protect the Hansard. When people read the Hansard, 20 years from now and they come across a record saying that the MP said, “The minister was waving “something.”

DR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, the minister was waving a document. She said it was from the President and that it came out in July. I think all that adds to the debate that we are having.

Can we now at least proceed with clear criteria of what is going to be followed, in order to replace the forests that we have? I thought you can guide on that.

THE SPEAKER: Can I rule on the procedural matter please, honourable members? The facts as before us now, which need verification, are that the 70 acres in question already have buildings on them. That fact needs verification.

Secondly, in replacement of the 70 acres, Gulu University – not Gulu Local Government or Gulu City Authority – has obtained land - 500 acres, to replace the 70 acres. We need to verify and look at the documents that are there to see.

If these facts are true, then there will be no need for a debate. Will there be a debate? How do you debate this very obvious thing? You are coming; you want to degazette the land on which this Parliament sits and there is a whole huge parliamentary building on the land. If you do not degazette, what happens to the buildings? Do you turn them to trees? 

These are practical things we need to verify and see if there are solutions to them. As for the bigger matter, which all the urban authorities seeking to swap land within the law so that they can expand, that matter is not before me now. I will deal with it when you bring it formally and I give guidance on it formally.

For now, I have this Gulu University issue only. My earlier suggestion was that instead of bringing them together, it might be better to handle them on a case-by-case basis. It does not matter how long it will take us but each request should come and be considered on its own merit; rather than using parameters of what applies in another place to limit the possibilities of what is obtaining in another place. Is that okay?

The matter is referred to the Committee on Education and Sports and so, debate on this matter is closed. (Applause)

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO URGENT QUESTION

5.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a response to a question raised by hon. Enos Asiimwe, the Member of Parliament for Kabula County, on continued livestock quarantine in Cattle Corridor due to Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) during the Seventh Sitting of the First Meeting of the 11th Parliament of Uganda. 

I will begin by giving the description and the background of FMD and its occurrence in Uganda, so that Members appreciate and understand the magnitude of the problem.

FMD is endemic in Uganda and is documented as being under surveillance by 1936 and the first serotype to be detected was Serotype A in West Buganda and Ankole in 1953. 

FMD is a highly contagious viral disease primarily of domestic cloven-hoofed animals (ruminants and swine). Worldwide, FMD has been reported in cattle, domestic buffalo, goats, sheep and swine. It has also been reported in over 70 species of wild animals. Of particular importance are the antelopes and buffalo in Uganda. 

Transmission of the FMD virus can occur by direct or indirect contact (through contaminated fomites). The most common mode of transmission is through the inhalation of infected aerosols from viremic animals (transmission through the air either in close quarters or through wind-borne aerosols from 60kms on land or 300kms over the sea where there is high humidity, low UV concentration and low temperatures). 

There are seven serotypes of FMD virus, that is; SATI, SAT2, SAT3, O, A, C and Asia l that affect cloven-hoofed animals, including domestic and wild animals related to cattle, sheep, goats and pigs. In Uganda, the common strains prevalent are: SAT1, SAT2, O and A. 

Infection with only one serotype does not confer immunity against another and, in essence, the serotype and their many sub-serotypes are like different FMD diseases in Uganda and the region.  

The virus causes high fever for two or three days, followed by vesicles inside the mouth, mammary glands and on the feet that may rupture to blisters and cause drooling of saliva and lameness. 

FMD has a short incubation period (time from infection with the virus to the time of clinical manifestation of the disease). An infected animal is able to shed a large amount of virus in one to two days before manifestation of clinical signs and seven to 10 days after infection. 

Cattle and pigs are able to secrete (from all body fluids) an estimated amount of 10 million to 10 billion infective doses per day. A milking cow has a capacity to secrete the virus in milk to the tune of five million infective doses per milliliter. 

The disease is characterised by a carrier state. The carrier state in cattle has been reported to be up to three-and-a-half years. Sheep and goats can also be carriers. The carrier rate within the African Buffalo is 50 per cent to 70 per cent in our national parks and game reserves for a duration of up of five years. In other words, if the cow has recovered from FMD, clinically, you may not see that it has the virus but if you test samples from the throat and the saliva, you may find the virus, which may not be active. When the cow gets weak and it is under stress, then the virus may reoccur and it is the same with buffalos.  

The disease can lead to extreme economic “paralysis” because it renders the animals unthrifty with low milk production, weight loss due to the painful lesions (vesicles and erosions in the mouth). This is further compounded by the lameness due to lesions in the feet. This loss of productivity can last for a considerable period. Animals cannot be sold because they have lost their health condition and may be carrying the virus. Much as there are no known antivirals, costs for treatment of secondary bacterial infection can be prohibitively high. 

Generally, since 1993, following a policy in which aspects of delivery of public veterinary services were decentralised, the frequency of FMD outbreaks has been on the increase. This is because decentralisation, in a way, broke down the chain of command. In disease control, especially for livestock and human beings, we need an effective one chain of command so that if the order is from the top, it should be followed to the bottom. 

The exception was between 2006 and 2016 when ring vaccination was aggressively combined with field enforcement and effective control of animal movements, which limited movement of infected animals and animal products. 

Within this period - January 2020 to August 2021 - the data shows that 100 districts were reported to have had at least one FMD outbreak of which 51 per cent of the outbreaks were in the districts of the cattle corridor, while 33 per cent occurred in districts sharing international borders with countries like Kenya, Tanzania, South Sudan and DRC. 

The rest, 16 per cent, occurred sporadically or in districts neighbouring the outbreak districts and game parks. Outbreaks are recorded to occur more in extensive system of production compared to intensive and semi-intensive system. Here we mean where people graze communally, we have a very big challenge of controlling FMD. Such a production system is prone to FMD outbreaks. 

Often by the time FMD is detected, the disease will have spread out quite significantly. Some farmers hide information from their neighbours and this behaviour has been rampant and has damaged our production system significantly. When farmers detect FMD in their cattle, sometimes they do not want to report. They want to continue selling their milk and other animal products. They try to do things quietly. 

Current FMD situation and quarantine restrictions in the cattle corridor

This has been the concern of the members. Not all livestock in the cattle corridor districts are under quarantine restrictions. It has affected subcounties/town councils in the districts in the high-risk areas that have quarantine restrictions in place. There are also other districts outside the cattle corridor that were under quarantine restrictions. 

Since February 2021, a number of districts reported FMD outbreaks and after a laboratory confirmation, the affected subcounties/town councils were placed under quarantine restrictions. These districts included: Kiruhura, Mbarara, Isingiro, Lyantonde, Wakiso, Gomba, Kalungu, Kazo, Bukomansimbi, Kiboga, Kiryandongo, Kyankwanzi, Masindi, Mukono, Nakaseke, Nakasongola, Rakai, Rubirizi, Ssembabule, Ibanda, Wakiso, Sironko, Serere, Kyegegwa, Ntungamo, Bukwo, Bulambuli, Ntoroko, Nwoya, Karenga and Kalangala. 

The quarantine restrictions were put in place to prevent the spread of Foot and Mouth Disease and clean areas in the district through animal movements. Usually, there is animosity to comprehensive quarantine restrictions in the cattle keeping communities since no sales of livestock or livestock products are allowed at all. This creates undue anxiety and leads to outright violation of quarantine restrictions leading to further spread and persistence of the disease in the area and beyond. I wish to request Members to support preventive measures so that we free Uganda from trade limiting diseases like Foot and Mouth Disease.

In most cases, Members of Parliament are always concerned about the quarantine because the traders and farmers are crying. However, the most primary issue should be to fight the disease. Therefore, we would like to call upon you to help us so that we can prevent these diseases and free the livestock business and trade internationally.

It is also important to note that the ministry has lifted quarantine restrictions in a number of sub-counties in some districts that were found to be free from circulating the Foot and Mouth Disease virus. This was based on the laboratory evidence and they include: Sironko, Panya in Panyangara Sub-county, Mayuge in Bukatube Sub-county, Sembabule in Mitima Sub-county, Kaboong in Kaboong Town Council, Nakasongola in Nakitooma, Migyera and Kalongwe Sub-counties, Abim District in Abim Kilak and Abim Town Council, Busia in Buteba Sub-county, Mubende in Butorogo Sub-county, Rubirizi in Ryeru and Magambo Sub-counties, Kapchorwa in Kapleiko and Nakapiripirit in Kakomongele and Nakapirpirit Town Council, Katakwi in Ngariam Sub-county and Kamuli in Kagumba Sub-county.

We are verifying the situation in other districts and as we speak, most of the districts have been freed from Foot and Mouth Disease because we provided vaccines and we have sensitised the local communities. We have engaged the local leadership so that we speak one language and fight the disease effectively.

Mr Speaker, these are the disease control strategies we have applied in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

The Animal Disease Act, Cap 38 mandates the ministry to prevent and control all animal diseases of epidemic and notifiable nature such as Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD). The ministry has deployed several measures to prevent and control Foot and Mouth Disease, which include but are not limited to the following:

    i) Carried out strategic/ring vaccinations of herds of cattle in the affected sub-counties in a number of districts to contain the disease. However, this has been affected by inadequate Foot and Mouth Disease doses to cover a large livestock population. The ministry procured 2.3 million Foot and Mouth Disease doses to carry out strategic vaccination of animals in different and high-risk areas. So far, 1.4 million doses have been supplied by the ministry to affected districts.

    ii) Institutional quarantine and controlling animal movement and their products to control the spread of the disease. Local governments are responsible for enforcement of quarantine restrictions imposed by the ministry as stipulated in the Animal Disease Act Cap 38. In addition, the ministry established an agricultural police unit to support enforcement and regulatory activities such as animal movement control. Enforcement and regulatory functions of the ministry are being strengthened.

I would like to inform the House that because of shortage of vaccines, we have only targeted the affected areas, high risk areas and transit routes. The good news is that results are beginning to be positive. Most of the areas are getting freed from Foot and Mouth Disease and quarantine restriction has been lifted.

    iii) Creation of mass awareness among livestock farmers, duty bearers and other key stakeholders about the socio-economic impact of the disease and its control measures. Mr Speaker, I have moved with many Members of Parliament from affected areas and we have addressed district councils, moved with Para veterinary personnel and veterinary practitioners so that we combat this menace. 

    iv) We have encouraged farmers to observe bio-security measures on their farms to prevent the entry of the Foot and Mouth Disease virus through disinfection of vehicles, proper disposal of animal waste, contaminated beddings and foodstuffs among others. 

    v) Sustained surveillance to detect any new cases of Foot and Mouth Disease by the districts and the ministry and also to guide the lifting of quarantine restrictions from affected areas.

We have however faced a number of challenges. Despite the measures put in place to prevent and control the spread of Foot and Mouth Disease, the ministry has faced a number of challenges to contain the disease which include:

    i. Underfunding to support the recommended 80 per cent vaccination coverage to cover all the susceptible animals to obtain desired herd immunity. The current vaccination rate is 5 percent and the desire of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is to vaccinate 80 per cent of the susceptible animals such as cattle, sheep, goats and pigs, every six months, to reach a recommended level of protection.

Mr Speaker, we have adopted the Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) Disease Control Path and we have requested for money. We have been promised a supplementary so that we can follow this path and trade in livestock and livestock products internationally in the short term.
    ii. Absence of appropriate veterinary infrastructure, quarantine station and holding grounds to handle sick animals and animals being moved illegally.

    iii. Inadequate logistical support such as vehicles for transportation of officials and critical animal health professionals to support surveillance, animal movement control and technical backstopping both at the centre and local Government. We must appreciate that we have created so many districts but we have not provided matching facilities especially infrastructure for veterinary.

    iv. Over dependence on external vaccine manufacturing facilities for supply of vaccines. Sometimes, the supply is erratic and inadequate. The ideal strategy would be to support local vaccines manufactured in the country. We are moving together with National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) and a private sector to put up a factory for the vaccine in Nakyesasa and we shall be producing Foot and Mouth Disease vaccine, tick vaccine and swine vaccine. The scientists have given us a timeframe that by June next year, we shall be producing the vaccine.

    v. Use of counterfeit and smuggled vaccines of unknown quality and efficacy by unscrupulous individuals who pose as veterinary workers has also complicated the Foot and Mouth Disease control in the country. Mr Speaker, we have strengthened our veterinary board, we have had a magistrate appointed to work with the board and we are trying some of these people who have been causing problems and selling fake vaccines. We have two cases being heard. 

    vi. Absence of a post Foot and Mouth Disease outbreak management strategy. This would involve establishment of methods of determining losses suffered by producers and mechanisms to compensate them. For example, a compensation policy would act as an incentive for Foot and Mouth Disease control programme rather than letting the producer/farmer suffer alone. 

This would make producers and farmers open up and report the diseases as opposed to the status quo, where producers keep quiet for fear of quarantine losses without compensation. Ultimately, Government would be able to implement “test and slaughter” policy in FMD-infected forms. I

In developed countries, when livestock suffer from FMD, immediately they organise the slaughter to eliminate. They have a compensation policy but since we are in the third world and still struggling with money even to do the production, we have not gone this far.

FMD control strategy in Uganda differs from some of our neighbours. I do not want to mention names. Here, our FMD control measure is that it is free and compulsory. However, we have some neighbours who do not care about it. You know that our colonial borders are very deceptive. There is no river or wall and people have relatives across; so, animals keep on moving –

The Speaker: Honourable minister, you may need to close. This is a response to an urgent question. You are responding to a question that was asked under urgent matters of public importance. 

Mr rwamirama: Honourable colleagues, we are working through the East African Community to make sure that we are harmonised.

In conclusion, therefore, I call upon my honourable colleagues to support the prevention and control of FMD measures and other reportable animal diseases by engaging stakeholders in constructive dialogue to adhere to disease control measures aimed at preventing further disease spread so as to realise the significant contribution of the livestock subsector, our livelihoods and national economy.

Mr Speaker, I would like to assure the Members that for most members of Parliament who are affected, we have engaged with them and provided remedies in some cases. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, I continue to insist on this point and the earlier we get to deal with this matter, the better for the House. This was raised as an urgent matter. As you can see, it should not have been raised as so because it does not fall in that category. However, it was allowed. For urgent matters normally, it is a response: “We are going to do this because this has happened.”

I have allowed you, honourable minister, because what you were dealing with is very important for people who are in the cattle corridor. That is why I used that latitude or else I should have stopped you early enough. I used my discretion to allow you finish this statement.

However, let us follow the rules. Honourable member who raised this question, this is not proper. It should not have been raised this way. Even for questions for oral answer, look at rule 47; the answers are restricted to three minutes. In other words, the answers should be succinct and to the point; no elaboration. If you want to elaborate, a minister will come with his own statement to cover the entire fabric of what the minister wants to deal with. 

When a question is asked, deal with it directly and finish then you give us time to handle many other business. There is an example of a question that is asked under questions for oral answer: “What interventions have been put in place by the ministry to stop the continuous conflict between wild animals and residents of this area?” This is from hon. Gyaviira from Buyamba County. 

You cannot bring me a 10-page document to respond to this question because the rule says three minutes. If it is too tight, I will give you an additional two minutes. Rule 47 is very clear on this.

In other words, this category of things must be handled in a very precise way but like I said, the honourable minister’s statement was important. It was almost a ministerial statement and I was almost going to allow a debate but it was brought under a completely different procedure. You do not even have supplementary questions on urgent matters, unfortunately. 

6.17
Mr enosi asiimwe (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first clarify that I raised this question during the Prime Minister’s Question Time sometime back in June when we were under human quarantine because of COVID-19. We had been under animal quarantine so at that time, I was trying to find out what we could do for the communities within the cattle corridor in consideration that we had been under quarantine for almost a year. We then had another for COVID-19.
 
I raised a question to the Prime Minister on what she could do for the communities within those areas. However, that question was never responded to. The Deputy Speaker who presided then requested that we put our questions in writing. I did but the question had never been answered until last week when it was put on the Order Paper.

Back to the issues that he has raised, I would like to thank you for giving us a chance so that the minister could respond. I appreciate the responses but my concern was more to do with our reactionary nature in handling epidemics. You find that we only do vaccination when there is an outbreak, which would have been done before. For example, we are doing vaccination a year down the road. The quarantine started last year in February but we got vaccines two months ago. My concern was more on the reactionary nature of our Government entities in dealing with these epidemics.

My other area of concern was more to do with compensation, which he has raised. These communities are affected. As you have just noted, when quarantines happen, there are no activities. There are so many individuals involved in this chain of business; those who deal in milk and meat. What does Government do to help such when you put people under quarantine for a full year and not providing alternatives for them? Thank you.

The Speaker: You can see that the matter had been lost in translation by the time it reached the minister –(Members rose_) Please, honourable members, resume your seats. I have just said it should only be a supplementary question from the Member who raised the matter.

You can see that the minister was now dealing with a more substantial issue than the question asked because by the time it reached him, it was different. It was raised as an urgent matter to specific issues; the level of preparation at that response – you only deal with things when they have already happened. Secondly, it was on issues of compensation. That was the question but now we have gone through the whole policy and response system to deal with this thing.

Honourable minister, you missed one issue of compensation. 

LT COL rwamirama: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your guidance. I thank the honourable member for clarification. We do not only vaccinate during the outbreak. As I mentioned in the paper - and I had mentioned in this House before, we have been getting very few doses of vaccines.

We have been administering them strategically to high risk areas, affected areas and transit routes. However, this time around, I do not know what happened. There was a breakdown in the system in 2019. We had FMD spreading all over and we could not manage routine vaccine to spread outside substantively but we are now going to ensure that we vaccinate regularly; every six months in the high risk areas, affected areas and transit routes. 

High risk areas are those neighbouring the border with our countries where we know the risk of Foot and Mouth Disease is high; those neighbouring national parks, game parks and transit routes like Wakiso, Jinja, Bukedea, where traders use these routes. 

Compensation
Uganda and many countries in Africa have not adopted the compensation concept. We do not have the policy on compensation. We may probably rethink it now that we are looking at international markets. However, it is very expensive and I do not think we can afford it, especially with the level of our community awareness. Even when people know that there is Foot and Mouth Disease, they will have weddings. I think it is something we are going to take up and discuss further. 

I would like to thank the member because he was one of the members who went around with us when we carried out sensitisation campaigns. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Let us go to the next item.  

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 04/01/11

THE SPEAKER: Is the Member for Buyamba County here? 

6.23
MR GYAVIIRA SSEMWANGA (NRM, Buyamba County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me hope I am not late to deliver my greetings from the people of Buyamba County.

Rakai District is endowed with two strategic – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the rules say that on Questions for Oral Answer, when you get up, you just say “Question No. 04/01/11” and then they respond to it.

MR SSEMWANGA: My question is – 

THE SPEAKER: Your question number – it is on the Order Paper.  

MR SSEMWANGA: Question No. 04/01/11. 

“(i) 	What interventions have been put in place by the ministry to stop the continuous conflict between wild animals and residents of this area?

(ii) 	What arrangements are in place to compensate the people who have suffered the damages?”

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister?  

6.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Bahinduka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to respond to the question raised by hon. Gyaviira Ssemwanga, Member of Parliament for Buyamba County, Rakai District, under rule 45 of the Rules of Procedure concerning the destruction of crops and human attacks by animals, mainly hippopotamus from Kijanebalola and Kacheera lakes.

Before I answer the question, just for the information of the House, honourable members – 

THE SPEAKER: You have three minutes to answer the question. So, just answer it. 

MR BAHINDUKA: I would like to thank hon. Ssemwanga for raising the question. As we all know, the hippopotamus is an amphibious mammal, which lives in the water but grazes outside the water at night. Previously, lakeshores and river banks had extensive swamps and other vegetation, which are now all cleared with gardens going right to the water. However, these swamps and vegetation protected the people from being attacked by wildlife and/or having their crops destroyed by hippopotamus, since the hippos grazed near the water bodies.

You will also recall that the National Environment Management Act 2019, Section 53 provides for protection of riverbanks, lakeshores and natural beaches. In this section, a lakeshore is defined as land not more than l00 metres adjacent to or bordering a lake. This zone does not only help to militate against siltation out, it also provides a ranging and feeding habitat for wildlife including hippopotamus. 

If the l00-metre lakeshore (buffer) and riverbanks were maintained intact, we would have less injury and damage than occurring now. Unfortunately, almost all swamps and other vegetation have been degraded and opened up for crop cultivation, leaving the hippopotami with no alternative, hence the crop destructions.

Mr Speaker, this goes to the second question he had raised, “What interventions are being put in place by the ministry to resolve these conflicts in this area?”

The above notwithstanding, Government is undertaking various interventions.

One is that Government has established a Wildlife Management Station at Kakuuto, Kyotera District with four wildlife rangers largely to sensitise the public about wildlife and ensure rapid response to reported cases. 

The Uganda Wildlife Authority staff have conducted scare-shooting around various villages including Lwanga, Kacheera, Karyerengeza and Biwolobo. 

In 2019, the Government constructed 1,000 metres of hippo deterrent fences. The fences were demonstration fences aimed at equipping communities with skills in constructing simple wooden fences. The fences were constructed at Kakenke village, Kagamba sub-county (500m) and Kanjoki Village, Buyamba sub-county, Rakai District (500m). 

In addition to these demonstration fences, the Government has equipped the communities with skills for protecting their crops and we expect such demonstrations to be duplicated around individual gardens. Unfortunately, given the limited resource envelope, the Government is unable to construct such interventions around every garden in the various villages in the entire country as the human wildlife issues are widespread. 

Whenever it is assessed that a particular wildlife is dangerous to human life and may cause death, the Uganda Wildlife Authority, which is the Government agency responsible for wildlife management, eliminates such animals to avoid the conflict. For instance, in the last two years, two hippos, around Kanjoki in Rakai and Kyebumba in Kyotera were eliminated following assessments. 

The final question is about what arrangements are in place to compensate the people who have suffered damages.

The intervention is compassionate support, which mainly focuses on supporting communities that lose their loved ones to wildlife attacks. Compensation regulations are now completed and awaiting gazettement by the First Parliamentary Counsel and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I think these will go a long way in having this fund operational where it would create obvious compensation for all those affected by animals outside protected areas. 

We are, however, not looking at compensation as a magic bullet but rather a last alternative when prevention has failed. Our main focus will remain to prevent damage and mitigate before damage is caused.

Government is also undertaking deliberate and aggressive efforts to sensitise the community about wildlife behaviour, mitigation of attacks and harnessing wildlife through tourism. 

Mr Speaker, finally, I call upon you all, Members, to assist Government in educating our citizens at every opportunity you get about the need to conserve riverbanks and lakeshores to ensure coexistence of humans with nature. 

Like I said a few weeks ago, we will continue to work with partners, including the honourable Members of Parliament and local leaders, to implement mitigation measures, reduce costs, harness wildlife benefits and ultimately secure the much-needed community. That is the end of the question.

However, I have some information I would like to leave on the Floor. We are currently holding meetings with all members of Parliament surrounding conservation areas. We had a meeting today with members of Parliament around the Murchison Falls Conservation Area. 

Unfortunately, out of the 28 members of Parliament that we expected, we got only seven. Tomorrow, we shall have those from other areas and we are going to have meetings throughout the week. We implore Members, because we have communicated to you; you have letters in your pigeonholes. Please come and attend so that we can interact more and find a lasting solution to this. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Do you have a supplementary question, hon. Gyaviira? 

MR SSEMWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and many thanks to the honourable minister. As we speak, people are preparing their gardens in the neighbouring villages waiting for the rains to plant. I think the minister should have come up with a prompt solution to these people because, according to our plans as a country, we are targeting improving household incomes. However, it does not add up when people grow their crops but they get destroyed by animals. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, any comment on that?

MR BAHINDUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I feel sorry for the Member who has raised the question. The biggest solution to this problem will be once we have these guidelines operationalised. Just to give you a scenario, before we got into COVID-19 - The law says we should set aside 2 per cent of the funds collected by UWA for compensation. Before COVID-19, UWA was collecting around Shs 100 billion. Therefore, 2 per cent would be around 2 billion just for compensation. I think that money would go a long way to make some small contribution.

However, the challenge now is that due to COVID-19, we are contributing very little and what we have had since the fund was put in place is just 300 million. We pray that as things get better, we start with what we have for now.

Mr Speaker, within next week, we should have those guidelines in place and then start planning for compensation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Next item

6.33
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (NUP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to ask question 13/01/11.

“i. Can the Minister clarify whether Uganda recognises the Government of Kabul and the effect of hosting the refugees on our international relations with Kabul?
 
    ii.  Inform Parliament on whether there is an agreement or memorandum of understanding with the USA to host the refugees, and if so, can it be availed to Members of Parliament”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister -

6.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Henry Okello-Oryem): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank my dear sister, hon. Betty Nambooze, for the questions she raised. The first was, ”Can the minister clarify whether Uganda recognises the Government of Kabul and the effect of hosting the refugees on our international relations with Kabul?” 

The response is that the Government of Afghanistan has not been fully established and as such, there is no government to recognise at this time. The Government of Uganda, at an appropriate time, will take decisions when a fully established government is established in Afghanistan on whether or not to recognise such a government.

The second question was to inform the House on whether there is an arrangement or a memorandum of understanding with the United States to host refugees and, if so, can it be availed to Members of Parliament?

In response, Uganda is signatory to several international and regional conventions by which the Government of Uganda commits to protect persons fleeing from persecution and conflict. 

The Uganda 1995 Constitution reaffirms Uganda’s commitments to international humanitarian laws and, in line with the above, Parliament has passed progressive laws that are held in high regard and emulated the world over.

The situation in Afghanistan evolved very quickly, leading to the evacuation by several countries of their nationals and Afghans. When the Government of Uganda was approached by the United States government with a request to consider hosting, temporarily, Afghan nationals and other nationals at risk, the Government of Uganda did not hesitate to accept to consider the request. 

The decision to host them was informed and consistent with our history and Uganda’s policy of receiving refugees and persons in distress. By doing so, Uganda was also playing its responsibility role as a member of the international community. It is for that very reason that Uganda remains the largest refugee-hosting country in Africa and third in the world.

Uganda and the United States of America enjoy long-standing cordial bilateral ties, which are historical in nature. We continue to pursue common interests for the mutual benefit of both countries. 

Our engagement on this matter is testimony to the state of our relations and the attachment that the Government attaches to this relation.
 
The Government of Uganda has a framework under which it is handling this matter with the United States government. We have been handling this matter through exchange of diplomatic notes between the two governments.

On the basis of this communication, on 24 August 2021, 51 evacuees from Afghanistan arrived aboard a privately-chartered flight and were received by the Government officials and the United States Embassy at the Entebbe International Airport. 

The evacuees who included men, women and children underwent the necessary security screening as well as the mandatory COVID-l9 testing and the required quarantine procedures.

The evacuees will remain in Uganda while they are processed by the US Embassy for their onward final journey and destinations. 

It is important to note that the evacuees are not refugees but people in transit. Their processing may take a few weeks or months and while they stay in the country, the US authorities are meeting the cost of providing for their needs and requirements. 

One of the evacuees has since left the country and 50 remain and are being processed.

Finally, the Government of Uganda is glad that following its engagement with the Government of USA and other partners, 14 Ugandans were safely evacuated from Afghanistan. Some of them are in the country already. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Supplementary question from Mukono Municipality?

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the answer he has tried to give to us. Mr Speaker, Uganda has always loudly proclaimed her independence and rightly so. As we proclaim our independence, we have always told some countries to stay off issues related to internal affairs of this country. 

For us to say that there is no government in Kabul to recognise right now but there are people from that area we are hosting in Uganda - I would like to know specifically under what international obligation we are doing that. 

In addition, do all flights from Kabul to USA go through Uganda? Why, in particular, is Uganda the country hosting them and what measures have we put in place to safeguard ourselves from the anger that usually accompanies dealings between America and Afghanistan? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, supplementary question response.

MR OKELLO-ORYEM: Thank you, my dear sister, hon. Nombooze. The consideration by the Government of Uganda to host these refugees are based on the principles of our international commitment where evacuees - these are evacuees not refugees - are based on principle where Uganda has always hosted people in distress like other people in distress who are already in this country. 

To be a refugee, you have to apply to be one. In addition, before you arrive in this country, you can be a person in distress, an evacuee or an asylum seeker and until you so apply to be a refugee and are recognised by this country as a refugee, you are not a refugee.

Mr Speaker, there are no regular flights to United States that transit through Uganda – there have never been such flights. The particular group that came to Uganda came through a private-chartered flight paid by USA Government.

Our security was well considered at the highest level before the decision to host these refugees was considered; in collaboration with the US Government guaranteeing the sharing of high-level intelligence with the Government of Uganda, reassuring us over and over again about their collaboration with the Government of Uganda that every single detail of those who will come to Uganda will have protection and assistance to Uganda, if need be, on top of their security. On this basis, His Excellency the President accepts that the evacuees will come to Uganda. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I apologise for going this far but there are things that we needed to finish. For example, part of the discussions led to some of the items that came up, which were not on the Order Paper and they affected our processing of the business that was on the Order Paper. For that, I apologise to you, honourable members, that we sat this late.

Of course, there will be moments where we will be required to sit beyond this time but today, it was not intended. House adjourned to tomorrow, at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.41 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 15 September 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 







