


Thursday, 17 September 2020

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have just two matters to communicate. On Tuesday, as you recall, I informed you about the death of hon. Faith Alupo, our colleague and I informed you that we are in discussions with the family about the funeral arrangements.

I now would like to inform you that we shall have a special sitting on Tuesday next week to honour her and thereafter, they will proceed to Pallisa for the burial. Therefore, we shall not have a normal sitting on Tuesday. However, Members should come in the morning because the body will lie in State first before the special sitting in the afternoon.

Secondly, our colleague, hon. Hamson Obua, the Minister of State for Sports, has lost his mother. She passed away this morning at Kampala Hospital in Kololo. We have not yet got the dates for the burial but let us stand and observe a moment of silence in solidarity with hon. Hamson Obua. May the Lord rest the mother’s soul in eternal peace.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are no matters of national importance. However, yesterday, I indicated that a number of casino workers, not the owners, are also urging the Government and Parliament to take an interest in their livelihood because they have not been earning since March. They all have rent, water and electricity bills up to this date and are pleading for help.

I hope that the Government has or will have an opportunity to deal with this issue to alleviate the plight of that category of workers and possibly to arrange some packages for them to see them through this difficulty.

2.38
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I thank you so much for your indulgence. I would like to move straight to the issue. The issue is in relation to teachers in Government schools that do not receive salary from Government but are paid under the Parent Teacher Association (PTA) arrangements.

Madam Speaker, for the one week when I was in Gulu, I visited the Government-aided schools and found out that the greatest challenge that is ongoing is about teachers in Government schools that to date, are really suffering. 

You are aware that those in private schools have been supported to some extent and those in Government schools continue to have the basic salary. However, those that are under the PTA arrangement in Government-aided schools are totally without anybody’s support. This is one of the greatest challenges that I found out. I would like to pray that the Government of Uganda takes this matter very seriously because these teachers are under their supervision.

Lastly, the teachers in primary schools that received support from Platinum Credit; Platinum Credit continues to deduct regardless of what we said on this Floor. From May, they resumed deductions of teachers’ salaries till now. For those in Gulu, they have even never refunded what the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development talked about here on the Floor; that their money was supposed to be refunded. All these are terrible messes.

I really request the Government of Uganda to take action and investigate Platinum Microfinance Uganda because we cannot tolerate this kind of economic behavior to our teachers who are there doing their best in our schools. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. Yesterday, we urged the Government to come and speak to us on the issues of education including the welfare of the teachers. I would like to urge the Clerk to also inform the Minister of Education and Sports to come and address the issue of teachers in Government schools paid under the Parents Teachers Association arrangement and not by Government. 

Concerning the issue of Platinum, it reminds me that on the Floor of this House, there have been reports about a company called Bayport extorting money from teachers and now Platinum. I do not know why no one has investigated that issue. I do not know whom we should task this time to investigate – I think it should be the Minister of Finance because he supervises that sector. 

Let us have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Microfinance) investigate the activities of Platinum - I do not know whether it is a money lending company or an NGO that mainly targets teachers. The minister should also give us an update of Bayport, whose activities have been complained about on the Floor of this House many times without a resolution. Thank you.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON COMPENSATION OF KANUNGU ORPHANS WHOSE PARENTS PERISHED IN THE INFAMOUS KIBWETERE INFERNO IN MARCH 2000

2.43
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MS Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister has requested me to inform you that the minister in charge will be making a statement because he has been summoned to go to State House for a meeting. We have been together in the Budget Conference.

THE SPEAKER: On Kibwetere’s issue, which minister is responsible?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: The Minister of Internal Affairs.

THE SPEAKER: Tell us the minister because you are the one bringing the information. Tell us which minister so they are captured on the Hansard.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: The Minister of Internal Affairs.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, the reason we had asked the Prime Minister is because I have written three letters to him over the last one year. These people keep on coming to my office and writing to me. The Prime Minister has not answered my letters on this issue and that is why I asked him to come.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I will communicate back your concerns.

THE SPEAKER: In the meantime, the Minister for Internal Affairs should come and give us an update on the Kibwetere investigations.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION OF 3RD MAY 2018 ON PAYMENT OF MONIES OWED TO UGANDA-SOUTH SUDAN TRADERS

THE SPEAKER: As usual, the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not here. However, we resolved this week that until this matter is settled, we shall not handle the business of the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Let us proceed.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF TARMAC ROADS IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: That ministry has got three ministers. Some of them rarely attend Parliament. Honourable Government Chief Whip, I hope you can also whip the ministers because they are supposed to be here to answer these questions. 

This is an old matter and it was raised before we went for the primaries. I know that at least one of those ministers was not involved in the primaries; she should be here to answer questions.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE COMPLAINTS BY INDIVIDUALS WHO WERE REPATRIATED FROM VARIOUS COUNTRIES WHERE THEY HAD BEEN STRANDED DUE TO THE COVID-19 LOCKDOWN AND QUARANTINED AT SHERATON HOTEL FOR THE OBLIGATORY 14 DAYS YET UPON EXPIRY OF THE DAYS, THEY WERE UNJUSTIFIABLY RETAINED FOR AN ADDITIONAL 3 DAYS WITHOUT TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE EXPENSES INVOLVED

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Health? Again this ministry has more than one minister. No excuse has been given for their absence. At the end of this, I am going to make a statement, which should be published widely that we have failed to do business because the ministers are not here. 

Sometimes, we are accused in fora where we are not that Parliament has delayed the work. Now, I would like it to be on record that each time they fail to come, we should publish it. They are not here.

The next item is also for the Ministry of Health. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE EVALUATION OF COVID-19 GUIDELINES AND RESPONSES

THE SPEAKER: They are absent again. Go to the next one.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, again, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has requested me to inform you that the President is going to address us on Saturday, which is the day after tomorrow and that most of these issues would probably be addressed by His Excellency the President. I am just communicating a message from the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business.

THE SPEAKER: You are now asking us to speculate on what the President might say.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is a member of the National Taskforce on COVID-19. I assume that he will be able to inform the President as they discuss what issues are supposed to be delivered to the nation.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, after that statement, if there are matters, which are not answered in the President’s speech, we shall keep them on the Order Paper so that they are answered here. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE ALLEGED CONSIDERATION BY THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION NOT TO NOMINATE PERSONS WHOSE NAMES ON THE NATIONAL IDS DIFFER FROM THOSE ON THEIR ACADEMIC TRANSCRIPTS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very serious issue especially during this season when people are preparing for nomination. It is important that the Government gives us proper answers on this issue. 

Therefore, we shall retain the matter on the Order Paper so that the minister comes on Wednesday to answer this question.

2.48
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you for asking the Electoral Commission and Government particularly to explain that.

I would like to seek your indulgence on one thing. First, it is the timing; we are going into electioneering. Secondly, there is the component of court. It is also allowed in court that you can swear an affidavit just in case your names do not correspond. I do not know whether the Electoral Commission is going to take over the work of court.

I think an explanation must be made as to what the Electoral Commission is legally allowed to do or that court has the mandate to scrutinise that.

THE SPEAKER: That is why we would like the minister to come because this is an urgent issue so the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs must answer this question on Wednesday.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE UNCOORDINATED COMMUNICATION AND LACK OF CLARITY BY THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE PLANNED RE-OPENING OF ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS

THE SPEAKER: They are not here.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, Cabinet discussed this matter on Monday and I am sure that the President is going to make an announcement on Saturday. I was present in Cabinet when it was discussed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just place on record that eight items on the Order Paper have not been handled because of the absence of the ministers. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE PETROLEUM AUTHORITY OF UGANDA ANNUAL REPORT, 01 JULY 2016 TO 30 JUNE 2017

2.52
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table the Annual Report for the Financial Year 2016/2017 on the Petroleum Authority of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Natural Resources for perusal and report back.

THE PETROLEUM AUTHORITY OF UGANDA ANNUAL REPORT, 01 JULY 2018 TO 30 JUNE 2019

2.52
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Petroleum Authority of Uganda Annual Report for 01 July 2018 to 30 June 2019. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is committed to the Committee on Natural Resources for perusal and report back.

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF PETROLEUM AUTHORITY OF UGANDA – PAU FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2019

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask hon. Bahati to lay that report for us?

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the Petroleum Authority of Uganda for the Financial Year ended 30 June 2019.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Public Accounts Committee, Commissions on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Prime Minister. Let us go to item six.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON THE PETITION OF THE FEDERATION OF UGANDA MEDICAL INTERNS CONCERNING TRAINING, SERVICE DELIVERY AND THE WELFARE OF UGANDA JUNIOR HEALTH WORKERS

THE SPEAKER: Any member of the Committee on Health? Let us move to the next one.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES ON GOVERNMENT’S PROPOSAL TO CONSTRUCT A HYDROPOWER GENERATION PLANT OVER MURCHISON FALLS

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson Committee of Natural Resources? Not here; they were also not here yesterday.

2.56
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You recall when the forest in Bundibugyo was massively destroyed, your Chair did direct this very chairperson to come up with a report about what exactly happened in Bundibugyo and you gave two weeks. However, the two weeks have gone beyond months.

Madam Speaker, I just wanted to get your guidance on how this chairperson should be handled because he has not fulfilled his role. What do we do, Madam Speaker?

2.57
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker and colleagues, the committee is finalising the report right now. They are in Jinja. I tried to call the chairperson and he promised me that they would be ready next week.

MR NZOGHU: I just wanted the Government Chief Whip to explain clearly whether she is also talking about the Bundibugyo report or you are talking about this particular report that is here on the Order Paper.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, the Clerk called item seven and this item is very clear. The Chairperson on the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources is supposed to present this report. I thought that my colleague understood me very clearly that I called the chairperson regarding item seven and this is the response I got.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, our rules are very clear that by the time an item appears on the Order Paper, it must be work that Parliament is supposed to process. How did this item appear? I did not understand the Government Chief Whip and that is why I asked whether the issue of Bundibugyo is part of the report that they are working on in Jinja? If it is so, why is on the Order Paper when it is not yet ready?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Committee of Natural Resources and Environment is directed to accomplish all their necessary work and be ready to present next week on item seven, eight, nine and 10. 

MR NZOGHU: I am seeking your indulgence that you also add the Bundibugyo report. The people of Bundibugyo are waiting for what Parliament is doing and see what they can do.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the chairperson will update us on how far they have gone on the issue of the Bundibugyo forest, which was brought to the floor of this House. Skip item No.11, let us go to item No.12

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO ALLOW CONTRIBUTORS ACCESS THEIR SAVINGS WITH THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND IN LIGHT OF THE ECONOMIC DISTRESS CAUSED BY THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

THE SPEAKER: But yesterday I asked the whips of all the parties to whip their members. Can I know where the members of the NRM, FDC, UPC, DP and the member for JEMA and Independents are?

3.01
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am moving under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to allow contributors access their savings with the National Social Security Fund in light of the economic distress caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

“WHEREAS section 2 of the National Social Security Fund Act Cap. 222 establishes a National Social Security Fund, into which there is paid all contributions made by members of the Fund and out of which payment is made to eligible beneficiaries;

AND WHEREAS section 19 of the National Social Security Fund Act limits access to member's contribution in circumstances where the member reaches the prescribed age, is suffering from permanent total incapacity, or emigrates permanently from Uganda
or upon the death of the contributor, if he or she is a survivor of the deceased person;

AWARE that the NSSF has about 1.5 million members who contribute to the fund every month, has an asset base of about 11.3 trillion and receives about 1.028 Trillion as member's contributions annually;

FURTHER AWARE that in March 2020, the Government of Uganda announced an outbreak of the viral disease (COVID-19) in Uganda and issued guidelines to curb the spread of the disease;

RECOGNISING THAT the COVID-19 guidelines, though necessary, have heavily impacted on industrial production, sales and investments and have resulted in the layoff or non-payment of the emoluments of employees and has generally affected the performance of the economy;

FURTHER RECOGNISING that the NSSF has recognised the economic distress and hardship faced by businesses and has allowed businesses to suspend member contributions for the next three months without incurring a penalty; 

APPRECIATING that although the NSSF assisted businesses by suspending contributions, it has not assisted its contributors through allowing them access part of their savings, considering that most of them are facing dire economic strain, are unemployed or are going without emoluments in the near future;

FURTHER APPRECIATING THAT most of the NSSF contributors have no access to alternative source of income, cannot borrow from financial institutions since they don't have security to guarantee such borrowing, and saved with the NSSF, under the reasonable belief that the fund will act as their social security net during times of uncertain economic environment;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this House that Government considers allowing contributors to the NSSF fund, access some of their savings held in the NSSF fund during the period when Uganda is dealing with the COVID-l9 pandemic.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Yes, minister.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I appreciate hon. Nzoghu for his motion, which I guess is timely. However, the procedural matter I am raising is how we shall proceed with the motion that is making certain prayers, well aware that following to that, we have a Bill substantially here in Parliament, whose debate is about to ensue, where similar issues are part of the Bill. How are we going to handle the motion, which urges Government to take action, yet already action is taken and an amendment Bill is on the Floor? I seek your guidance on how we shall proceed with the motion, well aware of the Bill before Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the Member brought the matter to us, we already had the Bill before the committee. Therefore, it was not possible to actually put it on the Order Paper because it would interfere with the work of the committee. Now that the committee has reported, we can debate them together and take a decision. 

Where are the Members? Was the motion seconded? (Interjection) Okay, justify.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The contributions to the NSSF are drawn largely from the contributors, from private sector employers and Government on behalf of the contractual staff. The contributors are estimated to be 1.5 million members, and the contributions they make are meant to cushion contributors against income and consumption shocks. 

Section 19 of the NSSF Act envisions such shocks to include retirement, immigration from Uganda and death. At the time of the development of the law, the world had never had a lockdown as is the case during the time of the COVID-19 pandemic. 

The magnitude of the shock realised from this pandemic measures up to the visioned shocks of the Act. People are no longer working, their salaries foregone and some have been laid off by their employers massively. This has a ripple effect on the functioning of the economy. The section of the economy that has felt the blunt wrath is the informal sector. Its survival is largely hinged on the people employed in the formal sector and this is mainly realised through the purchasing of different goods and services.

It is also important to note that those employed in the formal sector have a high dependency burden and lives of many Ugandans, including family members, relatives and friends depend on them. In such times, therefore, it is prudent to consider granting contributors access to partial payments from the NSSF contributions. This would lessen the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the households of the 1.5 million members.

While the three months’ NSSF amnesty granted to employers in distress is welcome. Based on the equity terms, it is critical that appropriate interventions are made for the actual contributions.

Madam Speaker, there is no point for the contributors to die of hunger and stress, only for dependents to access and enjoy their savings. Government is sustained by a healthy and living population - not the dead. Hence, the argument by NSSF that Government would be severely affected by the partial payments is insensitive. NSSF is more concerned with the sustainability of Government than with the lives of the contributors. One wonders why a social security manager would transfer the burden of assisting his contributors to Government that seeks to exploit the available contributions.

It is against this basis, that I implore Government to table an amendment to the NSSF Act, to permit partial payments to contributors so as to lessen the economic impact of COVID-19. The proposal is that the Members at least, access 20 per cent of their contributions so that they are able to survive with their families and to overcome any death trap that could come their way just because they are not able to match their lives. I would like to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We have listened to the justification. Honourable members, there are certain areas of commonality; I think the common one is about the status quo of waiting until the age of 50 years. There is also the proposal that there be partial access; the quantum is not well known until it is agreed upon here. 

Yesterday, the minority report brought out other proposals and the main report also brought out proposals. I think the area is really access or no access or how much, and I think that is where the contention is. You are free to debate; when we come to the prayers, we shall take them vote by vote. The debate is generally now over the whole Bill. Although I am not very comfortable, let us start; maybe others are coming.

3.12
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support my colleague. Today, in the morning, we were in Munyonyo meeting with the Ministry of Public Service over the same.

Madam Speaker, almost 63 per cent of the contributors to the NSSF are from the private sector. Those are the private schools and industries, e.t.c., which have been highly affected by this COVID-19 and they are unable to operate even at 10 per cent capacity.

A hotel as big as Speke Resort Munyonyo is operating at below 5 per cent, meaning that most the staff are at home. Their only hope is this House and that is why they allowed us to cancel our meeting of 2.00 p.m so that we could join our colleagues because everybody’s hopes are in this House. They expect us to make some resolution that will see them access some of their money as we work on the other modalities. 

What does it help someone to have Shs 8,000,000 when they cannot access even Shs 20,000? It is us to come up with a common figure here. We can say that those who are above this can access maybe Shs 500,000 or one million so that they can survive and start up other businesses. 

We have come to know that only 36 per cent of the people saving with NSSF are from Government. Those are fully paid and they include mainly teachers, nurses and we, here. Otherwise, those in the private sector are really badly off. 

That is why I strongly recommend and support that this House comes up with a solution to address people’s suffering by helping them access a certain percentage. We are sure that that cannot lead to the collapse of the NSSF because they have so many investments. The profits that they declared last year are in billions of money. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we also have submissions on the Bill? 

3.15
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have come to support –(Interruption)– terrible one. I think, the NSSF Act provides windows for accessing these funds, especially when one becomes disabled permanently and they cannot go back to work or when they have lost their job for good. 

However, the COVID-19 pandemic has created a disabling environment. It has disabled people completely, especially those who had been working but have now been laid off. 

You cannot stay hungry and die when your money over there is not being used. I think this is the opportunity to help our people to use that money to survive. When this money is released, it will circulate in the community and our economy will survive. 

Madam Speaker, developed countries provide money to those who do not have jobs. They give money in dollars monthly to help such survive. For us in Uganda, we do not have that money. We would like our own money, which we have saved to help us during this critical moment of COVID-19. 

I know we are now getting used to this COVID-19 pandemic and with time, we shall be able to work with or without it. However, for the time being, we need this money to save our people from dying. Madam Speaker, I support the motion. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you. I would like us to separate the COVID-19 situation from the right of access. I think we need to debate whether there should be access, with or without COVID-19.

3.18
MS SILVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion. On the issue of the NSSF savings, the owners should be the first beneficiaries when they are still alive. In any case, we save not to benefit others but us. If the actual owners who have been saving are asking for a small percentage, I believe this is the right time for Parliament to rally behind those ones and agree to it. 

The COVID-19 effects on some of the people who were earning but cannot earn anymore, have actually impacted on their families too. When you go out, you find so many girls pregnant. These are children of people who had been having more than one meal in a day but because the parents can no longer afford, the effect has gone deeper than what we can see. 

I, therefore, suggest that we agree on a percentage that can be given to the beneficiaries of NSSF so that life can come back to normal despite the COVID-19.

3.20
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion basing on the fact that we are living in unprecedented days. You have advised and given us guidance that we must separate the right to access from the situation we are living in now. 

In that regard, I would like to suggest that while COVID-19 has provided an opportunity for us to think differently, the right to access has to also be considered. The days we are living in are unprecedented. Nobody would have imagined that we would be in a situation like we are in today. 

I am made to understand that the fund managers have fears that this will cause a problem to the Government. However, I would like to state here that the first responsibility of the fund managers should not be to Government but to the savers. How do they begin to think of Government first instead of considering the situation of the savers?

The proposal of 20 per cent wouldn’t be bad. I would go with it but I also move that the law be adjusted because we did not know we would have COVID-19 and it is not going away tomorrow. There might be other situations that will arise because of COVID-19. Let this be an eye opener for us to make adjustments. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.22
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If NSSF is to help its savers, this is the right time because if they do not help a person in time of need, then they will not have helped them to survive and to take care of their basic needs and those of their families.

I am here to support the motion of giving the members 20 per cent because this is the right time for their contributions to help them in this time when they are in need, other than releasing it when they are not there.

Madam Speaker, if we are lawmakers, this is the right time to stand on our feet and help Ugandans who have contributed their money to the NSSF. Let us help them to get it so that they can they get out of their dire situation while waiting for the situation to normalise. I thank you very much.

3.23
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to add my voice to support this motion, as I say the following;

One; the right to access I think is something very important. Like you rightly guided, we should not simply look at this situation of COVID-19 but this has been something that the workers have been crying for. Twenty per cent is something small, which can actually change the lives of very many workers out there.

Madam Speaker, I came face to face with a gentleman who was so desperate to get his money from NSSF. That was some time back before even the issue of COVID-19 came up. He had lost his job. He failed to get another job. He is now almost clocking 50 years. He has children in the university and he has some good amount of money with NSSF. He cannot even borrow money anywhere and he was in a dilemma. 

Actually, he was thinking of now beginning to forge a medical report so that he gets it. This is the kind of situation that some of these laws put our people in, to the extent that I know of many people who are forced to forge reports in order to access NSSF.

Why don’t we make it simple by granting the 20 per cent, so that they get it the normal easy way and not going beyond their morals and doing something which is not right? By the time somebody saves for 10 years, I think this is enough time for a person to be considered a serious member. The other 80 per cent can then be handled with time.

Madam Speaker, I beg that Government listens to the cry of the workers out there and really gives the 20 per cent to the workers. This is my submission. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.26
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I join in to support this motion. It is very clear we are under a very abnormal situation. That is why for the first time in life, we call it a pandemic. I think the last one was in 1918.

Madam Speaker, the issue of the National Social Security Fund should not be a long debate. You have seen how we struggled here in this House on issues of giving support to the people of Uganda through many mechanisms that we proposed in previous motions. However, I think to date, not all is working well.

If you look at those who are most affected, they are actually those under employment and in the private sector. For Government – at least to some degree – there is continuous support through salaries. However, there are those who have lost jobs. They need support; they are not being supported under this pandemic. How do we deal with their situation? They are there. There are those who are about to leave their jobs. You remember the New Vision issue here; many are going away.

For me, it is very prudent that social security should be held in the context of its definition. In a simple definition, what is social security? That is why we provide for this funding. I think honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, while he shakes his head in denial, I think this is the time to be with the citizens of Uganda.

In Kenya, support was given directly by Government. I do not remember the amount but support was given. I think Uganda should show cause beyond the food that we provided. There should be a window that can be rolled out. We are not saying that you should now get the 20 per cent at once. Let us deal on situational basis. How do we roll out the 20 per cent?

I feel saddened because we are here to make laws. We are here to ensure that the health of this country is held well. This motion, together with what is coming in the amendment of the law, should support the people of Uganda.

I remember in my class of philosophy, one philosopher called Socrates, on the definition of life, stated that life is a constant struggle against death. If we are here fighting against death but we are here relenting and saying, “Let those who cannot fight die”, I think it is unfair for this country.

Therefore, I support this position and Government of Uganda should take full responsibility. This is an abnormal situation; it is COVID-19. We are aware that a lot of work is going on. Mulago alone is coming out with very important work in terms of treatment and the world as well is coming out with vaccinations soon. This, at least for the purpose of helping our citizens, should go within six months from now.

We hope by next year June going to August, situations may be better. However, as of now, let us support this process. That is why we are here. That is why we make these laws. 

Madam Speaker, I stand very firm to ensure that this motion be supported. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. So far, I have not heard any objection to the motion. I wanted to just point out that it seems on mid-term access, the motion is in consonance with the report of the committee. The only area of variance is in two minority reports; one proposing 30 per cent and another one proposing 40 per cent.

Let us also address the other areas in the Bill.

3.31
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice that the situation is out of the normal. However, I would like to request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development maybe to help Parliament.

The core values of accessing NSSF money is that principally, this money is saved and is invested. What is happening now is this money has been invested in the capital markets. However, what is happening now - It could have been an alternative to know what measure Government could put up as an alternative to the bail out of those who are completely out of work today and they are terminated. How can they access that mid-term?

If they calculate the figures, they can deal with the money which is not invested now because every month, what is submitted to NSSF can be dealt with and help those who want to access money, especially those who are out of work.

If you calculate the figures, on the other side, if the money has been invested for some years, to access it now, it would be problematic. We should know the figures of those who are out of work or disabled. It is because the submission of each month can help us to get some bailout rather than tampering with the money which has already been invested. 

Madam Speaker, all of us who save with NSSF want to get maximum returns on our money. If you are still working, that means, there is a leeway. When I am in problems, I can get that money after it has been invested. 

So, if the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development – because they have the data of those people who are out of work and in need of bailouts – Those who still have jobs are saving money. That saving can help them in future. The two ministries should calculate the figures so that we can know the amount that NSSF can give as bailouts to people who are completely out of work. This is a request to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. If you calculate those figures, then Parliament can make a leeway.

This is what has been done in Ghana and the USA. They made the calculations and found out the figures. If we do not have them, I find it very difficult because this money has been invested. To get maximum returns on pension, you cannot go and save offshore your shares or investment at this time when the economy is fragile. 

It is better we get to know whether that money can be calculated for us to know those who are out of work so that they are given bailouts. This is my request. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe the minister will also inform us whether all the money that come every month is invested automatically. We need to know that. 

Hon. Eitunganane, hon. Amero and hon. Arinaitwe. Hon. Ndeezi, you are the chairperson of the committee. We are debating your report. 

3.35
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti):   Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Access to this NSSF money should not attract a lot of debate. To me, it is a right of every saver to access at least some money. Jobs have been lost; livelihoods have been affected; and businesses have collapsed. The whole country is in disarray because of COVID-19. It has made matters worse.

In other countries where similar schemes like NSSF have existed, provisions have been made for members, for example, to access some percentage of money when they are unemployed for a certain period of time or when they are sick. So, I think we need to consider this. Looking at the current situation in the country, a 20 per cent payment to NSSF members who badly need it at this time will go a long way to strengthen their social security.

I would suggest that we structure this money we will give to the contributors. We can look at the age brackets between 20 and 30, 30 and 40, 50 and 60 and give them certain percentages. This will also depend on how long somebody has saved money. A member should be able to access some percentage of his or saving. Most of the social problems people are getting now are a result of COVID-19. 

Now that there are some savings that some people have, it would be right for us, as a House, to allow access to between 20 and 30 per cent. That would be good. We know, for example, NSSF keeps a liquidity of 40 per cent. Every year, it gives interest between 11 and 13 per cent. So, I am sure that if these payments are made to NSSF’s members, they would not bring trouble to NSSF as such despite the investments that they have done.

Government intervention has been limited; it has come in bits. The majority of people who are saving have not benefitted from Government directly. There is a lot of pressure that people are experiencing in their social life. So, it would be right for us, as a House, to give right to access. We can debate on the amount and the percentages that each member should get depending on the age bracket so that every member gets a certain percentage to alleviate the suffering that they are going through. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Amero. I think we shall then allow hon. Ndeezi to comment on the motion. 

3.38
MS SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion that contributors access part of their savings. There are things that we may not openly say, but as we can access our own savings as Members of Parliament to help us solve some problems, why shouldn’t these other people access their savings?

You have guided that the minister should tell us if there is money. We might be debating here, and yet actually, we do not have anything in the coffer as of now. So, we would like to know clearly if the money is there so that we take a decision as the august House on how much can be given out.

As we have been trying to allude to saying 20 per cent, 30 per cent, we cannot decide on the percentage yet unless we know how much money they have. So, I would like to request that as proceed with the debate, let the minister first clarify to us whether there is money that can be given out. Otherwise, we would be wasting time talking, and yet there is nothing to be given out. 

Therefore, I would like to also note that as we get these savings, the people outside there who are badly affected are members of the private sector who are not working. Diseases cannot wait. Other problems cannot wait. If you have saved money, you need to access it to solve some of these problems. 

I think the reason why we work very hard and save money is because we want to have something so that in case we have an issue or problem, we are able to solve it. 

I would like to support the motion fully. The minister should come out to tell us whether there is money or not so that we can take a decision as a House. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ndeezi and then hon. Arinaitwe.

3.40
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD, Central): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Mine is not really a contribution, but a fear that this decision on this resolution impacts on our own recommendation relating to the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill. I wish the position taken on this resolution bears in mind our own views in relation to this matter. 

I believe an Act of Parliament is superior to a resolution of Parliament. Maybe, in a few minutes time from now, we may have to talk about an Act of Parliament that enables the Government to implement this resolution. 

If you agree with me, I request you to allow me to state what decision we, in the joint committee, took on this matter. 

THE SPEAKER: We had a report given yesterday, and I had earlier said you can talk on both issues. People, however, are concentrating on the motion alone. Definitely, we shall have to address the Bill and the motion. 

MR NDEEZI: I fear that if the two contradict each other, we may get a problem –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am in charge of this debate. I am saying you speak on both issues and then we shall move on both of them, starting with the Bill.

MR NDEEZI: Thank you. 

3.42
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My contribution is based on the report of the committee, specifically on the Bill. I thank the committee for the report and I also thank those bringing a motion concerning issues of NSSF.

The spirit of NSSF as a forced saving is basically to address issues of the situations when an individual cannot help himself or herself. Especially, they were targeting the aged and incapacitated – when you either got an accident or sick to the extent that you can no longer work.

We brought these proposals long ago, for example, the mid-term access not knowing that COVID-19 would come in or such a situation. However, we were looking at a situation and with the experience that we have seen in this country – that someone retires, gets his entire package and then maybe he is starting business at a very old age while he can no longer start up and do something serious.

Therefore, we thought that mid-term access would help an individual in the middle age to get your 20 per cent, start up a business and by the time you retire, you have tasted the deep waters in business. We have seen many people who have received their retirement package and in one week, money is lost and they end up dying.

We have also seen people who get problems towards the retirement and they want to solve these minor problems, but they cannot support themselves and even end up falling into more problems when they are remaining with one year or two years to receive their main package.

I have many examples that I do not want to elaborate here – of some people who have ended up in bigger problems when they are almost receiving their entire package.

Madam Speaker, this Bill addresses so many issues like products. We have been having like nine products of NSSF that they offer including retirement package and time when you are incapacitated. However, there is no like education; housing and the Bill could not allow NSSF as a company to do good business because the law was very tight – like in terms of procurement and all that.

Therefore, we thought that we needed to amend this NSSF Bill to address such issues. In our proposals in the Bill, we said that if someone has saved for more than 10 years and is above 45 years, why don’t you get a small package of 20 per cent of your money and then start up something and by the time you reach 55 years, then you have seen what to do with the money and many other proposals.

I would like to request members that let us not focus on COVID-19 alone because we cannot legislate on this problem. You cannot get a permanent solution for a temporary problem. However, if we allow mid-term access, then it will address many issues including such situations of COVID-19 and other things that may come in future.

I would like to support the Bill and the committee report that we proceed. We do not need the minister to first tell us how much. I think they did actuarial studies and my understanding and according to the research I have done, I believe the 20 per cent cannot make the fund to collapse. Especially when it is phased in age and the time you have saved with NSSF. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems that there is consensus on the issue of access. What we need to discuss are the modalities. I, therefore, propose that we go to the second reading of the Bill and go item by item and them we can take the votes at a later stage.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time?

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDEMENT) BILL, 2019

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill- Is there an amendment?

MR NDEEZI: Madam Chairperson, I beg to draw your attention to page 11 of our report which also contains the amendments in this noble report. We have an amendment to this clause to read that we replace clause 1, with the following: “This Act shall come into force upon publication in the Gazette.”

There was a typing error when the words “assent by the President” were included. Therefore, our amendment is “This Act shall come into force upon publication in the Gazette.”

This is our justification. This Bill is very crucial to the savings of workers in that it has to be immediately implemented upon publication in the Gazette rather than subjecting it to the minister who may delay to appoint the date of enforcement. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, does the publication precede the assent or it is after the assent? 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed by the chairman?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2 agreed to.

Clause 3

MR NDEEZI: Yes, we have an amendment on clause 3. Madam Chairperson, in clause (3), we seek to replace this section in the principal Act with the following - and this amendment is also on page 11 of our report:

“By substituting section (1) with the following:

(a) 	The fund shall be governed by a stakeholder board of directors appointed by the minister and consisting of:

A chairperson;
The permanent secretary of the ministry responsible for labour;
The permanent secretary of the ministry responsible for finance; and
Four representatives of employers nominated by federations of labour unions.”

Madam Chairperson, there was a typing error, which indicated “labour unions” but the right term should have been “federation of labour unions.”

I continue with the same amendment.
“e.  Two representatives of employers nominated by Federation of Uganda Employers; and
The managing director who shall be an Ex-officio member without the right to vote.

(b) By substituting subsection (2) with the following:

A member of the board except those stated under sub-section (1) (b), (c) and (f) shall hold office for five years and may be reappointed for one more term only.

(c) By substituting subsection (3) with the following: 

A member of the board may be removed from the office by the minister for:

(a) 	Abuse of office;
(b) 	Corruption;
(c) 	Incompetence;
(d) 	Any physical or mental incapacity that renders a person incapable of preforming the functions of his or her office;
(e) 	Misbehaviour or misconduct;
(f) 	Being adjudged bankrupt by a court of law; and
(g) 	Conviction of an offence involving dishonesty, fraud or moral turpitude.

(d) 	By substituting for subsection (4) the following:

A member of the board may resign from the board by giving notice of not less than one month in writing addressed to the minister.

(e) By inserting immediately after subsection (4) the following new subsections:

(5) 	The members of the board shall hold office on terms and conditions specified in their instruments of appointment.
(6) 	The minister shall ensure:
(a) 	That a member of the board is a person of high moral character and proven integrity;
(b)	There is a balance of gender, skills and experience among the members of the board; and
(c) 	The members of the board provided for under subsection (1) (e), are contributing employers under section (7) of this Act.”

The justifications are as follows:

a) 	Amending subsection (2) is to provide for the term limits of the members of the board.
b) 	Inserting subsection (6)(a) is to ensure that the Board has qualified persons with requisite qualifications and experience to ably guide the execution of the mandate of the Fund;
c) 	Inserting sub-section (6)(c) ensures that the members of the board who represent employers are compliant with the provisions of the Act.
d) 	The current NSSF Act was enacted in 1985 and since then it has not been amended. It is therefore important that Section (3) of the Act is amended to comply with the provisions of the board under the NSSF Act to the provisions of other boards in other laws.

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals under clause 3. I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, do you have any amendment?

MR NDEEZI: Yes, we have an amendment to clause 7. Our amendment is on page 13 of the report. We beg to move that clause 7 is amended as follows:

  In the proposed subsection (2), delete the words, “together with the standard contribution;” and

Substitute the proposed subsection (3) with the following: “(3) An employer authorised by an employee under subsection (2), shall, for every month, during which he or she pays wages for the member, pay to the fund, within fifteen days next following the last day of the month for which the relevant wages are paid, the voluntary contribution of the sum agreed.”

Substitute the proposed subsection (6) with the following: “(6) An employer who deducts a voluntary contribution under subsection (2) and fails to remit the fund commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points or imprisonment not exceeding three years or both.”

The justification are as follows:

a) 	The amendment of the proposed subsection (2) is to differentiate between the standard and voluntary contribution clearly by not tagging the latter on the former.

b) 	Substitution of the proposed subsection (3) is to provide clear timelines within which the voluntary contribution should be paid by the employer.

c) 	Subsection (6) is to provide for a punitive fine and sentence so as to deter would be offenders.

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals in relation to clause 7. I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR NDEEZI: Madam Chairperson, we have an amendment on clause 9. The amendment is on page 14 of our report.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you do not have an amendment in clause 9 but a new clause after it.

MR NDEEZI: Yes, I agree with you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 9, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You can now make your proposal on the new clause.

MR NDEEZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. After clause 9 we propose an insertion of new clauses.

We move that we insert, immediately after clause 9, the following new clauses:

Section 21 of the Principal Act is amended by substituting for subsection (2), the following:

“(2) Subject to section 19, a person who ceases to be a member of the fund by virtue of being employed in exempted employment shall, if contributions under this Act have been paid in respect of that member to the fund, be entitled to the full balance of his or her account in the fund.”

Amendment of section 23 of the Principal Act

Section 23 of the principal Act is amended by substituting for subsection (1), the following:
“
(1) Subject to section 19, a member of the fund who emigrates permanently from Uganda to a country with which no reciprocal arrangement under this Act has been made, where contributions under this Act have been paid in respect of that member to the fund, the member shall be entitled to the full balance of his or her account in the fund.”

The justification is that clause 21 and clause 23 are inter-related, that is why they have been amended concurrently.

The amendment in clause 21 and clause 23 is to ensure that once contributions are made into the fund such contributions immediately vest in the member. If such a member requests to be paid the withdrawal benefit under section 2l or emigration grant under section 23, he or she should be paid both the 10 per cent employer contribution and the five per cent member contribution.

The amendment will address the unfairness caused by holding back the money which the employer contributed to benefit the member. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a proposal that two new clauses be inserted. I put the question that those two new clauses be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: The numbering will be addressed by the draftsman.

Clause 10

MR NDEEZI: We have an amendment for clause 10. Insert section 24 (a) to Principal Act and replace clause 10 as follows:

“24(a) Midterm Access to benefits

A member who has made voluntary contributions to the fund shall be allowed midterm access to his or her benefits on such terms and conditions and in a manner prescribed by the minister.
A member who is forty five years and above or has contributed to the Fund for at least ten years, is eligible to mid-term access of a sum not exceeding 20 per cent of his or her available accrued benefits.
A member who is a person with disability who ceases to be employed for a period of one year is eligible to mid-term access of a sum not exceeding 75 per cent of his or her available accrued benefits.
The minister shall, in consultation with the board, prescribe by statutory instrument the terms and conditions and procedure for accessing accrued benefits under this section.
The board may, in consultation with the minister, utilise the network, resources, and infrastructure of NSSF to support the provision of or expansion of other social security pillars including health and employment.”

The justification is that midterm access is necessary to cater for unexpected challenges in the life of a member who may need to utilize some of his or her savings as bail out of the challenge such include unemployment, illness, mortgage, and others.

According to the latest Housing and Population census, PWDs constitute l2 percent of the population of Uganda (about five million people) and less than two per cent of the PWDs in Uganda are in informal employment.

Research carried out by the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda (NUDIPU) indicates that due to the negative attitude towards PWDs in the working environment, almost 90 per cent of PWDS who lose jobs are never employed again and survive by way of self-employment in the informal sector. Therefore, PWDs deserve to be given their money/savings to survive on their own.

It is very important for the minister to regulate the procedure of allowing mid-term access in order to maintain the principal objective and viability of retirement funds. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals in respect to clause 10. Honourable chairperson, I just wanted to check whether you no longer need the word “voluntary” - you removed it.

MR NDEEZI: Yes, we deleted it. I read midterm access to benefits means “access to benefits” is not only limited to voluntary contributions but also all contributions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question-

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The proposal which is being made by the chairperson, only allows midterm access to a person who has attained 45 years or has saved for at least 10 years and that one is not in regard to whether that person is still in employment or not. The other one is for a disabled person who has lost employment for one year qualifies for 75 per cent. 

The proposal does not cater for a situation where a person has for instance saved for eight years but has remained unemployed for even if it is five years but that person is under 45 years. 

If somebody started working at 30, saved for eight years, and lost employment, that person is not catered for in this amendment that is being proposed. That is why in the minority report which I presented yesterday, I made a proposal that where a member loses his or her employment and remains unemployed for a period of not less than three years, such a member shall upon application be entitled to 40 per cent of the balance on the member’s account. 

The justification I made here is that this is about the right to live. A person, who has lost employment and has no means of living, cannot afford food, shelter and school fees for children. 

We must look for how to address a situation where a person has lost employment but is under 45 years and has saved for less than ten 10 years. That situation must be catered for because these people sometimes live in very desperate situations and yet there is some money, why can’t they access part of the money and be able to pay for rent, food and be able to survive! I would like to advance my minority recommendation that we should provide for such a situation. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, that proposal was made yesterday. We have not had anyone speaking on it –

MR ARINAITWE: Madam Chairperson, although I agree with my brother, but a pension scheme like NSSF needs to be separated from a commercial bank. We must cap some age and the time you have saved with NSSF such that the investments are not interrupted. There is proper planning and we should not interrupt it. At the end of the day, you may find people who have lost jobs running to the fund. 

Therefore, I would suggest that we maintain the proposal in the Bill such that we do not stampede the fund, and make it a commercial bank, where if you have a problem, you go and withdraw. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, hon. Lubogo’s proposal came in as his minority report. We now need to vote on the 40 per cent proposal by hon. Lubogo before we go back to the one in the Bill. I put the question –

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, just for purposes of information to the House, to have it at the back of their mind, and for the very reason hon. Rwakajara was raising his point; the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development was reluctant to recommend any rates of mid-term access – we had only wanted the power to be with the board to determine and guided by what actuarial studies should tell you. Actuarial studies will help at any given time to tell you the financial health of a scheme; whether it can sustain the payments at that point or for the future. 

However, when you fix any rate in the law, you now render empirical evidence that may come out from the actuarial study to show that at any time, the scheme may not pay. That is why the position of the ministry was that, yes, we put a provision for mid-term access but we allow the board in consultation with the minister, guided by actuarial science to determine what benefits to give out at a given time. Whether 20 or 40 would really be denying the input of technical advice, which is the actuarial professionals. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question –

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support hon. Kenneth Lubogo’s proposal, where he is saying that if a person fails in five years to get a job, and there is evidence to that, I do not see any reason why this should be difficult or it should disrupt the planning. He is talking of three years but I would actually go ahead and proposal between three to five years if the person has completely failed to get a job. It does not in any way disrupt the planning of the scheme. 

I would like to support the amendment by the minority report. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, this can help; I wanted to make an amendment on the amendments. First, honourable minister, yes, we could leave discretion to the board but we can give a range within which to operate. For example, in the current situation, if you fall sick, you are entitled to your benefits. However, it is very disappointing that they have restricted - even if medical professionals give you a report, they still say no, you must go to doctor so and so. 

I have a colleague who worked with me in Uganda Revenue Authority and later on, joined KCCA. He asked for early retirement because he is diabetic and he is handled by Prof. Otim and one other doctor from the military police in Makindye. When he applied for his benefits but because he has not reached that age, he was denied. They told him to go to the doctor, which NSSF is using. 

However, when you look at the condition of this gentleman, it makes one wonder what NSSF leadership think about such a case. I tried to bring it to the attention of the Deputy Director of NSSF but he could not help. The gentleman is on the verge of death but he cannot access his money; his children cannot go to school. 

With that background honourable minister, if this can help – hon. Lubogo had proposed 40 per cent, we could give a range that the board should be able to give access to somebody who has lost a job and has failed to get a job for two, three or five years, to access not more than 40 per cent, or we could say between 20 and 40 per cent such that we give leverage to the board to decide within what range they can be able to grant based on the studies they will have done. That is where I think we would have guided the board and given them a range within which to operate –(Interruption) 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Okupa. That is why when I was submitting - the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development have the data. Those people who have lost jobs, and they are not able and have their money, it is not a big portion when you look at it in the data. This person who is really disabled and has no future at all, I do not see it as a big problem that NSSF cannot give out the money, which somebody has saved. 

Madam Chairperson, I think in the law, we should put it that if somebody has lost a job, and he or she is disabled and has evidence, there is no way you can dilly-dally with that person’s money.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I understand what you are saying but maybe, we could say we give the board authority to examine different situations without putting a percentage to it. Why don’t we give them the –

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Chairperson, there is some information I would like to give. We have already passed clause 9, which provides that the board may in consultation with the minister by statutory instrument prescribe additional benefits. 

The intention was to cater for such situations. This is what this means –(Interjection)– let me explain this first. We considered all the scenarios in line with the ILO convention 102, and also in terms of the availability of funding in the fund. That is why we went for the mid-term access because that was clear, and the amounts were known.

Now the situation we are providing, which is known as the unemployment benefit, we are trying to give qualifications in terms of the number of years and all that. It is also a benefit. It is called the “unemployment benefit”. So, this general provision in clause 9 gives the minister and the board a chance to bring such situations - because we cannot provide for all situations. That was the thinking behind this.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, as you have stated, I can agree with a percentage but the principle should be adopted – that someone who has presented evidence of having lost a job should be assisted as a mandatory provision. This should be adopted as a mandatory prerequisite so that it does not stand in the law to be abused. Assuming the board says that they will not and the managing director of the National Social Security Fund also says “No”. If we put it in the law as a principle that a person who has saved with the fund but has lost a job and is now unable to make ends meet, such a person should be able to access the money. And as you have proposed, chair, the percentage should be at a particular actuarial study.

MR OKUPA: You see, that is why I brought that case of that gentleman. If you leave it that way, people will not – I do not know whether it is because they do not have a human heart. It is until you have been to that condition that you will know the need for you to be helped. It is not until you have lost a job or fallen sick and you are in that condition. 

You can give the board the leverage and a range within which to operate, but if you leave it like that; like in that case where we have said that it is only this doctor here which NSSF has appointed, and we do not know how they have been appointed, to determine when the other professional bodies have given an opinion.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it would definitely be unfair for us to subject the health condition or the desperate situation of a contributor to the board. I think that what we could agree on is that as a principle, let this law provide for the early disbursement of this money to the contributor, even when he has not yet reached 10 years. But the board can determine the percentage that the beneficiary can access. 

But it definitely would be inhuman and unfair to subject the desperation of a human being to the board convening. And sometimes they say that they cannot meet because there is no money, or because the chair is out of the country, or any other reason, and yet somebody is in a desperate situation and needs to be assisted. 

Therefore, as legislators who are responsible for these people, let us put in place a law which will in principle allow for contributors to apply for mid-term disbursement but with the board limited to determining the percentage. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think I had more or less said that, but let us continue.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chair, I would like to go with what honourable minister Tumwebaze has presented. That the board, with the actuarial advice should guide the decision of the kind of situation hon. Lubogo has presented. That power should go to the board on technical advice. 

But I find the proposal by hon. Rwakajara unacceptable that there will be a run on the money of the NSSF when everybody – It cannot be. The principle should be that when somebody is in need, and some technical body should look at it and the board approves, but not because the money will be run down. That is unacceptable. We have to be humanitarian and consider special cases. And that power should go to the board. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we stop debating and formulate what we want in the law? Let us formulate what we want in the law. (Interjections) Should we stand over and you formulate? Okay. Formulate a proposal. Let us go to clause 11.

Clause 11

MR NDEEZI: Madam Chair, we have an amendment to clause 11. It is on page 16 of our report. For the benefit of members who do not have copies of the Bill, our amendment relates to clause 11. This clause reads as follows:

“Section 29 of the principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after sub-section (4) the following statement: The minister shall, by statutory instrument, prescribe a threshold of expenditure by the fund prior to approval of the annual budget by the minister.”

For us, we want to delete this clause altogether. This is our reason. The fund should be in position to prepare and submit its budget for approval in a timely manner before the end of the financial year in accordance with the budgetary timelines similar to those prescribed in the Public Finance Management Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is that clause 11 be deleted. I put the question that clause 11 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11 deleted.

Clause 12

MR NDEEZI: We have an amendment to clause 12. Substitution of Section 30 of the principal Act, clause 12 is amended. The proposal is that we delete the phrase “which may include lending to the Government”.

This is our justification. In practice, the National Social Security Fund already lends to Government through government securities such as bills and bonds or other issuance sold on the open market. 

Lending through the open market ensures that members’ savings are protected from transactions below market interest rates. High costs are not imposed on savers. Lastly, the financial market is not distorted since NSSF is a key player in the Ugandan market.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to delete the phrase, “which may include lending to the Government”. I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chair, I do not know whether the chair has directed our attention in the right place. In clause 12(a), they talk of renumbering the current provision:

Substituting the word “minister” for the words “minister responsible for finance”.

It has not come out whether we are maintaining it as it is or we are amending it. That is why I subscribe to the position of the minority report where, from a governance perspective, we cannot have NSSF being supervised by two ministries. I would rather that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development - which is principally responsible for NSSF - remains the principal supervisor and not the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They can have the control through the board but the principal ministry must be known and it must be ministry of gender because that is where the interest of the workers lie. 

I would like that clarification to come out before I can approve clause 12. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, on the two points in regard to clause 12, I want to say that the hon. Cecilia Ogwal is raising a fundamental question on who supervises this fund.

Madam Chairperson, it is a position we wanted to make an amendment on –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you use the microphone? Is it on?

MR BAHATI: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was raising a fundamental question on who supervises the fund. 

Madam Chairperson, it is a position of His Excellency, the President and the Government indeed that this fund, given its strategic position in the economy but also for security of the workers’ contributions and given the expertise and machinery under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should be supervised by the finance ministry.

We want to make an amendment at an appropriate time that the responsible minister will be the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. That is the position that, I and together with my colleague, we are bringing to this House for approval.

However, on the question of what the chairperson has proposed, I think I did not get that amendment properly but it is really important that we leave the question of the experts under the fund to look at issues of lending to Government as part of its investment.

Therefore, leaving this clause the way it is would really serve the purpose for which the Bill was moved in this House. I beg to propose.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, what the minister has said has actually explained my fears; the more reason Parliament should look at this matter very critically. I thank God he has said it is a critical matter.

Madam Chairperson, NSSF is always subject to abuse. We have had it in our history and we are not going to have it again, where you have conflicting roles. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has his own definitive matter in which it manages the agency under it. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development takes the primary role in the supervision and management of the pension fund for the workers.

What else is left? If you remove the finance from the welfare of the workers, what else is left? The ministry of gender is not going to manage human beings. It is going to manage the pension fund, which these workers are going to use when they are not in position to function normally.

Madam Chairperson, it is important this House should decide on this as a matter of principle. We cannot allow this fund to be managed by finance ministry, when we have the principle line ministry responsible for the interests of the workers. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, it raises ethical questions that the honourable minister of finance knows very well that actually, Government can also access NSSF money just in case they want to borrow.

However, imagine a situation where Government, which may want to borrow money from NSSF, will then use the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to apply for the money and approve it.

Madam Chairperson, I think in the context, I feel that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has more expertise in understanding issues of workers and human resource than the finance ministry, which critically understands only figures.

Therefore, I do not agree with hon. Bahati’s submission that this money should go to the finance ministry. That finance ministry will abuse this money and it will not operate in the interest of the workers.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I was part of the audit report authored by a team headed by the hon. D’Ujanga, which Parliament pronounced itself on in 2004. You remember, Madam Chairperson, if my institutional memory serves me well, the hon. Bakoko Bakoru who used to head the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development?

Parliament pronounced itself that on the part of investment, it should be the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but with the other part in the law where social humanities and whatever – Madam Chairperson, the amount of money saved by the contributors in the economy needs to be supervised by the relevant ministry, which is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Whatever is done in this country - the macroeconomic situations, you cannot leave – we are talking of Shs 14 trillion, which must be supervised by the experts. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development cannot do that; it cannot hold that. I remember we debated in 2004 and took a decision that that money be supervised by the finance minister. That was the decision of this House. I beg to submit.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I thank very much, honourable colleagues, for the support to the workers’ voice on this matter. In the current Bill – or maybe the law that we are amending – legally, NSSF falls under the ministry responsible for labour and social security, which is under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

However, the Executive took a decision and transferred the whole fund, right now under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which was an illegality not supported by law. 

When this Bill was being proposed, the only argument by Government was that the ministry responsible for labour has issues in terms of competence and decisions related to investment and finance but they had taken the whole fund under finance and so, it was a challenge. 

The intention of the clause to bring the finance ministry - section 30 that we are trying to amend – is simply to cater for that area, whereby in terms of investment decisions, the minister responsible for finance should be consulted. 

However, in terms of other aspects of the law, it will be the ministry responsible for labour. Unless we are saying that we should not have anything to do with the ministry responsible for finance. 

However, the reason this is being introduced is to cure the other mischief where Government was trying to transfer the whole NSSF fund to finance, claiming that they cannot handle. In the process, they transferred all the other functions, including policy and all that, which was really a mistake.

In this law, reference to the finance ministry is on specific aspects and the clause we are handling is specifically on decisions for investment but not on other matters. I think that is the reason behind this clause. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the minister –

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, there are so many labour issues. What we are talking about here today is about workers saving their money in a pool called the National Social Security Fund. However, there are many other issues relating to these workers. It is like how we, the Members of Parliament, have our own pension scheme and SACCO. We save our money in the SACCO but there are so many other issues concerning Members of Parliament - attendance in the House, what has happened in our constituencies, etcetera. 

All those other issues concerning workers are handled by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. However, when these workers save their money in NSSF, how it is invested and accessed is the responsibility of the NSSF board, supervised by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Hon. Nzoghu was trying to suggest that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would have conflict of interest when it comes to lending. I would like to remind you that actually, the responsibility to approve any funds to finance Government activities through borrowing or other means is Parliament’s. It is Parliament that authorises the borrowing by Government; it is not the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that can go to NSSF and borrow. We cannot say that hon. Mathia Kasaija will call the chairperson of the board of NSSF to the boardroom and say, “Lend me Shs 5 trillion”. This borrowing has to be approved by Parliament. Therefore, there are already controls and systems in place. 

When it comes to the fund, we are talking about the fund only, not other issues concerning workers. There are so many other issues concerning workers, including standards in the work place and so many things that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development handles. However, when it comes to the fund, His Excellency the President, in writing, said that we should allow the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to supervise this fund. However, the critical body for the fund is actually the board. 

We have a board that has representatives from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the workers, and a number other institutions that are relevant. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would be the overall supervisor under this. I would like to request this House to see His Excellency the President’s wisdom in this and accept the proposal he made. I beg to move. 

MR RWAKAJARA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My concern is that there is an organisation called the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority (URBRA), which is under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority supervises all pension schemes in this country and it sits in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, I do not see why the finance ministry should come in yet we have the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

For the investment part, there is a custodian established by URBRA, there is an administrator and a fund manager. All of them are established by the law that established UBRA. Therefore, I do not see why, again, we should bring in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development unless we repeal the URBRA Act and allow the finance ministry to supervise pension funds. 

This double reporting is really destabilising the pension sector. Therefore, we request that they choose one; URBRA either remains with the responsibilities they are performing or the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development takes over. Alternatively, let NSSF be supervised by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and then URBRA plays its part. 

MR OKUPA: I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Do we have a problem with the current arrangement? I think we do not have. Why would you, at this point, want the fund to be shifted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? There is no problem in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Madam Chairperson, you saw what happened with the road fund. We created the road fund for a specific purpose. However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development took that money and it is impossible to get it back to address the purpose for which it was created. Uganda Road Fund cannot access that money. Therefore, if we risk the members’ contributions and send them to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, there is going to be a big challenge. 

You also need to watch the video clip of the former Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, hon. Bakoko Bakoru. She explained how the mafia wanted to hijack and take the money from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. It shows you that there is a hidden agenda in having this money moved from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

You also remember one minister who was in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and he fought for that fund to remain there. When he moved to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, he shifted goalposts saying the money must go to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

We have seen all these. Those who have been in Parliament for more than one term can bear witness. Honourable colleagues, I would like us to remain firm and let the fund remain with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. If there are issues, they can be addressed. You have even seen the roles of the minister in the proposal here. He has all the powers to appoint the board and whoever else, but he also wants to take the fund. It is something that we must reject to protect the savers’ funds – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank hon. Okupa for giving way. In the Ninth Parliament, I was one of the five members of the select committee which investigated NSSF. Indeed, one of our recommendations was directly dealing with the involvement of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and we gave a very strong recommendation.

Secondly, I would like to inform the minister that NSSF is not about borrowing alone. There are other investments, and their building is proof of this. When you go to Tanzania and Kenya, they do not have the ministry in charge of finance running this fund; they have a representative on the board as it is done here. 

What is that interest that you have? Madam Speaker, let us take interest in going back to the report of the select committee that made recommendations about the same. We should not accept this. 

Look at Mr Ocailap – I would like to say that when we went to Tanzania as a select committee, URBRA followed us. They were also moving around to see what we were doing. We had to fight with them to leave our hotel because we knew that what we were investigating was very useful.

As a lawyer, I have read the URBRA Act and I know what it says about the ministry in charge of finance and its role. Honourable minister, you cannot bring in your ministry to have direct control over this fund instead of having a representative there. Let it remain in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Also, the senior technocrat in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is a member of the NSSF board; that is the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury. Why would we want the money now to move to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I would like the Members to imagine a situation where any Member of Parliament would want to borrow money, as we do now, from our own pension scheme. Rather than going through the Parliamentary Commission, we are now going through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Just look at that. 

In this pension fund, it is only the Parliamentary Commission and the institution of Parliament that understand the unique problems of Members of Parliament. Therefore, if I have any need at all, which requires me to borrow money from our pension scheme, the right place for me to go is the Parliamentary Commission because they understand and have our records and they know how we manage our funds. Why would I go the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who has nothing to do with how we save our money?

Madam Chairperson, let us address this matter once and for all, and we clear that cancer which has been misusing NSSF.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, just allow me to clarify the obvious. This matter was extensively discussed in Cabinet. The former Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development made submissions and all the arguments you are raising were raised, especially the component of labour relations and workers. 

It was agreed in Cabinet that it does not do any harm for one ministry to supervise the fund because dual reporting of the fund was problematic in its own way. The matter was, therefore, left to His Excellency the President who is constitutionally mandated to assign work to ministries. He made a decision that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development supervises the fund. As Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, we agree with that position and we will comply with it. It does not in any way affect our other policy mandate of regulating labour issues. 

I felt that that should be on record. There is no fight between the two ministries and I request Members of Parliament to see the logic in the President’s letter, of which I guess the committee received a copy. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what do you define as supervising the fund? You used the words “supervising the fund”, how do you define supervising? What is that supervision you are talking about?

MR TUMWEBZE: Like any other statutory body, Madam Chairperson, there is a responsible minister who appoints and gives policy guidance to the board to ensure that it is managed in accordance with the law. In this case, it will be the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MS KUNIHIRA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to be guided. The current NSSF Act defines “minister” as the minister in charge of social security. Now, if the proposal from the minister is that the fund should go to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, how are we going to define the issue of social security, because it entails a lot more? 

Can we get clarification? Who is the minister in charge of social security? Is it the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The honourable Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development’s perspective only reflects the position of Cabinet. He is just telling us that he respects his appointing authority. You never know that even tomorrow, there could be a Cabinet reshuffle and hon. Tumwebaze is appointed Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development –(Interjection)- He has held positions in other ministries before.

What we are doing here is not simply being done by Members of Parliament; we are doing this after listening to the people who contribute to this fund. It is in the interest of the contributors of this fund that this fund is controlled by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development principally because of two things. One, there is already speculation that there is some money of NSSF which could be with Government; and two, Government has not paid it yet.

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is being overloaded because they are supervising almost everything and at the end of the day, they end up supervising nothing. Therefore, if the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development can be left to control this fund, the interests of the savers or contributors of this money will be on the safe side. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can nominate competent people who can help to guide the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development on how to manage this fund. That is a better scenario than the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development taking it over.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, the statement by hon. Nzoghu needs to be substantiated because we are talking about the workers’ money. To come here and say that there appears to be some money under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is a very wrong statement to make on the Floor of the House before the workers. He needs to withdraw that statement or give more information to the House.

The second point is that this fund has been supervised by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the last 10 years. Therefore, I do not see any problem that we are talking about here —(Interjection)- What we are saying is that it is being supervised by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as we speak and that has been the case for the last 10 years or more.

There has not been any problem. What we are trying to do is to state what is in practice by making it operational through this law. I do not see any reason why Members are saying that it cannot be supervised by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because it is being supervised by the ministry as we speak, following a decision of Cabinet.

Madam Chairperson, earlier on, you asked the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development what supervision means. National Social Security Fund is being supervised; it has a board, in terms of governance. The board has representatives from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and workers; the workers are on the board. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development ensures that this fund, in terms of investment and security, is really safe. That is the mandate of the ministry in the fund, and this is the position of His Excellency the President that he communicated to you, Madam Chairperson. 

We would like to convince this House that there is no problem in having the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development supervising the fund. After all, it is being supervised by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to date.  I thank you.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. From their arguments, it is a bit unfortunate that it appears that the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development have not internalized this Bill. This Bill comes to resolve that illegality which the Executive has committed by transferring NSSF to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development against the law.

When this Bill comes into operation, NSSF will have to go back to Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in accordance with the arrangement here. The parent Act defines the minister as the minister responsible for social security, who is the minister responsible for labour under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Clearly, you cannot change that definition because it is an international definition. Therefore, what the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been doing is an illegality, hiding behind a lacuna.

The current Bill is providing for specific areas of finance, for instance investment, because the intention of this Bill is to go back to what is supposed to be done, where everything goes back to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. They will only involve the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development when it comes to issues of investment. Therefore, for the honourable minister to come here and say that the current situation will continue, where NSSF will continue being under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and all that, shows that he has not understood this Bill. 

Honourable colleagues, should we insist that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development takes over NSSF and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not involved at all, that is one scenario. Another scenario is where NSSF goes back to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and only interfaces with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development when it comes to certain decisions of investment. That is what this law seeks to do. 

If we do not amend the law in the way we are proposing, it means that NSSF will go back to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and when it comes to investments, they will not be able to consult the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. That is why there was the introduction that when it comes to investments specifically, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is consulted. However, when it comes to other matters - We are trying to avoid a situation where Government claims the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is not competent on financial issues and then they illegally transfer the whole fund - supervision and everything – to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

What we are trying do is to cater for that situation - the excuse the Government is using to transfer NSSF to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. That is why we are trying to have that provision where we can only involve the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development when it comes to investment. That is the mischief we are trying to cure. If we remove even that consultation, it means we are to go to the old situation and then the Executive will start claiming that they are trying to keep the money –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give my colleague information. Under clause 3, which we have already passed, and in the original Act in section 3 also, there is reference to a minister, who has the mandate and the responsibility to make appointments. He is the one who appoints the board and determines who the chairperson will be. 

I would like to know who that minister is; is it the minister in charge of finance or the minister responsible for social security? If it is the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, why are we being shy to mention specifically that the minister in charge of NSSF should be the one to appoint the board, maybe in consultation with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

Secondly, I would like us to align our discussion today with the legal framework that governs the operations of Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority. Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority is the one that manages and supervises that sector. Can we also look at the law, which guides URBRA, so that we can synchronise it? 

As of now, I have the impression that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development just wants to snatch your cake while you are watching. I think the issue is that NSSF belongs to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I do not know why the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is running away from its management and supervision. 

I would also like the Members who are here in the House representing workers to be clear because some of you are also being intimidated. You are not being clear in the way you are putting your case forward. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to propose that we stand over this issue. It touches clauses 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18. I want to look at the URBRA Act and the principal Act to see how they fit in with this. Let us stand over this and go to clause 19.

Clause 19

MR NDEEZI: I have an amendment on clause 19. Our proposal is that we delete clause 19.

The justification is that the tax provisions in the Bill should be transferred to the Income Tax Act, to avoid administration difficulties where issues relating to tax are scattered in diverse legislations. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, they are proposing that clause 19 be deleted. It deals with exemption from tax. I put the question that clause 19 be deleted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, deleted.

Clause 20

MR NDEEZI: The committee has no amendment under clause 20.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This matter came to the committee; it was ably discussed and a decision was taken but it was left out in the report.

What clause 20 tries to do is to legitimise an illegality. The URBRA Act provides for levies by pension funds but it does not provide for any figures. What happened is that using the URBRA Act, the minister by statutory instrument provided that NSSF should be giving a certain percentage of money annually to URBRA, which is a very big amount. Actually, URBRA is taking a lot of money from NSSF.

Since workers are complaining and we wanted that statutory instrument to be struck out, what is being smuggled here is to put that provision in the parent law, which is not even in the UBRA Act. They are trying to smuggle that amendment here so that it would be difficult for us to remove that very outrageous provision from the regulations.

Our proposal was that this provision be deleted because it is smuggling in an aspect, which is contentious. The workers and subscribers are complaining that it is not right for URBRA to be taking a certain amount of money every year. What we are trying to do is to prevent URBRA and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development from using this. 

We discussed this matter in the committee. I remember I was there following and a decision was taken that this matter should be removed. Somehow, we are silent in the report. I do not know why it was left out but the decision was that this matter should be deleted because it is irregular and sort of exploiting and fleecing NSSF of the money.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, are you objecting to the levy itself or the quantum? There is the proposed section 38A dealing with the levy as a principle and 38A (2) dealing with the quantum. Which of these are you objecting to?

DR LYOMOKI: Deleting the whole of that clause so that we do not refer to the levy in this Act. The URBRA Act refers to a levy and they do not provide for the detail. The statutory instrument provides for the detail, which was very unfair. What they are trying to do here is to smuggle what was put in the statutory instrument in the Act, which is unfair, so that it would be difficult for us to fight it. 

There has been an argument that the minister responsible should repeal that statutory instrument, abandon the process and refund the money. Now, if you put it in this law, then you would have legitimised whatever has taken place and therefore, it would be difficult for us to handle that matter. Therefore, our proposal was that we delete any reference to that levy in this Act and then we leave it as it has been in the statutory instrument, which is a subsidiary law. We can then sort it out there, instead of bringing it in the parent Act, which would need us again to come to Parliament. 

The UBRA Act that was brought to Parliament did not provide for this. The statutory instrument, which was passed by the minister, is the one that provided for this type of principle. If you bring it here, it would mean that if we are to remove it, we shall again have to come back to Parliament with an amendment. However, in the current situation, we can sort it out by way of a statutory instrument being changed, other than putting it in the parent law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the owner of the Bill say?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, I agree with hon. Sam Lyomoki that this clause is not well accommodated in this Bill. This is because under the UBRA Act and the regulations, the levy on pension schemes, which cuts across all the sectors, is already catered for. Therefore, it would be a repetition and it would not fit well here. It would rather be placed in the regulations of UBRA, which is the body that is responsible for collecting this levy and administering it. Therefore, a deletion is acceptable to us.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is the mover happy with that? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, deleted.

Clause 21

MR NDEEZI: Madam Chairperson, clause 21 is amended in paragraph (b) by adding the words, “for one more term only” immediately after the word, “performance.” The justification is: to prescribe the tenure of office for the managing director.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal. I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR NDEEZI: Clause 22 is amended in the proposed subsection (2) by adding the words, “for one more term only” immediately after the word “performance”.

The justification is: to prescribe the tenure of office for the deputy managing director.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR NDEEZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 23 by replacing it with the following: 

“Amendment of section 41 of the principal Act 
Section 41 of the principal Act is amended -
(a) by substituting for subsection (1) the following:
‘(1) The fund shall have a secretary who shall be appointed by the Board, on a five-year contract and may be reappointed subject to satisfactory performance and on such terms and conditions as are specified in the instrument of appointment.’

(b) in subsection (2) by deleting the words ‘the Minister and’”

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment since the minister will not appoint the secretary anymore; therefore, the functions should be conferred by the board, which is the appointing authority. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals on clause 23. I put the question that clause 23 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Third Schedule, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is anyone ready with the redrafting of clause 11?

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The new proposal is to disregard the proposal which is in the committee report and amend section 24A to read follows: 

“Midterm access to benefits

(1) 	A member who has made voluntary contributions to the fund shall be allowed midterm access to his or her benefits on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the minister.

(2) 	The board may, in consultation with the minister, grant midterm access to a member of the fund under circumstances prescribed in subsection (3) of this section. 

(3) 	The circumstances under which the board may grant midterm access may include any of the following: age of the member, years of employment, disability of the member, or unemployment of the member.

(4) 	Where a member is granted midterm access to his or her benefits under this section, such a grant shall not exceed 40 per cent of the total sum of the member’s benefit.”

Madam Chairperson, this 40 per cent was brought in here but it is not a fixed figure. It is just being given as the top margin. It is a range. They may decide to put it at 20, 25, 30 - It is just a reference and it can be at the discretion of the minister to fix the figure.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I still think that the committee needs an opportunity to study this against their proposal. I would like, therefore, to defer this together with the clauses from 13 to 18, so that we can complete them next week and give time to the committee to look at this.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019” – (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, I agreed with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development that I would move this, so it should not be an issue in the House.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and passed it with amendments, save for clauses 1, 2, 3, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17. I beg to move. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have realised that hon. Bahati is flouting the rules. I know very well that the amendments that hon. Bahati is pushing for have not yet been passed; specifically, the amendment to have his ministry assume responsibility of whichever roles he wants to take over. 

Madam Speaker, I also know that the sponsor of this Bill is the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, who is in the House and he was also here yesterday. Hon. Bahati has just jetted in today. 

Is the honourable minister in charge of finance, hon. Bahati, in order to usurp the powers of the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development who is the sponsor of this Bill? Is he in order to come and tell a lie to Parliament that he is an interested party, and masquerade as the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill was sponsored by hon. Janat Mukwaya, the former Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. In the circumstances, her successor owns the Bill. Please, take the Floor.

5.25
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House, which considered the clauses as mentioned, be adopted. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please report properly; what have we done at the committee stage?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, clauses 1, 2, and 3 were not considered. Clauses 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 were considered. Clause 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 were not considered. Clauses 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 and 29 were considered.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.27
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, my apologies; I do not normally look as shabby as I look now. It is because my colleague had taken over. 

I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall not go to the third reading because we have stood over a number of clauses. I urge both the movers and Members to study those clauses that we stood over so that next Wednesday, we can complete the Bill. Thank you.

It is 5.30 p.m. I see the Minister of Works and Transport; have you come to respond to your issues? Okay, let us go to his item. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF TARMAC ROADS IN UGANDA

5.28
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, this is a statement by the Minister of Works and Transport to Parliament on the preparation of the National Development Plan III (NDP III) national roads projects, with a detail about the distribution of the tarmac roads in the country. I am presenting this statement to inform Parliament of the processes adopted by the Ministry of Works and Transport through the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) in developing a prioritised list of NDP III national roads projects. 

Uganda National Roads Authority has developed a five-year National Road Development Programme that includes the national roads to be upgraded, national roads to be widened, and the strategic bridges to be constructed in the next five years.

Objective of the Five-Year National Road Development Plan

The objective of the five-year plan was to provide a clear plan for the development of the national roads in the NDP III period. Specifically, this plan will - 

1. 	Ensure that the development of the road network is aligned with the national development priorities including agriculture, industry, mining, tourism, and regional equalisation; 

2. 	Efficiently cater for the increasing traffic levels around the country. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to give a short background and context. The Uganda National Roads Authority was established to maintain, operate and develop the national road network which comprises of 20,856 kilometres of paved and unpaved roads; 6,072 bridges and major culvert structures; and 10 ferry routes connecting various parts of the country up to date. As of June 2020, 5,398 kilometres, which is 25.7 per cent, of the national roads were paved while 15,458 kilometres, which is 74.3 per cent, were unpaved. 

The current distribution of the paved road network and ongoing projects across the country, by region, is as follows:

In central or Buganda region, the total paved national roads are 1,594 kilometres. The ongoing upgrading works are 177 kilometres. 

In the Rwenzori region, the paved roads are 500 kilometres. We do not have ongoing works.

In Bunyoro subregion, we have 484 kilometres of paved national roads and the ongoing projects are 379 kilometres.

In Ankole region, we have 569 kilometres of paved roads. We do not have any projects going on right now. 

In Kigezi region, we have 330 kilometres of paved roads and 77 kilometres of projects going on.

In Busoga region, we have 254 kilometres of paved roads. We do not have any projects going on right now.

In Elgon region, we have 222 kilometres of paved roads and 205 kilometres of ongoing works.

In Bukedi region, we have 179 kilometres of paved roads and 71 kilometres of ongoing projects.
 
In Teso, we have 216 kilometres of paved road networks and 26 kilometres of ongoing projects. 

In Lango, we have 151 kilometres of paved roads and 181 kilometres of ongoing projects. 

In Acholi subregion, we have 521 kilometres of paved roads. We do not have any ongoing projects right now.

In Karamoja, we have 163 kilometres of paved roads and 20 kilometres of ongoing projects. 

In West Nile, we have 214 kilometres of paved roads and 66 kilometres of ongoing projects. 

Madam Speaker, this information is contained in an annex to this statement and I will lay the details on the Table.

As at June 2020, the regions with the lowest density were the Karamoja and Lango subregions, with six kilometres per 1,000 square kilometres and eight kilometres per 1,000 square kilometres respectively. I have attached the list of the current paved national road densities per region and the ongoing national roads upgrading projects to this document. I will lay it on the Table.

I wish to inform you, Madam Speaker, that my ministry and UNRA followed the following criteria to determine the priority list of projects included in NDP III: Selection of projects to be implemented in the NDP III period was based on a technical needs analysis, consideration of available resources in the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF), and Government of Uganda priorities.

The technical needs analysis involved a process through which technical interventions were determined scientifically and objectively, considering the condition of and the traffic situation on the road network. Results of the technical analysis showed that approximately 8,811 kilometres of unpaved roads required upgrading to paved standards over the next five-year period. This would cost approximately Shs 32 trillion. 

Uganda National Roads Authority carried out a multi-criteria analysis to rank the road projects on the basis of the following criteria:

1. 	Roads that are critical for the support of agriculture, tourism, oil and gas production, minerals and other economic activities.

2. 	Roads that provide access to industrial parks and free zones.

3. 	Roads that support trade and movement of freight.

4. 	Roads that support regional integration – connecting neighbouring countries through major posts.

5. 	Roads that are critical for the provision of security, social and administrative services in the rural areas.

6. 	Roads that are planned to decongest Kampala City.

7. 	Roads that serve as a primary route in opening up the hinterland of the country and improving accessibility to regions in line with regional equalisation and balanced development as emphasised in the Vision 2040 framework. The programme considered increasing the road density of the underserved regions to move towards the Vision 2040 target. 

Madam Speaker, the roads were ranked according to the above criteria. 

Consideration was made of the estimated UNRA medium-term expenditure framework, which is approximately Shs 23 trillion in the NDP III period, to determine the final number of projects prioritised for implementation. This was used to determine the number of new projects within this planning period while taking into account the existing commitments. 

Based on the available MTEF, about 3,597 kilometres of national roads were selected for upgrading, 32 kilometres of the existing roads for widening within the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area, and construction of six strategic bridges. These projects are estimated to cost about Shs 15 trillion. This excludes the ongoing projects, which will require about Shs 7 trillion for completion in the NDP III period.

The selection process also considered the functional classification of the national roads, that is, Class A which are international trunk roads; Class B, which are national trunk roads or inter-regional roads within the country; and Class C, which are intra-regional roads, that is, connecting districts within the region.

As of June 2020, all Class A roads in Uganda and about 40 per cent of Class B roads were paved. Only about eight per cent of the Class C roads were paved; that is where we are still doing very badly. The overall intention is to complete the paving of the different classes of roads in a phased manner. 

A lot of care and effort has been taken to ensure that the national roads projects included in NDP III support the most critical sectors and the planned programmes of Government to spur economic development across the country. Overall, the planned programme increases the national paved roads’ density from 22 kilometres per 1,000 square kilometres to 41 kilometres per 1,000 square kilometres. This is in line with the targets of Vision 2040 towards achieving 100 kilometres per 1,000 square kilometres by the year 2040. The list of road projects included in NDP III and the target road densities per sub region is also attached as an annex to this document. 

Assurances 

Madam Speaker, I would like to assure you and all the honourable Members of Parliament that:

The selection process for the national roads project in the five-year programme was based on a scientific and objective analysis, which will ensure the highest return of investment in the national roads network.

The completion of the roads programme will increase the paved road density across the country to support the primary growth sectors and improve access to currently underserved regions, to promote Government efforts towards balanced development.

In conclusion, my ministry is committed to improve the national roads network by implementing the priority NDP III projects, in support of other Government programmes and facilitate economic activities to ensure the highest returns on investment. 

On this document, which I will lay on the Table, is a map which shows the distribution of the road network; the current paved one, the ongoing projects and the planned projects in the next five years.
Also in the document is an annex, which shows the paved national road network per sub-region. You have Buganda sub-region, Bunyoro sub-region, Ankole, Kigezi, Busoga, Elgon, Bukedi, Teso, Lango, Acholi, Karamoja and West Nile.

Also in the document is a list of the ongoing projects for upgrading in the year 2020/2021. The list is also herewith attached. Also included here is the list of current paved network, ongoing and planned roads, with the density being indicated as I had promised in the discussion document.

Also included in this document, I thought it relevant to inform the members of Parliament and give them information about the road construction process and the costs involved. Many times, people ask “When is this project starting?” even when a loan has been passed or money has been passed. I thought it wise to include this detail so that people can see the process through which a project goes.

Madam Speaker, I also took advantage of this report to include in this document a clarification to the Leader of the Opposition on the issue she raised in her statement, in response to the State of the Nation Address of 2020.

I beg to lay these documents on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. The Clerk should ensure that they are circulated to all the Members to study. As we start the new cycle, we should have those in mind. 

However, honourable minister, I just want you to check on one road. You properly identified Karamoja as very disadvantaged. Today, I had a delegation from Karamoja, wanting to know about the Moroto-Kotido-Kaabong-Namukora-Kitgum Road, which they consider very important.

GEN. KATUMBA: Madam Speaker, Moroto-Kotido-Kaabong-Namukora Road is in the NDP III programme. The Orom-Karenga-Kidepo, which is a tourism road, is also on the programme under the tourism road connection.

5.44
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Gen. Katumba for attempting to justify and defend the distribution of the tarmacked road network in Uganda.

If we were to apply the criteria the minister has enumerated to some of the places where we come from, then we shall never have tarmacked roads. Last year – I am a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure – we asked UNRA to give us this information.

When they came to the committee, - I have just picked a copy of the document on the distribution of the roads – the one you see in red is the distribution of the tarmacked roads in Uganda. You can see where the concentration of the roads is.

Let me speak for the east. Madam Speaker, if it was not for the purpose of the Great North Road, our region would not see tarmac roads. If you left – with the exception now from Iganga - With the exception of Kaliro and Pallisa Road to the left of the Great North road - from Iganga up to Lango, there is not any other, except those few kilometres.

By the time they realised that this had put them in a trap, UNRA had wanted to withdraw this map. However, good enough, we had already got it. So, when you look at it, it sends a disturbing picture to this country that if this is how our resources are allocated for the tarmac roads, then there is a big problem.

Why is it that when it comes to other regions, the east and north and West Nile, they say 
“No, this is the criteria we have used.” If we are using that criteria, that cannot solve the problem.

What happened to the so-called political roads? I can speak for part of the roads that the President pledged to this country from 2011 and 2016 campaigns from Kimaka-Kamuli-Bukungu connecting it from Kagwala-Kasilo-Serere to Ngora-Kumi-Serere-Soroti since 2011.

Madam Speaker, you know very well that there are even people who are ready to fund that road. Previously, we had been deceived by Sogea Satom that it was going to work on the roads. There were 14 roads which the President promised but they failed. They wrote back indicating that they could not. 

We have got a funder to do those roads. You remember I used to submit those letters to the President and copy to the Minister of Works and Transport. What happened? We saw this as the only way we could elevate that region and attract development early enough. 

If we went the way we are going, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues who come from those regions, there is going to be a big problem. Simply look at Teso, which has only the Great North Road. There is not any other. So, we only benefitted from the Great North Road. 

If it was not for the Governments at that time, we would not have had even the first class murram roads because that was 60 or so years ago. They were able to provide those murram roads but to-date, there is no more road.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, as you are sending this report to the Clerk, I think the Committee on Physical Infrastructure needs to look at this document the minister has just read. We have not been able to access it easily because we know the minister was not here earlier on.

The minister needs to take other regions seriously. We all pay taxes. The east is where taxes come from. You see what it has taken us to fight to ensure that the Kampala-Jinja Expressway has taken off. Tororo has very many industries. All the minerals from Karamoja and all the tourist attractions are there, which qualify. Why have they not been built up to now, except that single road?

Madam Speaker, I thank you.

5.49
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for the statement he has presented to the House. 

The minister has told us the criteria that is used in the selection of roads. He talked about tourism roads. He talked about roads, which will promote trade. He talked about those, which are critical for social administration and opening the hinterland.  

Currently, the NRM Government is drawing its manifesto. You have told us you have attached roads, which are planned for NDP III. We want to see that these roads are featuring there. For instance, I would like to talk about a particular road from Kamuli-Kaliro connecting to Pallisa and then connecting up to the other side of Kumi, which stretch has been constructed.

Madam Speaker, this road is very important. I believe it is a core tourism road. It is also a road, which provides an alternative road to the road from the known highway from Kampala via Jinja to go the eastern part. This road will connect Kamuli to Kayunga and we shall have another highway through Kayunga, Kamuli, Kaliro, Pallisa going up to Kumi –(Interjections)– okay, whatever but that side of the country. 

The road I am talking about is in regard to an advert for feasibility study and critically detailed engineering designs were run in February. We want to see commitment that Government is actually going to work on these roads. It is painful to see that the money, which is borrowed and will be paid for by our children, is being hugely spent in one region. We want these resources to be equitably distributed to the Ugandans. We want these roads actually extended to other parts of the country. Don’t you want to promote tourism in the eastern region? Don’t we have tourism features in the north, Busoga and Teso? We want to see these roads done.

Therefore, honourable minister, it would be very important for us to see these roads highlighted in the NRM’s manifesto showing that there is commitment to work on them. We shall be grateful when that is done. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.51
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Gen. Katumba, the Minister of Works and Transport, for the report he has given us on the status of roads in Uganda. 

Like hon. Okupa said, I bemoan the status of roads in the West Nile Region and northern Uganda as a whole. From colonial times, we are put as labour reserves of this world. There is no development in our region at all. They only went there to extract labour to come and do work in Kakira, Buganda and elsewhere. Fifty eight years after independence, we still have minuscule of roads. This injustice cannot go on. Honourable minister, I think you should look at this very carefully and address the roads in the West Nile Region.

Bunyoro is one of those areas, which were neglected during colonial times. They have only been rescued recently because of the discovery of oil. No wonder their roads are called oil roads. They are not even for the people of Bunyoro. This is the kind of injustice we want to see addressed, not just because of some direct benefits. 

Uganda has been applauded for its refugee policy globally by the United Nations but the people hosting these refugees are surrounded by dust. I am glad that the new road of Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo is going to be undertaken by loans from the World Bank. The road UNHCR uses to ferry relief food and refugees is all terribly dusty and bumpy. Why aren’t they included in this national road network?

Lastly, Madam Speaker, hon. Gen. Katumba was one time the Chief of Defence Forces. He knows the importance of security roads in this country. Government committed to build security roads along our borders. We in West Nile and northern Uganda live in the most conflict-ridden region. The Democratic Republic of Congo and South Sudan have never known peace and we are the ones receiving their refugees. We need to carefully survey these borders through these security roads. There are particular roads that do not cross any river apart from Nyagak and they are on the escarpment. This would be a very wonderful security road, which Government should give priority.

Among the refugee roads, which I would like the minister to consider is the Kagoropa-Busia road; we also have a Busia in Koboko, where the majority of the refugees from South Sudan go through in addition to Oraba. 

Honourable minister, I would like to appeal for Keri-Kagoropa-Nyamberi-Busia Road, which is a key road that brings refugees. It is also the shortest route crossing to Yei and Juba in terms of our future trade. Thank you very much.
 
5.55
MS SILVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for the statement. I am very shocked that he got sincere to talk about the percentage of roads in the Lango sub-region. One time, we had a meeting with the UNRA people in Lango sub-region. The community almost beat your staff, honourable minister. Your staff could not finish the meeting and they had to run away. 

In Lango sub-region, we almost have five of the criteria you have put in place. When you talk about security, it is inclusive. When you talk about agriculture, it is there. When you talk about the economy, it is there. Almost five of the six things you mentioned as your criteria are present in that sub-region. 

I tell you that from the time NRM came to power, we only have 50 kilometres of our road tarmacked. That is the road from Dokolo to Lira. The other ones that you have included are Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) roads that are within the municipalities. 

It is very shameful when we, members of Parliament from Lango and the community of Lango talk about roads. We feel like burying ourselves because we cannot be alert and talk. That is why some other people like hon. Cecilia Atim cannot talk about issues of roads. You have ashamed members of Parliament who come from Lango to the fullest.

Let me tell you, the road from Kamdini to Lira passes via a place where there are three ministers: hon. Betty Amongi, hon. Sarah Acheng and the hon. Col Okello-Engola Macodwogo. This road, however, was tarmacked during the Obote regime. I wish Langi people had the magic and strong culture like that of the Acholi people. Maybe the spirits would have talked so that the people understand. This is very annoying because we cannot explain ourselves for the people to understand. 

When you talk about Presidential pledges, this is even too much. From 2001, the Rwekunye-Acholibur Road has always been in the budget. I remember even the money was released but I do not know what happened to it. Each time elections are about to take place, they tell us the road is now in the procurement process and we never see it. 

When the people talk about roads, we really have nothing to say in response, in as far as Government programmes are concerned. 

We have a Presidential Lodge in Otuke. I am a representative of the people of Otuke. When it comes to voting, we vote highest in Lango sub-region. We move as a district and as members of Parliament from Lango. We even combine efforts with people of Karamoja to say, “May you give us that road from Lira City via Alebtong to Otuke- Abim-Kotido.” All these have fallen on deaf ears.

I would like to request –(Interjections)- can you allow me talk to the minister - to give us affirmative action. This time round, please, close your eyes and pick some of the congested roads you have put in one region and take them to Lango sub-region. We are very ashamed. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.59
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Mubende):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. Unfortunately, it gives the impression that here in Buganda, we are doing very well, which is not the case. 

From Kassanda District, for instance, which is very near here – Madam Speaker, you have been there - you know that as you go to Mubende, on the Rwenzori Highway, there is only about 18 kilometres of tarmac but as you branch off to Bukuya through Kiboga, there is no tarmac yet, we have been there for 35 years. We are very close here but we are experiencing the same problem the people of Otuke are talking about despite the fact that we feed the city with maize, coffee, cattle and even gold. We expected a gold road and we recently got a pledge from the President because we have the biggest gold deposits in the country. However, unfortunately, we have no tarmac.

Therefore, I would like to request the minister to make a comment on the Myanzi-Kiboga because it is also a presidential pledge. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.00
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative, National): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am privileged that my constituency is national and I have a fair understanding of the road network in this country. I appreciate and support what the honourable members are raising.

What I would think of- the minister should be able to listen- one time, I tried to move a motion, which was sabotaged by the Minister for Works and Transport that time. For over ten years, we gave roads infrastructure priority and we were giving a certain amount of money ranging from about Shs 2 trillion and it continued increasing to about Shs 3 trillion. Sometimes, the roads are funded by development partners.

However, what would happen is that a year would end and the money is not utilised because sometimes they would claim that it is the issue of absorption capacity and that money would not be returned. Then the following year, that road continued coming back and we requested that for the last about 15 years, the ministry should give us information on the money we voted and which roads the money was spent on.  

You would find a road X was provided for in Financial Year 2006/2007 and the money released. When it came to Financial Year 2007/2008, the road was not yet done and the other money, which was given previously would not be talked about and then they would start from zero and again they would be given more money for the same road. This took place for about three, four or five years and that is why we have this challenge.

Therefore, we need to do an audit of which roads were constructed using our budget local funding and also the development partners. That is number one.

Secondly, the issue of substandard roads - my colleague talked about the Great North of a road from Tororo-Mbale-Soroti Road. That road is substandard because it is already peeling off and even the one from Soroti to Lira already needs a repair. It is also substandard.

Then there is this road, which has been constructed between Kyegegwa through Kagadi to Hoima. Already, even without putting up the top layer, which is most expensive, they are already putting the road signs from Kyegegwa to Hoima. (Interjections) Yes, some sections are not constructed but even those that are constructed, they claim they have finished but they have not put on the top layer and they are already putting the road signs trying to claim –(Interjections) I know but there is a portion, which has been finished but it is substandard.

I am not blaming you honourable minister but the point I am raising is that you should try to interest yourself in the past because I know you inherited most of these problems and yet, we have a lot of trust in you.

Therefore, our request is that you take time to study some of those reports and try to guide. Otherwise, many mistakes were made and we want you to rectify them.

Lastly, if you are talking about roads connecting various regions of Uganda, they should be balanced. I do not know why you do not provide for this road through Kamuli. Why should someone coming from Kamuli- Pallisa have to come through Jinja instead of passing via Kayunga?

The new road bridge will be useful if the road continues from Kayunga through Kamuli, Kaliro up to Pallisa so that it connects to other roads. If I am going to Kumi, I do not have to pass via Jinja and Tirinyi.

Finally, I would like to thank you that the road which passes via Pallisa to Kamonkoli is being done very well and I am lucky it passes near my home. Thank you very much.

6.05
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for updating us about the status of the roads in Uganda. I will generally talk about the roads in Acholi and particularly, the ones in Amuru. The criteria that were raised by the minister are actually all in Acholi.

Honourable minister, I would like to draw your attention to Awer Rhino Camp Road, which would easily connect Acholi to West Nile to Arua. This road connects to very many big farms that are not feeding only Uganda but the rest of East Africa also. There are big farms, which are not just Ugandans but also international investors. However, year in year out, the road is terrible because the murram they use is bad. Secondly, the bridges have given way. The most recent bridge that gave way and it has taken UNRA and the ministry forever to rectify, is the Apaa Bridge, which connects to Rhino Camp.

Therefore, these are very serious issues that keep coming up every year. Farmers find it very difficult to bring their produce from wherever they farm to Gulu and the rest of the world because the roads are impassable.
Furthermore, hon. Okupa talked about- perhaps we are lucky that we are getting some of the tarmac roads because of the Great North Road. Amuru has benefited greatly because of that. The biggest percentage of the tarmac road that we have in Amuru is because of that Great North Road that goes to Nimule.

However, in essence, the only one that may be we shall get is that one of Atyak to Adjumani, which is yet to be worked on. I am talking about the tarmac that goes inside and actually benefits people. However, this Gulu-Nimule Road, I would say, is to benefit certain categories of people because the way it was constructed, it did not take into consideration challenges that are faced by people with disability. Some sections of the roads are very high and inaccessible to people with disability; even the women who sale by the road side find it a challenge.

In addition, I have always travelled along Gulu-Kampala Highway. There is a section that always disturbs me, between Migyera and Kafu. This is about 30 or so kilometres and it has never been completed. The rest of the road is about to wear out. What happened to that section? Was it “eaten” by somebody? It has never been completed and we have never got any answers to this.

Another question that I would like to ask is in regard to contracts. When you award contracts, say to build a bridge or a road, don’t you coordinate amongst yourselves as Government ministries and agencies to ensure that some of the encumbrances are dealt with? 

I would like to give an example of a contract that was awarded to construct a bridge that connects Lakwang and Oyobi.  The contractor even signed the contract and started ferrying materials to start the construction works. Uganda Wildlife Authority came from nowhere and said, “No, you are not constructing the bridge here because this is UWA land.” The people are asking themselves, “What’s happening to Government agencies?” 

Finally, I was in the constituency over the weekend. I used the road from Atiak to Okidi, which connects to Parabek in Lamwo. I can tell you that after travelling half way the journey, I had to make a U-turn to look for what hon. Baba was talking about the security road, in order to access Okidi Parish. Yet, this is the shortest cut to Lamwo but the road is impassable.

I am sure you know this road very well and you can give the people of Amur good answers. I was asked very tough questions. 

Hon. Akello talked about the chasing of UNRA staff. This happened because when we fail to get answers, we also send our anger on to the staff of UNRA. Just like in a home, when the father beats the wife, she will beat the children and the children will beat the chicken.  

Thank you for bringing up the issue of roads but there is a very big gap. Please, make priority in areas where you see that there is money coming in to support Government. Thank you. 

6.12
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity.

Honourable minister, as a General in the army, you should now become the General in the roads and other infrastructure. You are aware that without roads, it is very difficult to secure the country.

Road infrastructure in this country started well. Honourable minister, you are aware that roads and other infrastructure are driving forces for national development. Their sustained access is important in terms of improving productivity, welfare and security.

While we appreciate what you presented this afternoon, a lot more remains to be done. Mine is that while we move towards total national coverage, the manner in which we have been constructing roads in this country, especially quality, is still wanting. I do not know what the standards are. I am not an engineer. However, what I see by mere common sense is that our road quality cannot stand the test of over 20 years in this country. This is embarrassing.

How do we lift the quality of roads in this country to a level that should match - in the United States of America, roads were made in the early times and we were told that it takes 200 years. (Interjections) Well, you may object to it. Even if I said 100, you may still say it is not true.

Let us raise the quality of our roads. It is not good to say, “We have covered the road network” and after only a year, as you complete the project, the side that you started with is getting worn out. That is why they are talking about the Kamudini-Lira Road.

My interest is that while we do the roads, there should also be a comprehensive understanding of rolling out other transport infrastructure. Look at airways. They say that potentially, if the infrastructure of aerodromes in this country were also done, the tourism that we are crying for, we would be harvesting money just like white ants. 

There are potential investors out there who need to put all these aerodromes in place but there are lots of challenges to go through. I may not mention them here but these are critical areas where we need a lot of support.

If you look at Gulu, Soroti, Mbarara and Entebbe; if all these had internal flights while the road networks are being done – I know Ugandans have the capacity to fly. They have the capacity to use water transport, which we have not exhausted. It is just lying there gifted by God. What are we aiming at?

Let us insist that the road infrastructure should be done. It was looking very shabby when hon. Okupa displayed this on the screen. If you are watching from outside the chambers, you get shocked. If you did Physical Geography in High school, you would get scared of the network. It would appear like some people sat somewhere and then agreed, “Let this side of the country not have any roads, while the other side has.” This was not God’s creation. 

Therefore, honourable minister, you have a very big challenge. I know that as a General, we respected you so much in Gulu that we never wanted you to be removed from Division IV because of your performance. Please, do a good job even here. Thank you. 

6.15
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, the honourable minister read Rwenzori and indicated that there are 500 kilometres. However, looking at the Constitution, which I am quite conversant with, Rwenzori includes Bundibugyo and Kasese. Therefore, I am looking at that spectrum.

The distance from the border of Kasese with Bunyangabo up to Katunguru through Hima can be approximately 80 kilometres. From Kikorongo to Bwera could be around 30 kilometres. That is 110 kilometres.

When you add up the number of kilometres that are within Kasese Municipality, it will be between five and 10. That is 115.

From the border of Kabarole, that is Kichwamba Technical up to the river, it can take between 80 and 100 kilometres. That means that all together, you come to around 295 kilometres. The honourable minister indicated that we have 500 kilometres. Where are they? That is the entire network that I am talking about.

Secondly, honourable minister, you recall that the road of Rugendabara up to Kansangali, the one for Kisanyaraze up to Nyakaringijo were prioritised as tourism roads and I do not see work going on there. Why have you delayed?

Thirdly, I am looking at Busoga. The districts that constitute Busoga are Bugiri, Iganga, Jinja, Kaliro, Kamuli, Mayuge and Namutumba. That was at the time of the promulgation of this Constitution, which means that there are much more districts than I have read. 

Actually, to even validate the one for Rwenzori, you can also add Ntoroko so that you can get the real picture of what I am talking about.

In the whole of Busoga sub-region, there are only 124 kilometres, which you have listed. That includes the highway. Therefore, if you can reduce the kilometres from Jinja-Bugiri, you will know that what you have worked on – because it is President Milton Obote who worked on that one. This indicates that what you have worked on would be less than 50 kilometres. 

It is very unfortunate that for the last 35 years, you have not worked on roads, which are more than 50 kilometres. Yet, you know very well that our Constitution talks about balanced development. This development is not just about having more for others and less for the rest of the regions.

Therefore, I would like the minister to categorically state how he intends to cure this imbalance because if it is not cured, I can tell you, time will come and you will know what happens.

Finally, I would like the honourable minister to tell this country why what hon. Komakech has talked about keeps on re-occurring. That is the life span of the roads. The stretch from Hima up to Katunguru, for example, was completed around 2008. However, within 10 years, the road is worn out and you are again redoing it. Why don’t you build long lasting roads?

Madam Speaker, we have discussed with the honourable minister in our Committee on Physical Infrastructure that the number of kilometres might not matter but the quality of the roads is very important. For example, if each financial year, you can work on 200 kilometres of quality roads and you do this incrementally, by the end of the five years, you will have 1,000 kilometres but of good quality other than having this mix of disposable roads. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Ssewungu comes, I want the honourable minister to remove the Jinja-Kamuli Road; that was rehabilitation and not a new road. Please, remove also Kaliro-Iganga Road. Therefore, what has the NRM done in Busoga?

6.22
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the Minister for the report but it is not beneficial to Kalungu people because it is just a general one.

One of the reasons that were forwarded by Government in creating new districts was to develop them. If you go to Western Uganda in Ankole sub-region, most of districts are linked by tarmac. That is why hon. Okupa gave that performance and the map. In Ankole now, you cannot cross from one district to another without tarmac.

In Kalungu, which Gen. Katumba knows very well, we have Lwera where Kalungu District starts from and ends somewhere at Kabale Bugongi, meaning that our tarmac in Kalungu District is along Masaka Road, just five kilometres and nothing else.

When you get on the highway to Kalungu District, which starts from Bukalasa, the area that has tarmac has been taken to Masaka City and this was built by President Milton Obote. From Bukalasa to Gomba, there are only 35 kilometres that need tarmac. However, in Kalungu, there is a rich Catholic who built a church, which is in hon. Ssempijja’s constituency. That church has a distance like from the entrance of Parliament up to here, which was tarmacked by someone and that is the tarmac we have in the entire Kalungu District; a mere church road. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, what we are hearing from UNRA needs investigation. There is somebody who is playing a political role of determining which area should get a tarmac road. I will not mention that name here but when I come to the committee, I will give you the details. That person is the reason most of our areas are not getting these roads.

I remember when they were creating town councils, they told us that we would be given money every financial year to build at least five kilometres of tarmac within the town council but this is not happening.

We must pay a lot of attention to new districts, which also need to benefit by getting tarmac.  Gen. Katumba, you worked in Tanzania. You got a lot of training from the Tanzanian Government. In Tanzania, any district created is given attention - the headquarters of the district, the roads and other infrastructure. 

Madam Speaker, can Gen. Katumba go to Kalungu? You have made promises, just 35 kilometres, Bukalasa-Bukomansimbi is tarmacked, Gomba is tarmacked and now, the link between Kalungu – the only highway in Kalungu District is just 35 kilometres to conclude everything. You only need to cross to Katonga and that road would be finished.

I would also want to inquire why you make good roads in some districts and in others, very poor ones. We must look for that evidence. Do we have someone playing a political role at UNRA to determine who gets tarmac and who does not? If we solve that problem, Gen. Katumba, you would have solved the problems in UNRA. 

Otherwise, you took our coffee in Masaka and trucks. All the coffee you used to emerge victorious in the bush war was from Kalungu. Our factories in Kalungu are no longer there alongside poor roads. You must solve that problem in Kalungu and other parts of the country.

6.27
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Connected to roads is a matter that I had wanted to raise as a matter of public importance. However, now that we are discussing the issue of the roads, the minister should respond to the matter of this road.

On the 08 July 2019, UNRA published and wrote to Parliament that the road repairs for the Kampala-Mukono Highway starting from Spear Motors would start. This would involve filling the potholes. 

This contract was supposed to last for nine months and the cost that was for rehabilitation of that road before the Expressway - people who use it know the state of that road. When you reach Bweyogerere and Coca Cola, it is bumpy. It was supposed to cost Shs 13.9 billion.

There were two companies - Energo Project and one from Mauritius. We use this road. It was supposed to last nine months from July 2019 to March 2020 but we are now in September. The works have stopped and we do not know whether that is the type of work they have done and the Shs 13.9 billion disappeared. The valley between Seeta and Mukono is now murram, just like near Coca Cola. They scrapped off the tarmac and it is no more.
 
We want to know what happened to that project. (Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, my senior colleague. You have talked about the cost of that project. However, I have information that the cost of that stretch of the road has been exaggerated to about Shs 70 billion. There is a lot of theft and people working for selfish interests in that project. Therefore, I think you need to update yourself with the actual figure. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: That is why we are asking the minister to explain because ordinary Ugandans or Parliament or even our committee, do not know why two years down the road, the work has stopped and nothing is going on. What happened to the Energo Project and that Mauritius company? We are suffering with that terrible stretch.

Finally, as you leave the Jinja Bridge heading to Njeru side, there is a stretch of about 100 metres and it is murram. Every day, vehicles overturn from there. What is UNRA doing to repair that small part of the road? 

I have raised this matter several times to the committee and to the Permanent Secretary. They said they would contact the UNRA people to work on it. What has happened? If you look at the other roads leading out of Kampala, they are not like this road. Can we put all the attention to those roads? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, are you in position to answer? 

6.31
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Members for the contribution and issues raised. I really wish I had all the money to do all the roads at the pace which everybody demands. 

Unfortunately, running a cash budget as you know, does not allow us to do that. However, I would like to request the Members to take time and look at Annex 4 of the document I have submitted and also look at the roads, which we have planned for. Since we have the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, if there are any alterations, which you think are necessary, then we will be able to get together. However, that annex will show you because you have also directed us to never, for example, go and ask for money when we have not done the feasibility studies. 

Therefore, that annex will show you the projects, which we think are ready in terms of feasibility study and detailed design to be financed and to take off. I would request that this document goes to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure so that they look at it and we work together to see if there are any major projects, which you think we should take on and they are not included. (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I stand on a procedural matter. The minister is talking about feasibility studies for this entire network. I wonder why feasibility studies cannot be done in northern and eastern Uganda. We have to be serious and specific about these issues.

Secondly, when we last spoke about the distribution of tarmac roads in Uganda, I raised one issue of historical perspective in regard to a special fund from BADEA; the Arab Fund for Development, which was acquired through Uganda Development Bank and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development acknowledged that he was aware of that particular scheme or the line of credit. I am wondering what happened to that line of credit. It was to extend first class roads through Kwania up to Kitgum. 

If we cannot get funding directly through the Government system, maybe we can try through the international line of credit. Therefore, can you also clarify to us on that? Thank you.      

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I talked about feasibility studies, I did not say that they are only concentrated in one area. This is a feasibility study throughout the country. 

Specifically, to respond to some of the issues, I will start with hon. Ogwal’s issue about Rwenkunye-Apac Road. There were issues, which caused delay because the bank took time to give us a response, which they have done. We have actually made an impression that before December, we should have the contractor on site so that the road can start and that is Rwenkunye-Apac-Puranga-Acholibur.

On the ongoing projects, I appreciate hon. Okupa’s concerns. However, we also have projects that we did not mention. We have Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kamonkoli-Kumi in the East. We have Soroti-Katakwi-Akisim Road to Karamoja and that has been completed. We have 111km from Soroti to Akisim. When you add that to the distance on the Muyende-Nakapiripirit Road, you get 92 kilometres. Therefore, there are projects that are ongoing. 

On the issue of roads in Lango area apart from Rwekunye-Apac, Lira-Abim Road is among the roads, which are planned for in Lango in the NDP III. The road from Kamuli to Kaliro to Namulwa to Pallisa is also in the NDP III.
 
Hon. Baba, we now have Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo Road, which is 105 Kilometres. We have Atiak-Adjumani-Laropi up to Moyo, which is 70kilometres with a bridge. That belt is going to be covered. The road, which we have also requested the World Bank to include to the IDA19; I mean the road from Paidha-Goli-Vurra, along the border line. Therefore, all these are planned for and it is only a question of us getting the money. 

In Kasese, the challenge is the terrains in some of the areas and where we may not be able to do the tarmac roads but most of your roads have been maintained. The road from Fortportal through Hima to Kasese has been repaired. The one from Kikorongo to Katunguru has been done. Katunguru Bridge is going to be replaced. (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: The road you are talking about, from Kikorongo to Katunguru was built during the Obote regime. Therefore, where is your tarmac?

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Honourable colleague, you know that the road from Kikorongo to Bwera was not tarmacked before. It was only tarmacked under this Government. 

For the Acholi area, you have a road already from Olwiyo to Gulu, Acholibur, Kitgum to Musingo, which is 177 kilometres plus the entire road network in Gulu town, more than 30 kilometres in Gulu Municipality. The road from Atiak through Okidi to Parabek up to Ngomoromo and back to Kitgum is among the roads we have identified for IDA19 under the World Bank grant. 

Therefore, if we get to that, we shall be able to work on that road to include the connection to Gulu through Apyeta. Rhino Camp Road will be maintained as a murram road for now but because of the productions in Nwoya, we are now in advanced stages of discussing the introduction of the railway line from Gulu to Pakwach. 

We are now dong the Tororo Gulu Railway repair and we want to finish it with the Gulu Pakwach stretch that will address the production area of Nwoya in terms of transportation of their goods. (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: You are mentioning all the other roads but when I mentioned Kimaka-Kamuli-Bukungu and then the one connecting the ferry to Kagwala; then, you take that to Serere-Ngola-Kumi-Soroti. How can all these districts not have tarmac?

I would want you to comment on those ones.

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Honourable colleague, please, look at this document and look at specifically at Annex 4. That Mbulamuti-Kamuli Road is under the Sogea Satom Projet.

I have already talked to the Rt Hon. Speaker and updated her on how far we are with that project. Therefore, it is a question of when to start but the project is on and it is already identified. (Interruption)

MS LUCY AKELLO: Honourable minister, the Apac Road is an emergency and it has really cut off very many people. 

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: That is an emergency because it connects many communities but that one, we can do within our own funding once we get into the budget. (Interjections) Kamdini, yes, we have the Northern Corridor project starting from Tororo-Mbale-Soroti-Lira-Kamdini.

The World Bank is the financier of that project but there were social issues, which they raised with the contractor. One of them was about the quarry, which they had established at the Katine and they were not happy with where the quarry was. Therefore, they stopped the process of the project. We are in touch with the World Bank. We have answered most of the queries raised. We have raised another five queries to enable the contractor get on site and we are working with them to answer those queries.

World Bank is very particular about social safe guards and we must be able to answer all social safe guards questions before they can allow any project to proceed but we are moving. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, I think we have done a lot of work today. -  Yes, the stretch around coca cola.

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: I am sorry, Madam Speaker. The issue of Spear Motors through Bweyogerere and Mukono - it is true that when we went to look at the quotation, which the companies presented, they were over exaggerated and so, we stopped the contract until we were convinced that we were going to get value for money. That project is under review.

We have told our UNRA office in Kampala to keep maintaining the section as we reconsider the quotations, which have been –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, how would you sign a contract for Shs 13.9 billion and you are saying they exaggerated? That is what you presented to us. The Shs 13.9 billion was for the works. Therefore, the contract was signed and that is why the contractor went on site and did some parts of the work and  –(Interruption)

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: He then made new demands, which we found undefendable.

MR OKUPA: We shall handle it in the committee then. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have done quite a bit of work today. House is adjourned to Tuesday. As I informed you, we shall have a special sitting for our departed colleague but of course, the body will be brought earlier. You will be advised about the programme.

House is adjourned to Tuesday, at 2.00 p.m.

(House rose at 6.43 p.m. and adjourned till Tuesday, 22 September 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 