Tuesday, 27 September 2005

Parliament met at 2.51 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to this afternoon’s meeting and to request you to join me in welcoming students of Bubusa Primary School, Busembatia in Busiki. They are up there in the gallery. You are welcome. (Applause)

Last week we had indicated that we were going to continue handling outstanding reports. However, we have now received the laws relating to elections. So after today we shall have to adjourn the plenary for some time to permit the committees, especially the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, to attend to all these Bills all of which will have to be returned after 14 days almost simultaneously. But also, to permit the public to attend public hearings and since honourable members have different interests through their political parties, this is also to give them an opportunity to go and give their views and present their amendments. 

We believe that if members are able to present their amendments during this period, it will improve the speed at which we work when we return to the Committee Stage. The condition is that amendments will only be entertained here in the Committee Stage if they have been presented in the committee and rejected. I think that is the best way of working. I encourage all members, the public and all stakeholders interested in the transition to make use of these days to go and present their views. Thank you.

2.55
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Madam Speaker, most of the legislations that are being presented to Parliament now are very important but my fear is that they are not given sufficient publicity for the public first to know that they have been presented and then the contents of those legislations. I do not know what Parliament can do to give sufficient publicity so that the public can participate in discussing these issues. They are so important, but there is a degree of ignorance of what is going on. I pray that Parliament does something about publicizing them so that everybody knows how everything will work out for them to participate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether the chair has any brainwave on improving the publicity.

2.55
THE CHAIRMAN, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee had only received one Bill as of last week and we were able to have a press conference on Friday to inform the public that the Bill is before the committee and public hearings have commenced. We informed the public that we would start public hearings today and indeed we started today. This will go on covering next week and ending early the other week. 

Now that we are likely to receive the other two Bills today, the same information will be conveyed to the public. But as to the contents of the Bill, that will be a bit difficult for the committee to do unless there is going to be some other publications to be distributed to the people. 

The committee has commenced public hearings and any person interested in giving a view on how Bills can be improved for the better governance of the country, is welcome. All they need to do is to get in touch with the Clerk to the Committee, Mrs Rose Ssemakula and Mr John Sentubwe in Room 501 in the North Wing of Parliament Building and they will be given a schedule to appear before the committee.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Attorney-General have any other intention maybe of publishing the Bills in the press?

2.57
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this. We will endeavour to publish Bills in the national media, funds permitting.

2.57
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I regretfully note the absence of our colleagues who belong to NRM/O. I am just wondering whether the caucus or the NRM activities take precedence over the proceedings of Parliament.

CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Aggrey Awori, to say that all members of the NRM are not here when I can see two ministers and hon. Abura Pirir here? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. Some members whom you have pointed out are here.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take note of my honourable colleague’s concern about his colleagues, and your ruling. However, a more substantive concern I would like to register and probably seek the guidance of the Attorney-General is on the matter of the law during the transitional period when political parties are supposed to be preparing themselves for elections. The reason I am raising this matter is that members of the security forces, especially ISO and other domestic intelligence organizations, are beginning to interfere with parish elections of various political parties. 

This is not a farfetched concern; it happened to me last weekend. I presented myself as a candidate for the office of constituency member in my district and successfully went through for Uganda People’s Congress. Immediately thereafter a member of ISO, that is the local Gombolola Intelligence Security Officer (GISO) approached the election officers saying, “I want you to hand over the returns of the elections particularly the sheet where hon. Awori’s name is written. We want to verify it.” 

Immediately after that the election officer telephoned me expressing concern and fear for his life because generally these people are armed. He was also getting concerned that maybe these returns may never be returned to him. I told him that unless the GISO is a member of the Uganda People’s Congress and he was acting in his private capacity, he has no authority whatsoever to examine, to seize or to take papers belonging to a political party to which he does not belong.

Madam Speaker, I would like to know whether the law permits a security officer to look at papers -(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, this information will enrich the member on the Floor. Last week I raised this here but I think it is important to repeat it. A similar thing happened in my sub-county of Nabwicu, in Apac District. After the elections in one parish had been concluded, the GISO came and demanded to be given a list of those who were elected in the branch. This caused a lot of concern because the members present felt that this was harassment. Therefore, it is a real problem and I am sure that it might not be limited to my constituency and that of my friend hon. Awori. 

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, the same thing happened in my constituency, in Gai sub-county, where a GISO field officer went around looking for this list. He claimed that he had been directed by the RDC who was to take the lists to the President’s office.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, just in case the impression created is that harassment is directed only to members of UPC, I would like to give this information. Two weeks ago, at the instigation of a Gombolola Intelligence Security Officer attached to a sub-county in my constituency, unknown people attacked a village and demanded for appointment letters from the FDC party. 

Fortunately the villagers are fully mobilised. I have mobilised them fully to beat off such intimidations. An alarm was raised and these intruders ran in disarray. Whereas government may be using these institutions to intimidate people, we are building their confidence and this should sound as a warning to those who intend to misuse these institutions. Their method of work could backfire, and we do not want to lose lives.

MR AWORI: Thank you honourable colleagues for supplementing this concern. Madam Speaker, as I said, I would like the Attorney-General to guide me on interpretation of the law governing the freedoms of political parties and the transition period.  With this kind of intimidation going on, there is no way we can guarantee free and fair elections. If the Government has lost direction on matters of state management especially as far as allowing other political parties to operate freely in accordance with the law is concerned, I think the Government is free - I can see the acting Prime minister here – to declare, “We have lost the capacity to observe the law as provided in the Constitution.” 

I would like the Attorney-General to tell me which section of the law permits a security officer to interfere with the elections of a political party. Which section of the law permits a security officer of this government to inquire and examine the returns of a political party and interrogate party officials to establish membership in a given area? I seek information on the interpretation of the law from the Chief Legal Officer, Parliament and this Government’s Attorney-General.

3.06
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleagues for raising these concerns, one of which is factual. When you name a particular sub-county or a particular GISO, you should also add that we need an investigation. I will have to feed this information into our information machinery, which will inform as to what actually happened. 

My colleague mentioned unknown people who went into the village demanding letters of appointment. If they are unknown to my colleague who is reporting about them, they are more unknown –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Just as a way of clarifying to the learned Attorney-General, the vehicle they used belongs to the LC III chairperson, who also doubles as the GISO. This kind of method of work by the GISO is not something new in the sub-county. He has on separate occasions threatened people who support political parties other than NRM/O. He even held meetings to intimidate the people of that sub-county. I am not merely saying this for the sake of promoting my party. I feel we need fairness as elections draw near. Otherwise, this county will lose whatever it has achieved over the years.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, in my constituency, the RDC is now the chairman of a team, which works day and night to ensure that they have a Movement MP. This is the least I would have expected of him.  To the best of my knowledge, his roles should include among others, security. He is instead the chairman of the task force to have a Movement MP from Aruu County! Therefore, the Attorney-General should advise us on the roles the RDC should play in this transition process. If their roles are not clear, then some of us may also choose unclear ways to give them a clear role. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what you are clarifying. Let us deal with just the principles since the questions have already been asked. Please, Attorney-General, proceed and deal with the principles.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, I am not in position to give the principles. This is the point I was leading to because I am supposed to explain a particular section of the law, which allows the GISO and the RDC to do certain things. I accept these as questions, which require legal response and I will give a considered opinion in due course. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am sure my hon. colleague, the Attorney-General is familiar with the proceedings of this august House. It is during the communication from the Chair that we raise matters of national urgency and importance. We are doing this in order to elicit an immediate response from the Government –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, you are also forgetting that our rules require that if you are going to raise a matter of national importance, you contact me by 11.00 a.m. I should inform the minister to get ready with an answer by 2.00 p.m. You did not do this and in fact you are ambushing the minister and I.

MR AWORI: I agree with you and I apologise for that oversight on my part. I should not be the one to impose it on the Attorney-General. Therefore, Attorney-General, you can now relax but we still demand an immediate answer.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, I need your guidance. The issue, which has been raised on the conduct of RDCs in this country, is not simply a legal concern. We have a general problem in this country. Some offices of government decide deliberately to go outside their mandate and indulge in things, which they should not do. Therefore, it is a matter of policy and yet I see the Leader of Government Business relaxing on the front bench. This is a matter for him, not the Attorney-General. Is this government committed to ensuring that the RDCs stick to their roles other than getting into partisan political activities? Can he assure us that those RDCs will not tempt some Members of Parliament to stop them from what they are doing? 

3.15
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member has already got an answer to the question for he says, “We shall deal with them.”  Notwithstanding what the law says, I agree with members who raise concerns about the misconduct of members of our society, which includes officials of government, members of political parties and the public.  

We all agree that it is not a certain class of our society, which is prone to behaving irregularly. We have been reading in the papers, watching on television and hearing on the radios, misconduct by very many Ugandan citizens who are not in government but are actually political party leaders. Therefore, we should all be concerned about the irregular behavior of our people. We all know that towards elections people’s temperature goes up a bit. However, I must commend hon. Awori who told an official of his party to stick to the rules of the game, and it worked.   

I appeal to all of you to observe the law and charge government with bearing its responsibility. Madam Speaker, and honourable members, I do not think it makes legal or ordinary sense to simply say you are going to deal with these officers yourself. If you are already dealing with them, then what are you asking government to do? If we must have the Government, we should insist on observance of the law. 

I will take up this matter with the President’s Office and the Minister of Internal Affairs. If any government officers are becoming overzealous in their activities, these people will be called to order. It is not in the interest of this government or anybody else in this country that we do things to impact negatively on carrying out free and fair elections come the time –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, this is not the first time this country has had general elections under the present government. We had the Constituent Assembly delegate’s election in 1994, 1996 and the one, which gave birth to this Parliament in 2001. Therefore, we are talking out of experiences. What colleagues are beginning to see is what some of us experienced during the previous elections. The previous elections were under the Movement System where we had institutions like the Army, the RDCs office and the local councils. All these institutions were in one way or another misused by the very institution of government, which should protect life, property and enforce law and order.

I think what my colleagues are saying - that is why you heard about FDC and UPC who went through the branch elections recalling their experiences in the House. As we now move to a new system the situation seems to be more critical. So, if you have institutions of government it should be protecting everybody impartially. I am not scared of a GISO going to my primary elections, which are open to the public, witnessing them and even taking records. I am sure that was done in my case but what we do not want is his interference and intimidation.  

In the Police I am sure there is special branch, which can distantly see what is going on whether it is being done well and there is no problem. But what the people of other parties are saying is that institutions or organs of government, which should be seen to be non-partisan in a new political order of Multi-partyism, are still taking sides. I think this is really the emphasis, which you should go with.  

I am happy you have given a very good answer to the concern of the members. We want you to take it back that there is now a clear political dispensation and that some of these people, like an RDC in Pader, are making sure that hon. Odonga Otto who is not contesting under the Movement Party does not come back. And that RDC has taken the active part using his status and government machinery and resources to campaign. Mr Prime Minister, it is totally unacceptable.  

I experienced it in my constituency when a commander in a barracks, a day before elections, just sent soldiers to beat up people so that they could not turn up for elections. We do not want to go through these experiences again. It is our responsibility when members come and talk about this in the House to take them seriously because all of us love this country. We want peace; we want free and fair elections. When this sort of thing begins to happen it shakes the foundation of a peaceful nation, which we would like to have.  

We really want our respectable minister to take this up very seriously with the Government. It is unfortunate that today I do not know whether the Speaker was informed in advance that we have very serious business on the Order Paper. I see only two ministers here and this is not very good for the country. I am sure that Parliament had very serious business to transact but somebody has decided to divert Members of Parliament to non-parliamentary work. I think we need an explanation from the Leader of Government Business because we are still in the Movement System. What is happening? Why are ministers not here? Why are MPs not here? I do not know whether apart from the presentation of the Bill we are going to transact some other business.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The business of the Order Paper, please leave it to me.  

MR MWONDHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For almost 20 years we have been running a system that infuses politics with the state in that government officers cannot design their role as separate from politics. It has been a normal thing for an RDC to campaign for somebody. It has been normal for the GISOs to run around the countryside harassing opponents and those who are viewed as opponents. We have now to understand that we are entering in a new phase where politics should be separated from the state. I think it is incumbent on government to hold seminars to educate their officers as to what their role now should be.  

It must be said very categorically that political parties are autonomous bodies. They have to enjoy autonomy to be able to carry out their functions. They will not enjoy that autonomy when the RDCs and their agents are supervising them. It is not going to work and the earlier government wakes up on this the better for government and for everybody else. We are not going to accept to jeopardize our newly earned freedom and surrender it to the hands of these GISOs and the RDCs. Government must be told this.

The fact that some of us have kept Parliament sitting and functioning today should educate government that we need this situation for some of these institutions to survive. Otherwise, where would we be if everybody had gone to Kyadondo Road? Where would the House be? So it is important that government recognizes this fact. Thank you.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister we are getting a bit perturbed. Are the RDCs civil servants or politicians? If they are any we should really know when they should participate in politics and when they should act as civil servants. I think the Government has erred a lot. Maybe it wants this institution to be like that so that they can benefit by not giving them job descriptions. These people are a nuisance and a problem. They walk with guns as if they are army men. The GISOs are having guns as if they were trained to shoot.  

The problem is, to be an intelligence officer you must be intelligent. But the problem with us we get even those people who are not intelligent and we make them intelligence officers and that is why we are getting probleMs I would request you, Leader of Government Business that these GISOs you better take them away and bring better RDCs and GISOs. We have a problem.  

What is the order of protocol? You get a Member of Parliament - according to me I know he is above the RDC - but you get the RDC in those district functions as a boss. What is the order? When you give them that order that as special advisors they are the highest they become a nuisance to the public. I want you the Leader of Government Business, if you do not have people who are trained as civil servants we better get others. Tomorrow the Government will not be this one. Whom will RDCs serve if they are going to behave like that? They should not serve a regime. They should serve the people. I thank you.

3.30
THE MINISTER, OFFICE THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The first thing I would like to say is to totally agree with hon. Mwandha that we are really appreciative of the fact that there are some Members of Parliament who are in this Chamber making sure that Parliament’s business continues.  

I can say this certainly from all sincerity that personally I am very grateful to the Members of Parliament who keep this House going. It would be a very sad story for this House if you came here and there were no members to receive you. So there is no question in my mind that you people are really doing a commendable job. 

And mark you, Madam Speaker and honourable members, there is absolutely no doubt in my mind that it is very important that members raise issues of concern about irregular behaviour by some government officials and others because people who break the law in this country do not have to be members of government. In fact for any Government to perform well the members of the public, leaders like we Members of Parliament, must demand of government that the laws are followed.  In fact complacency very often leads to problems; proactive behaviour like this is very good indeed. 

We have a saying in Rukiga - the Banyankore like hon. Matembe always call Rukiga things Runyankore – that, “If you warm someone to cover themselves properly they should heed, and if they do not heed you are not restrained from laughing at them.” So warning Government and raising concerns of the people is a legitimate job and more so of political leaders like us than anybody else; so it is good and it is proper.  

In fact I was a little bit disappointed that hon. Omara Atubo raised the issue of a commander who went up beating people so that they could not vote.  That was sufficient reason to have that election annulled.  If you went to court and you produced that –(Interjection)- yes, our courts are independent and many election results have been quashed and they continue to be quashed. I am reminded by what I read in the newspapers that usually members of the opposition view the Judiciary as independent only when they decide in their favour; and as soon as they decide against them they are not independent. But a reason like this - hon. Matembe, give me a bit of time.  

MRS MATEMBE: The information I would like to give the honourable minister is that that must be the practice of this country. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members you remember in that case when the court of appeal said that the referendum of 2000 was null and void. It took the Head of State, the Head of this Government, to make a public national address and threatened the Judiciary. Actually that intimidation of the Judiciary was translated into the mobilization of this boda boda who demonstrated against Judiciary.  That is what we call mob justice against Judiciary itself.  

Hon. Kagonyera should be able to realise that if that is the practice it is bad and it should be condemned but not just to assign it to the opposition alone.  Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Matembe for that information.  What I would like to add, Madam Speaker and honourable members, is that when you do not agree with something you have every reason why you should raise some concern because there is no infallibility anywhere in society.  People make mistakes; people will even do something you do not agree with.  In other words I am not condemning these Members of Parliament who have thought that any decision against them is not according to the law.  

In fact not too long ago there was a very senior man in the American Government who disagreed publicly with what their Supreme Court had decided. As honourable members know even in those courts sometimes it is not the law that matters, it is the philosophical opinion of the Judges involved. 

 So in other words what we must say is how far do you go to admonish someone?  I think saying that maybe the Judges – that is why when you disagree with a decision at any court you appeal to another court; you are really disagreeing with that decision and you can say it publicly.  Otherwise, you would never appeal against any decision.  

Therefore, what we have to do is to disagree with everybody within limits. I was happy that the Chief Justice stood up and said they were not intimidated and they would continue to do their job as freely and as fairly as they can humanely do it.

Honourable members must agree that really this country is struggling in all walks of life to perfect our systeMs  We are trying to perfect the economy; we are trying to perfect even the politics; we are trying to perfect the judicial system; we are trying to perfect education and it is a struggle. 

On Parliament, I must say, I think these Members do very well; we have nearly arrived.  If I look at the Parliaments on this continent, I have no doubt that this Parliament does a very good job.  

Yes, I do agree with honorable members – hon. Wacha, I agree with you –(Mr Wacha rose_)

MR WACHA: Point of order.  Madam Speaker, I have sat here, I have said nothing; is it in order for hon. Mondo Kagonyera to keep on mentioning my name, to agree with me on what I have not said?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Commissioner, you did report something, you were complaining about something; Commissioner Wacha, you have spoken this afternoon.

MR WACHA: I did not raise anything in the last five minutes, Madam Speaker; I have not.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, not in the last five minutes.  Since the Session started, you stood up and gave information about a problem.

MR WACHA: Is he agreeing with me on that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him tell us what he is agreeing with.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  I did agree with hon. Wacha Ben’s statement much earlier than now.  I agree with hon. Mwondha when he says that nobody has any right to deny a Ugandan their freedom.  This country has gone through so many problems and we should all do everything possible, and we will do everything possible, those of us in Government, to make sure that people enjoy their freedom.  We are aware, at least I am, and many government leaders are aware that when people enjoy their freedom, especially if they enjoy it within the ambits of the law, then that augurs well for the development of the country.  So we will do that.

I do agree with you that because of the system we have been operating, nobody has ever pretended that a transition is easy, it is complicated, Madam Speaker; even for people who went to Harvard University, it is not easy.  So education of the people is important, but wherever we also go we should also educate.  

When I hear an ordinary colleague saying that we shall deal with them, that is not educating people –(Interjections)- I have no problem with the last resort as much as I hope that hon. Omara Atubo is not going to have a last resort with regard to the anomaly in the UPC elections in his village.  That is where we should start actually, putting our own houses in order and then demanding of others to do the same.  But education of people who are in leadership, educating people who are handling the elections is very important.  

This civic education is largely the job of the Electoral Commission and not of Government, and your concerns are going to be relayed to the Electoral Commission.  But we would like to appeal to everybody, instead of saying that we shall deal with them, why do you not first of all behave like hon. Awori Aggrey did; tell your members to stand by their rights, and if that does not work, report these people to the authorities –(Interjection)- no, those people who misbehave are not the authority.  

Hon. Nandala Mafabi; are Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) politicians?  No they are not, their jobs are very clear, they are provided for even in the Constitution.  But if anybody goes beyond their mandate, then it is up to Government to deal with them –(Mr Oulanyah rose_)- just hold on.  Hon. Matembe –(Interruption)

MR OULANYAH: I could clarify something on the RDCs, Sir.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Hon. Oulanyah, I congratulate you on being successfully elected.

MR OULANYAH: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to give information on the Office of the RDC.  As of the last constitution amendment, the RDCs are now politicians.  But as of the Constitution as it was enacted then in 1995, Article 203 stated that there shall be for each district a Resident District Commissioner who shall be a senior civil servant appointed by the President; and the functions that were given to the RDC were very clear under clause 2: ”To coordinate administration of Government, advise the District Chairperson…” – the problem was with (c), Madam Speaker, what you call the incidental clause.  It said, “To carry out such other functions as may be assigned by the President or prescribed by Parliament.”  

We know the functions that we prescribed to the RDCs as a Parliament in the Local Government Act.  What the country did not know is what “such other functions” the President prescribed to the RDCs.  So since we do not know the list of the other functions that were assigned to the RDCs, these other things could have been part of it.  But now, that has been covered in the sense that it is now clear in the amended Constitution that the RDCs are politicians and the rules are given clearly without incidental clauses.  Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: I thank hon. Oulanyah for that very good explanation, and we agree with it. Madam Speaker, I do not want to say that we are dealing with a very unique situation in transitional politics, in fact it is known that by and large in Uganda we come off quite well.  

I listen to the radios, I read the papers; if you were listening to the BBC this morning, you could have heard what politicians in neighboring countries were saying about the coming elections in their countries.  So why should anybody think that the Ugandan situation is unique and very sad?  It is not; the challenge is on us leaders to lead our people properly.  I do not mind facial expressions –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us end this matter, please.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Yes, but I think, Madam Speaker, the challenge is on the part of everybody.  If Members of Parliament and others think that the responsibility lies 100 per cent with Government and zero with them, then we have a problem.  Everybody should say, “We have done the best we are expected to do, you do yours also,” then the country will move forward.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS BILL, 2005

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Presidential Elections Bill, 2005,” be read for the first time, in accordance with section (10) of the Budget Act 2001. I beg to lay on the Table a certificate of financial implications relating to the Bill duly issued by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The bill is committed to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to peruse and report back expeditiously.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE Parliamentary Elections BILL, 2005

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya):  Madam Speaker honourable members, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections Bill, 2005,” be read for the first time, in accordance with section (10) of the Budget Act 2001. I beg to lay on the Table a certificate of financial implications relating to the Bill duly issued by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The Parliamentary Elections Bill is hereby committed to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to peruse expeditiously and report back.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Where is the Local Governments Bill? This is a government bill; any minister can present it.  Now, honourable members, you know that time is really of essence. I have got a copy of the certificate and the bill. If there is a minister of the Government ready to move this Bill, let him go on. I want it to go to the Committee because we do not have time.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE Local Governments (Amendment) BILL, 2005

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya):  Madam Speaker, honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Local Governments (Amendment) No. 2 Bill, 2005” be read for the first time. And Madam Speaker, the certificate of financial implications has already been submitted to the clerk’s office.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, honourable members, I confirm that I have a copy of the certificate of financial implications. 

Now, although this bill would ordinarily have gone to the Committee on Local Government and Public Service, I have perused it and it is essentially an elections bill. It is really about the local governments elections. So, I am similarly committing this bill to the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to peruse and report back expeditiously.

So, honourable members, as we had indicated, the bills are almost all here. I am sorry for the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, but you have got to rise to the occasion as you have done before. So, you will indicate where you can be found so that members and the public can come to you and I hope the Minister will also help us to publicize the bills and their contents so that we can have interaction with the public and all the members of the House.

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am raising an issue where I am seeking some answers. I have been approached by some members of my constituency who are civil servants and would like to participate in politics; they are not sure as to when the time for resigning starts running and they say that they have been seeing nomination dates in the press. 

So, they are asking, are they going to be governed by what they see in the press, or there will be some official communication gazetted and maybe hanged in form of a circular in offices so that they can know when to resign. They are looking at time passing and they would not like to be knocked off by being told they never resigned. So, since the Attorney General and Minister of Justice is here, he would help to give some guidance and information to members of my constituency.

DR MAKUBUYA: Are you worried? I came here and made a statement on this matter and I have nothing to add to that statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Attorney General, I do not know whether you having made that statement, whether the permanent secretaries have issued circulars to the civil servants informing them that if they want to contest, they should take leave; because you made a statement here to us.  I do not know how it is being implemented in the civil service.

DR MAKUBUYA:  Now, you know, I appreciate your guidance on this matter. But I have to accept certain limitations. I will ensure that circulars are issued tomorrow on this matter.  Thank you.

MR AWORI:  Supplementary 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, supplementary? We debated this matter last week at length.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to know from the Minister whether the Constitutional Amendment Bill that we submitted to the President has been assented to, and which date?

MR KAWANGA: That is what I wanted to point out.  The Constitutional Amendment requires approval and gazetting before anybody can act on it. Even the statement that the Minister made in respect of the nomination dates and so on, to give them legal status, at least they should be gazetted so that somebody can make a reference to them later on in case there is a dispute. There is an urgency to resolve this matter legally so that subsequent elections can be held within the proper legal framework.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, it is not possible for a Permanent Secretary to issue a circular without a constitutional framework. As long as the Bill lacks consent, it is mere speculation and there is no law. Therefore until the President assents to the Bill and gazettes it, all subsequent authorities, including ministries, the Attorney General and the Electoral Commission cannot act on it as it is because it is regarded as speculation.

MR AWORI: Furthermore, Madam Speaker, I was the one who raised this matter in this August House. I said that it is irregular for the Electoral Commission to issue a press release regarding the timetable for elections in the absence of the relevant law. Up to now, there is no law despite the fact that the honourable minister came here and made a statement to the effect that the Electoral Commission was right in issuing that statement. How can this be proper and in accordance with the provisions of the law in the absence of a relevant law?

3.58
MR JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you Madam Speaker. I think the Electoral Commission has been proactive as usual. This is the same situation as when they started updating the register in an attempt to be ready even before Parliament had passed a resolution for a referendum. 

As regards the framework we are talking about, we have passed a Constitution and all Constitutional Amendment Bills are not subject to presidential veto and Article 263. In other words the President has no authority to withhold his signatures on any of these Bills. They are deemed as passed by Parliament and should the President be reluctant to assent to this Bill, we can act under Article 262(4). 
We only do not know the date the Bill was submitted to him for his signature because if we did, after 30 days, the Speaker can issue his certificate and operationalise this law. Therefore we need not worry too much about Presidential assent because it is not a substantial requirement under the law. Should he choose to withhold his signature, the law is effective on the lapse of 30 days. Thank you.

DR KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, I made a statement last week on this matter and the question of the legal timetable for assenting to the Bill arose. I explained though not using the same words that hon. Oulanyah has used but the idea was the same. I said that the Constitution prescribes a timetable for assent and that that timetable will be followed. I thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

4.00
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, permit me to refer to Article 52, clause 2. It reads as follows, “The Uganda Human Rights Commission shall publish periodical reports on its findings and submit annual reports to Parliament on the state of human rights and freedoms in the country”.

Similarly Madam Speaker, permit me to refer to the Uganda Human Rights Commission Act, Chapter 24 of the Laws of Uganda 2000 Section 7, sub-section 6. It reads, “The annual report required by Article 52 (2) of the Constitution to be submitted to Parliament shall be addressed to the Speaker of Parliament and shall be signed by the Chairperson of the Commission and a copy of it shall be forwarded to the President”.  

Madam Speaker, I have here the Uganda Human Rights Commission’s 7th Annual Report for the year 2004. It is addressed to the honourable Speaker, Parliament of Uganda, and signed by Mrs Margaret Sekajja, Chairperson, Uganda Human Rights Commission. With your permission, may I lay it on Table?

DR OKULO EPAK: I wonder whether I heard the honourable Attorney General correctly when he said that the Chairperson of the Commission shall submit the report to the Speaker. If she is the one to submit to the Speaker, then I think it is the Speaker who should lay it on the Table or chairperson of the appropriate committee can do it on his behalf. I hope I heard him correctly, if not, then obviously what he has done is right. Thank you.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, I could have brought this document and just laid it here on Table since this has happened before. Instead I have chosen to perform this function under the law and lay this report on the Table since the Chairperson of the Human Rights Commission cannot come here and do it. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think that what has been done is fatal. The issue is that the report should be laid on Table and this has been done. I commit the report to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee to peruse and report back on ordinary oversight functions.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON PORNOGRAPHY

4.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON PORNOGRAPHY (Ms Sarah Kiyingi Namusoke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether I am expected to - because members’ copies have not been produced since the machine was out of order today. I would like to know what I am supposed to do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiyingi Namusoke, I hope you will present when the plenary resumes. I will ask the Clerk to ensure that copies are produced and distributed in time before you present. Thank you.

MS NAMUSOKE: Actually they are being worked on but they started as we were coming in.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, since some of the chairpersons are not here, I think we will end here for today –(Interruption)

4.08
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Madam Speaker, you remember I raised two issues last week concerning the report on the Referendum and you actually confirmed that they would appear on the Order Paper. I am a bit concerned as to why the Attorney General does not want to bring this report to the House. That report should be brought to the House and put on the record of Parliament for the Nation to access.

The second issue I raised was concerning the report on IDP camps which was also supposed to be adopted by this House. I hope you will remember to put it there so that we can finalise this and have the Government take certain actions.  You may recall that you even asked various committees and ministries concerned with education to supplement that report and synchronise it with that of hon. Alaso. Likewise hon. Christine Aporu’s response has not been finalised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we cannot have 50 items on the Order Paper, it is not possible. We shall get time for all of them since there would be no point in putting all of them on the Order Paper. 

4.10
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, you can see that Prof. Latigo Ogenga and myself were getting up. This Parliament had also instituted a committee to investigate our beating in Acholi Bur in Aruu County and I have attended a few rallies where Prof. Latigo Ogenga was showing his scars to people to show the extent of democracy of the Movement regime. This incident was investigated and the committee has its report intact. I would have loved it to appear perhaps as business to follow together with election violence because that one was also –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The order in which these items appear is our business. What I can say is that we shall ensure that we get rid of these reports as soon as possible.  Honourable members, the House is adjourned to Monday 10 October at 10.00 O’clock in the morning.  

(The House rose at 4.13 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 10 October 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)

  

