Tuesday, 16 September 2014

Parliament met at 10.20 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting, and thank you for the work. I have an invitation from the Speaker to participate in a workshop on the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) slated for 19th September, 2014 at Speak Resort Munyonyo: 

“The Office of the Speaker of Parliament is organising a one-day workshop on 19 September 2014 targeting Members of Parliament, line ministers and civil society organisations aimed at reflecting on progress made towards the development of the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women Report 2014. 

As a requirement, the Government of Uganda is expected to present the state report to the United Nations CEDAW committee this October. This is a follow-up of the 2010 state report, the concluding observations and recommendations regarding the implementation of CEDAW in Uganda. 

The purpose of the workshop is to increase awareness, reporting process and to harness skills on gender sensitive legislations for Parliamentarians to enable them be aware of their roles in enacting enabling laws that promote and protect the rights of girls and women. The specific objectives of the workshop are:

1. 	To give update on the progress of the 2010 CEDAW concluding observations by the different stakeholders.
2. 	To establish the mandate of Parliament in this process.
3. 	To harness skills on gender sensitive legislation and awareness specifically for Members of Parliament and the different stakeholders.
4. 	To come up with a road map towards the development of the Uganda state and shadow CEDAW report. 

The purpose of this letter is therefore to request you as a key stakeholder to participate in this interactive residential workshop in person. I request that you report to the hotel on Thursday, 18 September 2014 at 4.00p.m. The workshop starts on Friday, 19th at 8.00 a.m. and ends at 4.00 p.m. 

Rebecca A. Kadaga MP, Speaker of Parliament.” 

This means that we need to hasten our processes and complete what we are doing here by that time, to enable the Members be able to participate in that meeting. Thank you, honourable members. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE BILL, 2014

10.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Tax Procedures Code Bill, 2014” be read for the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Minister of State for Trade, member for Ndorwa and member for Sheema. Please, justify your motion. 

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, this Bill is to provide for a code to regulate the procedures for the administration of specified tax laws in Uganda, to harmonise and consolidate the tax procedures under existing tax laws, and to provide for related matters. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was referred to the committee to advise us on what the status is and how we need to proceed. I now invite the chairman to give us the report. 

10.25
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule Ssebunya): This is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Tax Procedures Code Bill, 2014. 

The Bill was referred to the committee for the first time by the minister on 16 May 2014. I am not going to read the methodology. The object of the Bill has been well elaborated by the minister. Let me go to the observations of the committee. 

Harmonisation of Tax Administration

The Bill attempts to streamline tax administration in Uganda by separating tax policy from tax administration. The different procedures spread across the tax laws were overlapping and not consistent. The committee welcomes this initiative and recommends that Parliament passes the Bill subject to the proposed amendments. 

Registration of Tax Agents 

Clause 7 requires tax agents to register with URA upon payment of a fee to be prescribed by the minister. 

The committee observes that while there is need to regulate and control who should be a tax agent, the requirement of a fee on application is unfair to professionals that are recognised as qualified to dispense tax advice, especially the accountants and advocates who already pay fees to their respective professional bodies for practicing certificates. The committee recommends that the requirement for payment of fees should be deleted. 

Criteria for Determining whether a Person is a Fit and Proper Person to Register as a Tax Agent
Clause 8 provides that in case of an application by an individual, the commission general shall register the person only if satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person to prepare tax returns and transact business with the commissioner general under the tax laws on behalf of tax payers. The committee observes that the Bill does not provide the criteria for assessing a fit and proper person as is done with such legislation that provides for fit and proper tests. 

The committee recommends that – 
1. 	A criterion for determining whether a person is a fit and proper person to register as a tax agent be clearly detailed in the Bill. 

2. 	There is need for establishment of a tax agents’ registration committee, which shall be an independent committee, to register tax agents. This is to ensure objectivity and transparency in the registration process, to minimise conflict of interest, and to create a level of professionalism among tax agents. 

Objection to a Tax Decision

Clause 23 provides for objections to a tax decision. Sub clause (3) requires a taxpayer to pay 30 per cent of the difference, if any, between the amount assessed by the commissioner and the amount of tax paid by the person.

The committee observes that currently, the requirement to pay 30 per cent is only necessary when a taxpayer is appealing a decision of the commissioner general to the tax appeals tribunal. The requirement to pay 30 per cent for the commissioner to consider the objection will restrict the taxpayers from objecting tax decisions, some of which may lack merit. This should be scrapped as it can act as a barrier to taxpayers seeking justice.

The committee recommends that if a taxpayer is dissatisfied with an assessment or tax decision, they should be able to object to the commissioner general without being required to pay up the disputed sums. Only on appeal outside URA levels should the requirement be enforced.

Advanced Assessment 

Clause 21 provides that this section applies where the commissioner is satisfied that there is risk that a taxpayer may delay, obstruct, prevent or render ineffective payment or collection of tax that has not become due. The committee observes that the provision implies that URA can make an assessment even before income has been earned. This means tax is due even where income has not arisen. To challenge this assessment, 30 per cent of the assessed amount must be paid on objection. 

The committee finds this provision unfair since tax cannot be due on income that has not been earned. The committee recommends that clause 21 (1) should be rephrased to read as follows: “This section applies to a taxpayer specified in section 17 and where the commissioner is satisfied that there is a risk that a taxpayer may delay, obstruct, prevent or render ineffective payment or collection of tax that has not yet become due.”

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Bill be passed subject to these proposed amendments. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman of the committee. Honourable members, I now propose the question for your debate. The motion is that the Bill entitled “the Tax Procedures Code Bill, 2014” be read the second time. That is the matter for your debate and that debate begins now. Let us first get the procedural point.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been listening carefully to the chairman of the committee while he read the report. When I tried to access this report on my iPad, I could not find it. I also want to indicate to you that even the hard copy is not here. In order for us to debate effectively, we need the copies. May you kindly guide on how we can proceed to debate this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As you heard from the chairman of the committee, there is not too much involved in this particular piece of legislation, save for those three issues that the committee is concerned about, and I am sure we have captured all of them. In the spirit of trying to finish this within this timeframe, honourable members, I seek your indulgence that we handle this matter this way. However, I am also advised that it is being uploaded right now. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I think there is some homework to do on your part because as we are sitting now, some committees are also sitting. So it is difficult to raise quorum because of the work of committees going on. Now that we are in the budget process, which is so critical, maybe you will have to direct that all committee work be suspended for the remaining days so that we can accomplish this job. I beg your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I gave that directive at the beginning when we resumed plenary. So, the members who are holding committee meetings right now are doing so in defiance of the Speaker’s directive. Please, Sergeant-at-Arms, notify your people that committees should stop sitting until we finish the budget process. (Applause) Please, get somebody to inform the person who is holding committee meetings that they are required in the House.

Okay, honourable members, I already proposed a question for your debate and debate starts now from Igara.

10.35
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for presenting this report. I want to state that I support their submission.

Mr Speaker, the committee elaborated on the separation of tax policy and tax administration, which I entirely agree with. They also said that government should not charge tax agents a certain fee because most people will have paid professional fees, and that this would be double payment on the part of the professionals. 

I would like to suggest that still a certain minimum fee be charged to whoever wants to become a tax agent, so that when someone pays a certain fee they will be able to perform a professional job. If we leave it hanging, most of the people, including the unqualified ones, will want to become tax agents. We have seen some cases where court clerks have masqueraded as lawyers when in the actual sense they are not. That is why these people should pay a certain fee so that they can be clearly identified. It will also let these people conduct themselves professionally.

I also agree with the committee that certain criteria be put in place to be able to assess the professionalism of whoever is going to become a tax agent. I further agree with the committee that the 30 per cent tax required from somebody appealing against a tax decision should be adjusted. We should not scrap it but 30 per cent in a situation where no income has been earned, I think is unfair to taxpayers.

Lastly, I agree with committee’s submission, subject to those amendments mentioned by the chairperson. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, it looks like at this stage we have to take a decision on this particular discussion on the principles of the Bill, so that we can see if we can process the provisions of the Bill at the committee stage. Can I put the question to the principles of the Bill? Okay, the motion is that the Bill entitled “the Tax Procedures Code Bill, 2014” be read the second time. I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE BILL, 2014

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we deal with clause 1 later.

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR SSEBUNYA: We stand over it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We stand over clause 3 on interpretation.

Clause 4

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR SSEBUNYA: Clause 7 is on tax agents. We propose to change the headnote from “Registration of a tax agent” to “tax agent” and insert a new sub clause (3) to read as follows: 
“For purposes of this Act, a tax agent is a person engaged- 
(a) 	in the preparation, certification, and filing of tax returns, information returns or other statements or reports required by the Authority; 
(b) 	in the preparation of requests for ruling, petitions for reinvestigation, protests, objections, requests for refunds or tax certificates, compromise settlements and/or abatement of tax liabilities and other official papers and correspondences with the Authority; 
(c) in meetings, conferences and hearings before any matter in URA officially on behalf of the taxpayer or client in all matters relating to a client’s rights, privileges or liabilities under the laws or regulations administered by the Authority.” 

Justification: The approach used to introduce the idea of tax agents seems to be borrowed from the East African Customs Management Act, section 145, where customs agents are provided for. However, in the tax procedures code, the role of tax agents is not clearly defined.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear, members? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR SSEBUNYA: Clause 8 is on the registration of tax agents. Insert a new sub clause (6) to read as follows: “An individual applying for registration as a tax agent, or in the case of an application by a partnership or company, the partner or employee specified as the nominee of the partnership or company respectively, shall meet the following requirements:
(a) 	have been awarded a degree or a postgraduate award from an approved tertiary institution in the discipline that is relevant for the provision of tax agent services; or 

(b) 	have successfully completed a course in taxation that is recognised by tax registration committee; or in the coming into force of this Act, have been engaged in the equivalent of 24 months of fulltime tax practice in the preceding five years.”

Justification

The Bill does not provide conditions or requirements for one to be registered as a tax agent other than paying a fee. 

Insert a new sub clause (7) to read as follows: “(7) In assessing whether an applicant is a fit and proper person, reference shall be made to Schedule 4.”

The justification is that the Bill does not provide criterion for assessing a fit and proper person. The clauses shall be rearranged by the drafter. 

MR MULIMBA: Mr Chairman, whereas I agree with the principle of prescribing a competence, locking it to a degree without necessarily looking at other qualifications in accounting is discriminatory. We need to open it up so that we can look at other qualifications within the accounting profession. We have CPA, ACCA and other qualifications. Therefore, to make it strictly a degree is leaving out other qualified and competent professionals. So, we should just open it up and say “qualified professionals” and leave it at that.

MR SSEBUNYA: We have provided for somebody who has successfully completed a course in taxation that has been recognised or somebody who has worked in the practice. We are saying, if you have a degree or a postgraduate qualification in the relevant field, you can apply, or if in the coming into force of the Act one has been engaged in the equivalent of 24 months of fulltime practice - if you have been practicing as a tax agent, you are also allowed. We can also add a degree, maybe in accountancy.

MR BAHATI: Can we add to the degree, a member of a professional body of accountants. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you see, here you are registering tax agents not accountants. So the competence should be in relation to tax matters. It does not matter whether you are CPA Africa, CPA London or CPA Uganda, if you have no experience with tax matters you cannot be registered under this.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Chair. Even at the Law Development Centre (LDC) now, they are advising people who are taking diplomas to specialise in certain courses. Somebody who finishes a diploma at LDC could be specialised in taxation, for example. Now, if you say that one has to be a member of a professional body of accountancy, you have locked out those who would have qualified in taxation in the area of law. I suggest that we specifically look at those who have specialised in taxation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think anybody can claim they know taxation, but there is a way this training is done – you train in income tax, customs, etc. However, who are those that really help? Everything is about preparation of accounts but when it comes to taxable income, you must have some background of accounts. If you do not do this, you are going to allow everybody to come and eventually, you will have a problem. That is why in order to be a board secretary, you must have legal knowledge. If you do not have it, you cannot be a board secretary, and I am sure that the chairperson knows this.

I think, therefore, that the recommendation that the committee is coming out with should include that for somebody to be a tax agent, that person must be somebody from a professional body, for purposes of even discipline. If there is no professional body, there is nowhere you can take that person to be disciplined. That is why lawyers have the law council and the accountants have ICPAU to deal with that. That is the reason we are saying that for anybody to be a tax agent, they must be from a professional body with professional qualifications in relation to taxation.

MR WAMAKUYU: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. We have cases upcountry, like in some of the districts you know, where one will look for those professionals, for example in a district like Amudat, and may not find them. So, how will you handle such situations if you restrict?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, that is right, but I am sure that before you become a practising doctor, you must do medicine and you must do internship. When you are doing internship, you are under somebody, and that is the first place to start from. 

The reason we are having problems is that nobody can go to Budadiri or wherever because everybody has become an expert and URA can deal with those who are not necessarily professionals. If you put a law, it will even ease operations because if a professional makes a mistake, he will be subject to disciplinary measures. However, if any person does it with some people, there will be no problem. As a professional, you are not supposed to be involved in criminal activities. 

What my brother from Budadiri has raised is that I can decide to open an office in Gulu and you can only practice under me and no report can go out without my authority. I am just giving an example; I am not going there. The reason I am trying to raise this is because we have enough professionals who can assist URA to be tax agents. Lawyers in taxation, accountants and even engineers if they want, can train but they must be under a professional body.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But I thought that the committee responsible for this would develop a code to regulate the conduct of people who are registered as tax agents. I thought the disciplinary aspect would be taken care of by the committee rather than any other professional agency. That would be extracting this from the mandate of this law and putting it in say, the law to do with accountants, lawyers and other things, and yet the law is creating and giving authority to an institution to discipline people practising this matter of taxation. 

MR SSEBUNYA: In deliberating in the committee, we said that we should not be so strict on the profession because there are those people who have worked with the revenue authority and have gained experience through practice. When they retire, they would want to be tax agents but they have degrees in history and other areas but now they have been working with the revenue authority. So, we do not want to be so strict and leave it to professionals only. If we do that, we shall create so much unemployment among the people who are currently practising. 

This is why we left it as somebody who has been practising, who has a degree or somebody – Somebody can have a degree in anything but end up specialising. We are now trying to tell people to retrain; so somebody can train and get a certificate that allows him to understand taxation and then he does the work. At the beginning, we wanted the professionals but we do not want to be so strict and leave out so many people.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The issues of discipline will therefore be handled by the committee.

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes, because there is a fit and proper test one must take. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Members, I put the question on the amendment as read by the chairperson of the committee.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEBUNYA: There is a new clause that we want to insert on the setting up of a tax agents registration committee –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it still under clause 8?

MR SSEBUNYA: It is a new clause immediately before clause 7 –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: A new clause?

MR SSEBUNYA: It is a new clause to be inserted and it is concerning the setting up of a tax agents regulation committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where does it come in?

MR SSEBUNYA: After clause 8.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, I can deal with clause 8 first. I will now put the question to clause 8 as amended - 

MR BAHATI: Sorry, Mr Chairman; I just wanted to check whether we are on clause 8 (2) (b) – “a partner in the partnership or a director, manager or other executive officer of the company is of good fame, integrity and character.” I do not know whether you have the word “fame” in legal terms, but I thought that it is very misleading. Maybe we could say, “...is of good character.” Fame can mean so many things.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Actually, it is very new even in law.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, a tax agent can make a mistake –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are we on clause 8 (2) (b)? Let us finish with clause 8 (2) (b).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, that is why I am raising this. It refers somewhere to a partnership or a company, and the liabilities of an individual in a profession – A partnership is not a legal entity and likewise, somebody can mess up an issue in a company and leave the matter to the company and yet this is an individual. That is why as professional accountants, and I think lawyers, cannot have a company that has “limited”; it is a partnership. So, if I commit a crime, I should be individually held liable. 

The reason I am raising this is because the idea of having a company here is very dangerous; it should be an individual, partnership or firm. If you bring in a company, it will be very dangerous.

MR SSEBUNYA: Where is the company?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Look at (2) (a) where they say – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that is referring to an executive officer of a company. That is a person – a human being, a natural person - not a company. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is true and I agree, but it says that the firm that will be practising as a tax agent will be a partnership, individual or a company.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where is that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Sub clause (2) says, “In the case of an application by a partnership or a company...” The moment that you refer to a company, it means that the liability goes to a company if an individual made a mistake.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think even with a company, it is still talking about the individuals in the company and not the company itself. Are we together there? It is not talking about the company as a limited entity or body corporate but the individuals working in the company. Can I put the question now? Oh, there is this issue of fame, honourable minister. 

MR OMACH: Yes, it was referring to somebody from Ndorwa, but we could remove it. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, we replace it with “good character” or something like that. 

MR OMACH: Yes, good standing, integrity and character.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Maybe we can say good reputation because character is difficult to assess.

MR OMACH: Character is already there. So, we could change it to, “…is of high integrity and good character”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? I will now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR SSEBUNYA: Insert a new clause, which will be clause 9, immediately before-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is just a new clause after clause 8.

MR SSEBUNYA: Okay, insert a new clause after clause 8 to read as follows: 
“Tax Agents Registration Committee 
(1) There shall be a Tax Agents Registration Committee to handle registration, renewal of registrations and cancellation of tax agents’ registration.

(2) 	The committee shall comprise of the following members: 
a. 	The Commissioner General, or his or her representative for purposes of this Act, who shall be the chairperson;
b. 	One representative from the accountancy profession nominated by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda;
c. 	One representation from the legal profession nominated by the Uganda Law Society; and
d. 	Two members from the private sector appointed by the board who in the opinion of the board have expertise or relevant experience in economics, finance or taxation.

(3) 	In exercise of its functions under this Act, the committee shall make rules to govern its own procedure.

(4) 	The commissioner shall receive and maintain a register of all registered tax agents.” 

The justification is that the law does not provide for an independent committee to register tax agents. This should be done to ensure objectivity and transparency in matters of tax. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which board are we referring to here?

MR SSEBUNYA: The board of URA. I think we should say it specifically.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it defined in this law? You might have to say the URA board instead of just the board.

MR SSEBUNYA: Okay, I will restate (2)(d): “Two members from the private sector appointed by the URA board who in the opinion of the board have expertise or relevant experience in economics, finance or taxation.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “Who in the opinion of that board have expertise or relevant experience in economics, finance or taxation.” Is that okay?

MR AKORA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, the composition of that committee leaves out the Minister of Finance entirely and yet the Ministry of Finance is a key stakeholder. The board of URA reports to the ministry. The Commissioner General of URA plus the two other members of the private sector appointed by URA gives URA unlimited control over this committee. So, my suggestion is that we should include on that committee a member or a senior commissioner from the Ministry of Finance, who supervises the commissioner general and URA.

NR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, before I deal with what I was about to raise, I want to talk about what my colleague, hon. Akora, has raised. I think the board of URA has the PS of Ministry of Finance, so you do not need to make these bodies so large.

I also want to submit that there is no way you can say, “in my opinion, you are a finance expert or a legal expert”. We should just say, those who have a qualification in finance, because with qualifications we have evidence. A qualification is a qualification but if you refer to opinion, I can come and say that in my opinion you do not have the qualification and yet you have the qualification. What I want to raise is that my chairman should remove “opinion” and just refer to qualifications.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, the proposal is that you delete the phrase “in the opinion of the board” and leave the rest of the sentence as it is.

MR SSEBUNYA: I concede to that because we cannot judge opinion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, that is deleted, so it will now read, “Two members from the private sector appointed by the URA board who have expertise…” No, it will now look like it is the board who will have the expertise.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, can we say, “Two members from the private sector with expertise or relevant experience in economics, finance or taxation who shall be appointed by the URA board”?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? I put the question to that amendment. Okay, (d) is already amended; I do not have to put a question to that. I will now put the question to the inclusion of a new clause after clause 8. I put the question that this new clause be introduced and forms part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 11 deals with notice of change in registered particulars. Before registration, substitution and the like, supposing I have an issue with the committee, - I have applied and they refuse to register me - I should have a procedure that caters for me to appeal. I do not see this anywhere in this law. I therefore want to propose that after clause 10, we insert a clause to deal with issues of the appeal process.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the proposal. Can we have somebody working on a draft while we move to the next one and then we come back and handle it?

MR MAWANDA: Mr Chairman, before they can work on the draft, when we put another level of appeal, we create a lot of bureaucracy. We already have existing courts; if you disagree with a decision, why don’t you move straight and appeal in the courts of law, to reduce on the burden of bureaucracy in the whole exercise? Even after that appeal, somebody may be dissatisfied with the decision and will want to go to another level and will end up delaying the administration of justice. I thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, before you go to courts of law, there must be somewhere else to go - the committee, the URA board or to a tribunal –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: First, let us look at clause 23 – Part Vii - on objections and appeals. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if I am objecting to an assessment, this would be the process, but here we are talking about registration of a tax agent. When he or she has been rejected, where should they start from? My proposal is that since the board is interested, they would first appeal to the board, and from there they can go to the tax tribunal, and then the courts of law. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can somebody work out a draft? There are similar provisions we passed yesterday in the other law. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to ask hon. Bahati, my young brother, to work on that. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we will come back to that. We know that there is a proposal to insert a new clause after clause 10 to deal with the appeal process. We will come back to that once we have a draft. 

Clause 11

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 11 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, clause 15 is on furnishing of tax returns. Insert a new sub clause (8) to read as follows: “For purposes of subsection (7), the applicable timeframe for lodging a return shall be as follows-
a) 	In the case of a return of income, every taxpayer shall furnish a return of income for each year of income of the taxpayer not later than six months after the end of that year.

b) 	In the case of a return of rental income, every taxpayer shall furnish a return of rental income for each year of income of the taxpayer not later than six months after the end of that year.

c) 	In the case of a provisional tax estimate, every taxpayer is required to furnish a return of provisional tax estimate on or before the last day of the sixth and twelfth months of the year of income in respect of the taxpayer’s liability for a period of the six or twelve months. 

d)	In the case of a business information return, a person who is required to furnish a business information return with the commissioner should do so within 60 days after the end of the year of income in which the payment was made. 

e) 	In the case of the Value Added Tax Act, a taxable person shall lodge a Value Added Tax return with the Commissioner General for each tax period within 15 days after the end of the tax period. 

f) 	In the case of an excise duty return, a person who is required to furnish an excise duty return with the Commissioner General shall do so by the fifteenth day of the following month. 

g) 	In the case of the Gaming and Pool Betting Act, a person who is required to furnish a return with the commissioner shall do so in the period specified under the Act. 

h) 	In case of any other return required to be furnished under a tax law, a person is required to furnish such return with the commissioner in the period specified under the tax law to which the return relates. 

i) 	In case of any form required to be furnished under a tax law containing information relating to an assessment of tax, a person is required to furnish such a form with the commissioner in the period specified by the commissioner.” I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is clear; I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if you look at clause 15(2) it says that where someone fails to furnish a return the commissioner may direct –(Interjections)– Okay, it says “...the commissioner may, by notice in writing, appoint a person to prepare and furnish the return on behalf of that person.” If the commissioner appoints, who bears the costs? We must be careful. We must say that the commissioner by notice – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where are we?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are on clause 15(2). It says that where someone fails to furnish a return, the commissioner may, by notice in writing, appoint a person to prepare and furnish a return on behalf of that person. My question is: who bears the cost? 

I think we should say, “...the commissioner may, by notice in writing, appoint a person to prepare and furnish the return on behalf of that person at that person’s cost”, to avoid URA paying because they appointed the person. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I concede on the person paying the costs. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment in sub clause (2) - the inclusion of the words that the person on whose behalf this has been done should be responsible for the cost. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR SSEBUNYA: Clause 16 - certification of tax return by a tax agent. In sub clause (1)(b), delete the phase “a true and fair view of”, so that this clause reads, “Certifying that the tax agent has examined the documents of the taxpayer and that, to the best of the tax agent’s knowledge, the return together with any supporting documentation reflects the data and transactions to which it relates.” The justification is that the concept of a true and fair view has a specific meaning in accountancy practice and denotes the provision of auditing services, which are regulated by another law. So the true and fair view is for accountants. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, we delete that phrase “a true and fair view”?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The chairman says there is a view already and that is fine, but even the person who is filing the return must be clear. He or she should be held liable to ensure that they present a fair view of their returns. Supposing he or she changes figures and they say, “I had no reason to tell whether it was true or false”? So, the true and fair view is basically to hold that person answerable.

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think we should not delete this because when we are dealing with tax reports, there is need for transparency. At least let the person, who is forwarding the information, believe that this is a true and fair view, so that if cornered and maybe it is discovered that instead of 20 containers the agent declared only 10, this will catch that person. Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We proposed that other words be used because the phrase “true and fair view” has a specific meaning in the accounting profession, like the chairman of the committee has stated. Actually, the proposal was that instead of using this phrase, we use “correct data.” I think the committee chairperson forgot this.

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to depart from what the chairperson of the committee is proposing. The phrase “true and fair view” is an accounting terminology meaning that whatever you have declared cannot be 100 per cent correct but there is reasonable truth in the documents you have submitted. So, this phrase is okay.

MR MUSASIZI: Maybe let me give further explanation, Mr Chairman –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is so fatal about using words from other professions to confirm a particular statement?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, tax agents are not necessarily accountants and auditors. So, if people from other professions begin to use terminologies that are specific to some profession, it becomes dangerous because that terminology will lose meaning.

In auditing, the phrase “true and fair view” means that someone qualified has attested to the statement and the figures. However, these are figures that are going to be looked at by someone called a tax agent who may not be necessarily an accountant. So, what I want to suggest is that instead of using that phrase, let us just say that this data as seen is correct. What I am saying is that instead of using just the word “data” let us say, “correct data”. 

With your indulgence, allow me read it out. It would read thus: “Certifying that the tax agent has examined the documents of the taxpayer and that, to the best of the tax agent’s knowledge, the return together with any supporting documentation, reflects the correct data and transactions to which it relates.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, do we take the view from the member for Rubanda?

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, the accountants were so angry with –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do we take the view from that member?

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes, let us take the view to include the phrase, “reflects correct data.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, under clause 17, instead of saying “power” we should say “powers”. Most importantly, since in (1) (a) we are talking about a taxpayer who has died yet we need tax returns, I would like to propose an amendment to include those taxpayers who may have been convicted and thrown into prisons over any offence during the tax period. If we are talking about tax returns for the dead, what about those who may have been sentenced to prison? Do we leave that to just go like that? I want us to first agree on the principle before I go to the wording.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The principle, like we adopted in some other law, is called disability. It is not the known physical disability but a kind of incapacity occasioned by operations of the law that makes you completely unable to do anything. I think we passed that somewhere yesterday. Is that okay with you, honourable minister? Would you want to consult on this?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: When somebody goes to prison for one reason or another, they have not gone with the business. The reason we assess the one who has died is because this could be one of the items in that person’s estate. The government tax, which is the first call on your estate, is a certain amount of money. If you are in prison, however, you do not go with the assets; you can distress the movable items or go for the immovable ones through the normal procedures. I think for the ones in prisons –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it similar to the content in (c)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, that it. So, it is covered under this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, but that one is about a person who is about to leave Uganda permanently. This other one is not leaving the country per se but going to jail.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think you are right. Part (c) is okay but it is about a person who is about to leave Uganda permanently or suspected to be leaving, because one can go and come back. That is okay. Even other laws carry this provision where they talk about the commissioner assessing their taxes before they leave.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, it does not apply.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I think the principle that Dr Epetait is rising is considered to have been covered under (d) - where the commissioner considers it appropriate.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Chairman, I would like to still agree with the honourable Dr Epetait’s proposal. If we leave this to the commissioner to decide, it will be difficult. Let me give you an example from when I returned to this country. The law says you are granted a tax-free vehicle and I had had a vehicle for about 12 months, but when I came back and I went to the commissioner, he said I had to pay taxes. So, I had to pay those taxes. So, leaving this to the commissioner to decide is not proper.

Secondly, when you leave the country, it means you are not in the country, and this applies so much to officers in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. When they leave the country to serve Uganda outside here for a few years, they do not pay taxes here. Even when one is in prison, they are incapacitated; they do not have money to make sure that their company is running or an opportunity to get money to pay taxes. This law should exempt those who are in prison and those who are serving outside the country; they should not pay taxes.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I totally want to disagree with hon. Wamanga.  Some Ugandans steal government money and they have put up big businesses. If this man has got wonderfully run businesses out of the money that he has been stealing from Government and then later on he is in Luzira, why don’t you want him to pay tax?

Mr Chairman, I want this person who is in prison, if he has got a running business, the wife is working, the children are working, to pay taxes. By the way, some of these fellows that are stealing Government money put the businesses in the names of the children; so let them pay tax. If somebody is in prison, Mr Chairman, let him pay some tax if he has got a running business, like hon. Mafabi has said.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is not about paying tax; this is about filing the returns.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, the minister did say that part (d) caters for my concern, but on a more critical look, it even caters for part (a), (b) and (c). What do we fear; why don’t we want to be specific? I wish my colleague could get this argument. 

Supposing that person who is in prison is a sole proprietor of his or her business and the fellow now has disability in filing this return, why do we fear stating it? My fear is that the commissioner may decide to blink his or her eyes and say, “Epetait is there in prison - God forbid - but he is my friend I do not find it appropriate to demand that he files tax returns.” 

We must follow those people. The argument that the honourable colleague from Mbarara Municipality has given is real. Some of these people go to prison and if the commissioner is a close friend of the inmate, they will just say it is not appropriate. So, let us include them and demand tax returns. 

MR OMACH: We have no fear about including that, but in our submission we thought this would suffice.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: They want it specific.

MR OMACH: If you want to be specific, would you like to propose the amendment?

DR EPETAIT: I propose that we include after (a) a new (b) to say, “where the taxpayer has been convicted by a competent court and sentenced to imprisonment without the option of a fine during the tax period.” 

MR KAMATEEKA: I would like to seek clarification on this matter. I thought that businesses are going concerns; so, whether an individual is in prison or not, the business continues running and it is liable to paying tax. The issue of an individual being in prison should not arise.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Supposing he is a sole proprietor? What harm does it cause, anyway?

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I think the URA has been very clear that they want to make most taxpayers’ businesses formal. With formal businesses, whether it is sole proprietorship or not, whether the person is in prison or not he or she is mandated to submit tax returns. What do you base on to assess the tax of a sole proprietor, for example? It is on the basis of the records that the business has. So, Mr Chairman, I do not see why we should have an exception there in the event that most businesses which are taxed are formal businesses. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Look at (c), remove “Uganda” and put “prison”- is about to go to prison permanently. What it means is that this person will be compelled to file returns before they go.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I think if we are to agree to his insertion of prison, we should also include the sick. Sub clause (2) says, “The commissioner may, by notice in writing and at any time during the tax period, require- (a) the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s representative...” So, if somebody is sick or in prison, then the commissioner will require the taxpayer or his representative to furnish the tax return. That is (2); so we combine it and put it somewhere. 

MR AKORA: Thank you, Mr Chair. I want to request the House to look at the intention of this clause. First of all, this is relating to payment of income tax by resident taxable persons. Taxation is due on your income where you are resident for tax purposes. It should be paid by legal persons, whether natural or artificial persons. Residency is determined by where you live and where you conduct your business. 

This particular clause 17 is saying that where a taxpayer has died, that means that their tax file must be closed - the estate is going to administration. You should determine whether there was any tax liability due on that taxpayer before the estate is distributed. So, there the commissioner must require or may require the tax return to be submitted. 

Where a person has become bankrupt, this means that their business proceedings are coming to a halt. The commissioner must therefore determine if there was tax liability arising from the business of the bankrupt person so as to determine their tax liability. A commissioner will require tax returns to be submitted in that specific incidence.

When a taxpayer is about to leave the country where they are resident for tax purposes, again their tax files must be brought to a close. For that reason, a commissioner must require that person to submit so that they are cleared and then they can leave the country after their tax liabilities have been determined. 

So, it is not about whether you are sick or in prison. If you are sick and still doing business and you are earning an income, you are taxable ordinarily; there is no special reason for the commission to request for a tax return. If you are in prison and you are doing business, because your companies are still in business you are still taxable ordinarily. So this does not refer to taxpayers who are either sick, incapacitated or in prison; it refers to people who have left the tax-paying domicile of Uganda because they are either dead, bankrupt or have left the country. So, what is catered for here is quite adequate to cover those incidents.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If your situation is permanent, then that is taken care of under clause 17 and if it is temporary, it is taken care of under clause 18. If you go to jail for five years, for example, and the period has passed, when you come back you seek those extensions from the commissioner and then you file the returns late and you cite the disability that prohibited you from filing the returns within that time. However, if somebody is going to jail permanently, what happens? Life imprisonment – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. First of all, I want to make a correction. My brother said that this relates to income tax, but it is tax returns for any tax – you may have VAT, customs, excise, etc. This law that we are working on administers all taxes. Tax return does not mean income tax return because even VAT returns or excise duty returns are also tax returns. 

Having made that correction, the reason I think they are trying to have a tax agent being appointed is that in case something is needed about you, that tax agent will be the first call. That is why the agent is registered by URA. Let us say that the tax agent for Nandala and Company, for example, is Bahati David and Company. So, they will come to Bahati and ask for the tax returns for Nandala. 

The reason as to why they are bringing this here is because something permanent is taking place - one person has died and will not be able to file his income tax or VAT returns. However, if his businesses exist, they will continue in another way.

What my brother, the doctor, is raising is also important. He asked what happens if somebody is in prison permanently. What is permanent? If I can borrow current liabilities or current assets and long term – For us, anything between zero to 12 months is treated as current and anything above that is treated as long term. So, I think here we should specify the period. So, I agree with him but we should specify the period. 

Anybody who is going to prison for less than 12 months, that is, current, we can allow it. For any period beyond 12 months, that person should be able to file his return or his representative should do it because that ceases to be current and long term. He could be there for some time and delay the tax bases. So, in that context – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In that case, don’t you think that the discretion that is given to the commissioner under (d) would handle those case by case?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is what I was coming to. The discretion to handle all those is under (d). Incidentally, the commissioner is free, even if you are walking here, to say that your tax return is needed - [HON. MEMBER: “On the street?”]- Yes, because the commissioner has powers to demand a tax return anytime. Should you refuse, even if you are walking, he or she is free to raise an estimated assessment. I think we are going to handle that as we go ahead. 

So, doctor, if we are going that way, I think that (d) can help to answer the problem that you are raising. We can deal with all those technicalities. I would propose that the doctor looks at it further.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The laws that we make must be seen to be fair. This person is going to be incarcerated for the rest of his or her life; so why would you put in the law, in addition to everything that this person is suffering, that you want them to pay tax? I think that it is better that it remains under the discretion of the commissioner. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Those were the final submissions. Can we take a decision on this? Dr Epetait, are you okay now? Alright, there are no amendments in 17. I now put the question that clause 17 stand part of the Bill.    

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I am concerned about sub clause (5) of this clause. My understanding of the entire clause is that somebody fails to furnish tax returns within a certain period for some reason or another and the commissioner recognises the situation of that person. However, under (5), there seems to be punitive action meted on that person. The person has to pay tax as if he or she had not been given an extension. Besides that, there is an interest levied.

So, you are in difficulty as a taxpayer, you do not file returns in time, you tell the commissioner about your difficulty and the commissioner recognises it but when it comes paying tax, you are charged interest. I think that this is being unfair to a taxpayer. I would like to propose a deletion of this sub clause (5).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But honourable member, when is the tax due? This is a matter for returns but when was that tax due?

MR EKANYA: Colleagues, I thought that in the current law, if your tax is due on 30 June 2014 and you default in paying, you pay with interest after a given period. Even with the bank, if you have a loan and you default in paying, you are fined and given a penalty. 

I therefore seek clarification because I do not understand whether we fear interest. You are mandated to pay and if you do not, pay with interest or pay in time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that is the position. Please, let us not dwell on this too much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, yes, you must pay interest, but tax not in dispute –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But if it is in dispute, then you have the avenue of going to the Tax Appeal Tribunal. Honourable member, I think that this is clear; let us not spend time on this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Just listen to me a bit and you will understand what I am raising. There are instances where I could do a self-assessment and say my taxable income, for example corporation tax, could be Shs 1 billion and the tax payable is 30 per cent, which is Shs 300 million, and I pay. Now URA says no, we have added this and now your taxable income is Shs 1.2 billion and so you must pay Shs 360 million. 

The Shs 60 million is an additional tax and URA says that I must pay interest on that and yet I submitted my return on 30th June and paid what was due to me. That is why I want to understand where this is coming from - what is the due date for this additional tax? That is where this is coming from. 

That is now I want to say that hon. Amuriat has a very big point here. We must differentiate between two types of tax - tax of my own assessment where I have filed my returns and paid, and the tax which has been adjusted, the additional one. When do I start paying interest? I can only pay interest if I have been notified that instead of Shs 300 million, I am supposed to pay Shs 360 million. So, there should be a date when interest on the additional Shs 60 million should start accruing. That is where I want to agree with him.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I might not be an expert in this area but this is talking about returns; these are tax returns. You have not filed it within time and you are seeking an extension but the due date of that tax is known and when you default, it attracts interest. 

Now, there should be another section altogether dealing with assessments. If there are disputes about assessments, you know where to go. Also, the due date for that excess assessment will be the date given when the tribunal pronounces itself that this is the due date, and this is under clause 22, I am advised.

I think that is clear. I put the question that clause 18 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, clause 19 is on self-assessment. In clause 19 sub clause (5), insert a new paragraph (d) to read as follows: “(d) A return required to be furnished under the excise duty law.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is the value of that? - [MR SSEBUNYA: “There is a gap”] – There is a gap? Okay, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR SSEBUNYA: Clause 21 is on advance assessment. Under clause 21, rephrase sub clause (1) to read as follows: “(1) This section applies to a taxpayer specified in section 17 and the commissioner is satisfied that there is a risk that a taxpayer may delay, obstruct, prevent or render ineffective payment or collection of tax that has not yet become due.” 

The justification is that this provision is unfair since tax cannot be due on income that has not been earned. Uganda Revenue Authority can make an assessment even before income has been earned. This means tax is due even where income has not arisen and to challenge this assessment, 30 per cent of the assessed amount must be paid on objection. So we must assess after income has been earned.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So what are you proposing?

MR SSEBUNYA: To rephrase sub clause (1) of clause 21 which says, “This section applies- (a) to a taxpayer specified in section 17...” We have rephrased it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay; is that re-wording okay, honourable minister?

MR OMACH: I have no objection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, no objection from the minister.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the chairman of the committee mentioned 30 per cent; where are we inserting the 30 per cent here?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is not in the Bill. Those were some of the additional statements he was using to illustrate; it does not become part of the law.

Okay, I put the question to the amendment proposed by the chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have an additional amendment to clause 21. Before I propose the amendment, I want to ask the minister to explain sub clause (7) to me – “Nothing in this section relieves a taxpayer from being required to furnish the tax return to which the assessment served under this section relates.”

I ask this because under sub clause (5), the commissioner has raised an assessment and now you are saying under (7) that much as URA has raised an assessment, nothing stops the taxpayer from filing a return for assessment. So, what are you trying to cure with (7)? I want clarification on that and then I will propose the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But this does not require - This is ordinary looking at the law as proposed. This particular section does not take away the responsibility of the taxpayer to file a return.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is good, Mr Chairman. If that is the case, then in (5)(b) where the commissioner serves an assessment under subsection (2), the notice will specify the amount assessed and the interest payable not the penal tax. The justification is that you have been assessed Shs 1 billion, for example, it was due on a certain amount and your interest on this money is this amount, payable by this date. 

If say you are raising a penal tax, it means you will not listen to my objection, I have no way of coming back and filing a return and it means your tax is final. However, if I have a way to file the returns, it would be one of the taxes I would file, maybe to deal with an objection to your estimated assessment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I have not got the actual proposal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My proposal is that in (b), we delete penal tax and deal with only interest, if any, payable in respect of the tax assessed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So you want to delete “penal tax”? In other words, (b) would read, “the amount of interest, if any, payable in respect of the tax assessed.” Is penal tax the same as penalty?

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I thought the commissioner shall serve the taxpayer assessed the amount of tax assessed- Okay, if they have mentioned the tax assessed then why say penal tax?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is why I was asking; is it the same as penalty? Honourable minister-

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I think we can have the penal tax removed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Oh, the penal tax is defined. Let us look at the definition: “Penal tax means a tax imposed as a penalty for failure perform...” - Chairman, take note, there is a word “to” missing there in the definition. “Penal tax means a tax imposed as a penalty for failure to perform an act required by or under a tax law.” In other words, it is a penalty. So it is okay. Since it is a defined word, we do not have to worry too much about it. It is a penalty.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, interest is a penalty; because you have not filed a return on time, you have deprived Government of money to use and that is why you are charged two per cent per month. It is already a punishment, so why should you penalise a person twice? It is double jeopardy. You have assessed the tax –(Interruption)

MR MUDIMI: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the information I want to give you is that once you delay to file VAT returns, you pay Shs 200,000 as penalty. Now, that amount, once it remains unpaid, attracts interest; that is what this is about. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, here we assume the commissioner has assessed you and said that your tax due by 30th was Shs 1 billion. Since you did not pay it at that time, the penalty is a charge of interest of two per cent per month –(Interruption)

MR MUDIMI: There is a fixed amount of money which URA normally imposes as a penalty. 

MR EKANYA: Hon. Mudimi, there are two things; penalty and interest are separate things and they are defined in law. By the way, these ladies and gentlemen of URA can also delay and when they delay, you have a problem. Your auditor files returns and they are rejected and during that period, you are paying interest and at the same time the law is saying that you have to pay a penalty. This is double jeopardy. Some of us are in business and we face this problem already. Let us not just make a law which makes business very hard. 

Mr Chairman, I request the honourable members and the Minister of Finance that in this case, the penalty should be deleted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Removing this phrase from here does not take away the imposition of penalty; it does not. What this is saying is that in the commissioner’s letter to you, he will advise you on the amount of tax, the penalty and the interest. So deleting this from here does not mean there are no penalties in taxes. 

MS TAAKA: Mr Chairman, here we are saying that a penalty can be in different forms; it is either in the form of interest or any other way. How do you calculate the penalty? Those are two different things - because you have delayed to pay, therefore you have to pay interest but that interest can also be the penalty. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, interest comes because you have kept money instead of giving it to the owner. If you use my money, you pay interest; that is not a penalty, but also under another provision, you must pay a penalty for failing to do certain things. Interest is different from penalty.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I want to get clarification from the chairman. I can see that the penal tax is calculated based on a given figure. There are two things, the panel tax and interest, but I do not know whether the chairman would wish to have interest on the penal tax. 

In my view, we should not have a penal tax and interest because a penalty, as the member for Busia has explained, is calculated based on the fact that you defaulted somewhere. When you default, you are given a penalty and then after that again you face another penalty – it will be double taxation! 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Penal tax, by definition, again, means a tax imposed as a penalty for failure to perform an act required by or under a tax law. It is not interest. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if you go to a bank and borrow money and default, they charge you what we call penal interest or default interest; it ceases to be the normal interest. That is why we are saying, if you want to say that this interest is different from others, then it should be named differently, maybe penal interest because you defaulted - instead of charging you 2 per cent, we charge you 2.1 per cent. That is different. The moment you assess the tax and then give me penal tax and also demand interest from me –(Interruption) 

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairman, we are spending a lot of time arguing about this when you have already advised us that this is simply a letter the commissioner is writing to advise the taxpayer on the amount of tax assessed, the penal tax and interest, if any. That means if you pay the penal tax on time, there will be no interest. This is just a letter; the actual penal tax would have been calculated elsewhere. It is just the commissioner advising you on your position. 

Why are members spending so much time arguing about a letter which the commissioner has to write? I beg that we end this debate because it is not a substantive issue. My procedural point is: why are people continuing to argue about a letter the commissioner is going to write? If the penal tax is somewhere in the Bill, go to where it is and argue from that point but this is just a letter. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, you have said many times that the penal tax as defined under the definition clause is that tax you are required to pay for having failed to perform an act under any tax law. The question would now be: what would that act be? If it is the act of failing to either furnish a return in due time or paying your tax on the due date, by that alone, any interest is already good enough a penalty for your failure to pay. 

If it is an act of under declaring your taxes, for example, then the penal tax will stand because you ought to know that you are supposed to declare the correct amount. If you evade that, that attracts a penal tax. That stands as a good definition and there is no reason to remove it now. 

Therefore, honourable members, under clause 21, the commissioner is going to write to you an assessment saying this is the amount of tax due, and probably, if you defaulted, this is the interest. Apart from defaulting, you also committed another act which is contrary to the law and for that they penalise you such an amount. I think it does not call for any alarm. 

We should therefore leave this provision as it is except we may need to further define the act clearly. What act would amount to attracting a penal tax? That should be defined. Otherwise, for the act of mere default, you are already letting me pay interest and you are again asking me to pay a penal tax; that will be double jeopardy. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question. I think we all agree that there is no contradiction on the issue of penal tax. Okay, I now put the question that clause 21 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I proposed an amendment and there was no argument about it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, there was an amendment to clause 21. Okay, I now put the question that clause 21, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, before we leave clause 21-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are done with it.

Clause 22

MR SSEBUNYA: Clause 22 is on additional assessment. In sub clause (5), the reference should be subsection (2) (b) and not (4) (b).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that will be for the drafts people to edit. We do not have to pronounce ourselves on that. They will do the cross-referencing properly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, this clause is on additional assessment, but sub clause (6) (b) says, “the amount of penal tax and interest, if any, payable in respect of the amount assessed”. 

Mr Chairman, there are two ways an assessment can come up. One is where a taxpayer claim is allowable but the tax authority says it is not allowable but it is in the books. It is provided for very well that I am claiming X, I have given you all the information, but it is disallowed. When you disallow and give an additional assessment, supposing URA raises the assessment after three years and says that the additional tax payable is Shs 60 million, it means under (b) they will charge you interest with penal tax for the last three years. They will do that and yet it is URA that delayed to raise an assessment and secondly, the information is on file.

The other point, which my brother from Padyere also mentioned, is where someone wilfully produces a wrong record to evade taxes; that is where (6)(b) would apply. I want to qualify this by saying that the amount of penal tax and interest, if any, payable in respect of the amount assessed as a result of evasion. This is because that person evaded. In respect of someone for whom you have just raised an additional assessment and the information is on file, such a person should not be subjected to this.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, allow me seek some clarification from the hon. Nandala. Suppose URA comes and they do the first assessment but get no error and now they come for an additional assessment and they now establish that there was an error, who will be liable?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: When you read this, when there is any additional assessment, whether URA made a mistake or not, it is the taxpayer to suffer. That is why we want to qualify these two; one is to deal with evasion, for example 22 (2) which is about fraud or gross wilful negligence. Those could be subjected to penal tax and interest, if any, on additional assessment. However, where a person has not done any of those and it is URA that has come with additional assessment, that person should not be subjected to penal tax and interest because it would not have been that person’s fault.

So, it should read, “the amount of penal tax and interest, if any, payable in respect of additional assessment for an act by the taxpayer, or fraud or gross and wilful negligence.” The justification is that URA should not raise an additional assessment where there is no gross and wilful negligence, no fraud but because of technicalities they charge interest for three years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are we looking at sub clause (2) or (6)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, sub clause (2) moves. What we are trying to do in (2) is to raise an additional assessment, but in (6), it is saying that when an additional assessment is raised, you will be –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, why (2) is important is because it sets the parameters of the additional assessment. So, what is not qualified in (2) cannot come up in (6).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you are right.

MR DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: As always. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You are right, but an addition assessment can be raised by URA adding something to your tax returns. I will give an example. You might have claimed that the money you spent on travel is Shs 1 million but they come back and say that from  that Shs 1 million, they are allowing Shs 800,000 and Shs 200,000 will go back, but the information is in the books. That will be the judgement of URA. So, will you put it under fraud or gross negligence? But an additional assessment has been raised on the Shs 200,000. 

The reason I am raising this is because this should only be applicable under sub clause (2) but not any other additions that may come up as the URA people do their assessments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, you need to help us explain the significance of (b) and (c) in sub clause (2). Why are they important when they look like what we have just passed in 21?
Sub clause (2) (a) is clear because it says, “at any time, if fraud or any gross or wilful neglect has been committed by, or on behalf of the taxpayer, or new information has been discovered in relation to the tax payable by the taxpayer for a tax period.” Isn’t that sufficient to capture the circumstances under which the additional assessment can be raised instead of these others?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, (b) and (c) specifically mention the period within three years, but (a) refers to a tax period. So, what you are saying is that the tax period will also cover the three years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, why don’t you improve on (a) so that (a) can deal with both the tax period and the three years if it is necessary, and take out all these other ones which are importing things which can cause a bit of confusion. I think that is the point being made by hon. Nandala, because what is in (2) is what is now being applied in (6).

If sub clause (2) is so open, that makes the issue in sub clause (6) a bit difficult. The reason being we have already passed a similar provision in relation to penal tax interest in normal circumstances in clause 21. Now we are talking about fraud and wilful neglect and those circumstances where new facts have arisen within the tax period or three years.

MR KAKOOZA: Yes chair, I think what they are trying to say is when they are auditing taxpayers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you still hold your position?

MR KAKOOZA: You know, when they are assessing taxpayers, for instance VAT for final year or VAT at the end of the financial year, they might not be able to find out the mistake you have caused at the beginning of the year so they give you a period of three years; URA can come back and say, please according to the details and the copies and the audited books of accounts and your importation documents, we are finding that there some additional assessments which we have to give you to pay taxes. That is why they have put it in three years which is B.

Then in sub clause 1 they are saying it might be you as a taxpayer; you did not give in the documents to verify that the tax assessments which are additional; you did it intentionally that is why they want to get you here. But what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying, if I gave you the documents and you did not do it, why should a penalty come to me when I gave you the documents. That is the question. So the drafting should be different such that in case it was a not a problem from me as a taxpayer-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Kakooza, that is captured in A. if you read the second leg- all new information has been discovered in relation to the tax payable by the taxpayer for a tax period” that is captured in A.

MR ANYWARACH: Chair I don’t think that is captured in (a).Here we are talking about professional negligence of the commissioner. I would think that must come as a stand-alone provision that actually protects a taxpayer who did all he did with due diligence. That will make the difference; otherwise if we say it is covered in (a), I do not see where it is covered may be it has to be explained clearly. What we lack here is a stand-alone provision that must protect –(Interjection) yes URA.

MR SSEBUNYA: I have been advised; The assessment on (a) is based on fraud or any gross or wilful neglect, which has been committed by or on behalf of the taxpayer or new information; so  sub clause (2) (b) and (c) are for any other circumstances and giving timelines. Three years, anyway, if any new additional information has been discovered, I think we can leave out (b) and (c).

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, let hon. Omach do his job, because when you consult you will mislead us. Let hon. Omach be the one to consult. You are our chairperson for Parliament of Uganda. You see this clause is very serious. Sometimes ladies and gentlemen of URA make omissions, errors and negligence and then come back and say you did not furnish us the information and yet it is them who ignored it. They do sampling, and the error is as a result of their own omission. The taxpayer should not be penalised three years after. That is why they say, “You give me a bribe, I will ignore you tax liability”. This causes bribery and fraud. We need a clause here to protect the taxpayer that if it was as a result of wilful negligence of a commissioner or a representative the taxpayer is protected from penal tax and interest.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, there is what we call avoidance and evasion. Avoidance is legal; evasion is illegal. Here you have filed your returns very well giving all the information and you made your computation using the law. Now URA comes and says that they are issuing an additional assessment of Shs 60 million after 3 or 5 years. If this tax was due five years ago, you must pay interest and penal tax yet it was not wilful, fraud or anything like that. Also you get somebody who is involved in fraud, wilful and is paying the same penal tax and interest. Why should you penalise me when you should have issued an additional assessment there and thenand I pay the money.

We are not saying that the person who has issued an additional assessment genuinely, the taxpayer should pay but should not pay with interest the penal tax of years when it should have been issued earlier. I think that is why we need to protect taxpayers. That is why I was proposing the amendment that the amount of penal tax and interest, if any, payable in respect of the amount assessed shall be in respect of fraud, gross or wilful negligence committed by the taxpayer or on his behalf. There we can say we have protected URA indirectly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What about in a case where some information had been hidden and now has been discovered. I am talking about in this clause.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But Mr Chairman even with that we are making a mistake. The moment it is a fraud, it means there was information which was not declared. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If it is not intentional, it is not fraud.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If you are saying it is not intentional then you cannot put it here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes that is why it has to be here. It may not be intended that the information be kept away but it has just been discovered that we did not know about this and there is no fraud about that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But, Mr Chairman, if you read very well this new information it is not segregating the one which is intentional and non-intentional. May be here the new information that has been discovered by the tax authority may not be intentional withheld.

MR KAKOOZA: Chair we need to redraft it because every taxpayer is registered and whatever importation you make, whatever goods and services you supply, are registered within the computers; all the documents you bring for assessment are known and you have them because that is your basis for tax assessment.

But you cannot come back after 3 years and say, “No I have discovered new information,” because you get all the documents from me. If it was your negligence, do not put a burden on me. For a business of three years, you know the computation and projection of profits that you have made. So, coming back in three years and say, “By the time I audited you, the documents I had….” No- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kakooza, the mistake that we are making here is to think that you cannot discover fraud three years later. There is a time limit on criminal responsibility. There is no time limit on that.

Two, it is only in respect of where the taxpayer is liable and that is prescribed here where the responsibility rests with the tax payer and that is where the sanctions in sub clause 6 are coming. I have not been able to see a situation where it is the omission of URA that has caused the additional assessment. I have not seen it here and nobody has suggested it here. In fact, they have been silent about it because if it is them who have made it, then they are not penalising anybody for it. It is not there and I do not know why we are hammering something that is not in the Bill. It is not there, hon. Nandala-Mafabi – where have they said that URA committed the mistake; it is not in the Bill. 

The new information that they are talking about is the one that has been discovered in relation to the tax payable by the tax payer for the tax period and this means that the information was not with URA and they have just discovered it from the tax payer. Please.  

MR KAKOOZA: If that is it, then for that period that you have discovered, do not put interest on me because I furnished all the documents with you and my projections in my documents are clear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You do not discover documents that are with you. (Laughter)

MR KAKOOZA: If I furnish the documents with you and the errors and omissions are from your side, then you do not put blame on me. The problem with this clause is that even if I give you the correct documents but you did not add the  property properly- You are saying that I am the one who is in wrong. Suppose my documents are correct and everything is right but the way you computed has an error on your side. So, do not put interest –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  What you are saying is not in the Bill.

MR KAKOOZA: If they say that at any time, interest - any gross or wilful neglect that has been committee by or on behalf of a tax payer- new information has been discovered in relation to the taxpayer by the tax payer for a tax period, then in case of additional assessment, then that is where there is a problem. Within three years from the date of service of notice of additional assessment –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The member for Pader.

MR ANYWARACH: Chairperson, your explanation is really straight and clear but we are looking at a situation where an additional assessment must not just be called for at my instant. It is at the instant of the commissioner. I have done my due diligence and everything and that is why we are struggling to say that we need to protect the taxpayer who did everything but only one thing, the negligence of the commissioner in handling the tax information maybe while entering it into the computer or whatever.

That is why I propose that there should be a stand-alone provision that exonerates me as a tax payer having done my due diligence and so forth and imputes responsibility on the commissioner and the URA officials to also do due care and make sure that they take care of the whole process of handling my tax assessment issues.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us clear this, member for Pader. The situation is this; what you are exactly stating that their miscalculations could have been occasioned by error from URA is not in the Bill. So, nobody is being penalised for it. Those situations are not captured in the Bill and no penalty is being imposed on anybody for that. Unless you know what to say where URA commits a mistake in doing assessment, they should be punished but it not part of this law. 

MR ANYWARACH: If we put one clause for example because here we are saying –(Interruption)-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much for giving way. The information I want to give the member for Pader and the House is that if you deal in airtime, for example, in order to entice your customers to buy airtime, you give them a soda. Now one time, my brother Ben comes but he does not buy airtime and you give him a soda, and then URA comes and audits that the soda you gave Ben is not allowable. Are you getting it?  These are the definitions that we are trying to raise. But I had given him and the amount that I spent on sodas is Shs 10,000, which is allowable business expenses, but he said out of this, Shs 1,000 is not allowed and he is raising an additional assessment on Shs 1,000. It is not fraud; the information is there, but he has come after five years and because of the audit, he is saying that the Shs 1,000 should be taxed. If he does that, according to 6 (b), they will raise an additional assessment, interest and penalty. That is the thing that we are trying to talk about and that is what I wanted to tell my brother. 

The mistake of URA is: why did they wait for five years to audit an activity which for me I said is okay and for you, you say it is disallowed and you are penalising me? That is where the issue is, and it is number one.

Clause 2 is where there is fraud, which we should not allow.  A person must be punished and what hon. Ekanya raised – you people, URA is on rampage, auditing people and raising huge assessments and negotiating. Please, let us call a spade a spade. If you leave this law like this, you are empowering URA staff to become richer at the expense of the taxpayer. The reason we are raising is that we should also put a clause to deal with the URA staff that go on rampage - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clarification from who-the chairperson of the committee?

MRS ALUM: The chairperson of the whole House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, you cannot seek clarification from the Chair of the whole House. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, I thought that he was giving me information.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes because the hon. Member holding the Floor is from Pader

MS ALUM: Honourable member from Pader –(Laughter)- thank you so much my colleague and the chairperson. My mind now drives to something that in case of new information which leads to increase in productivity and the increase in productivity may came later before the assessment and later the URA discovers that because of new knowledge- first of all, increase in productivity means you have to go back and make a new assessment – I do not know whether this one will not help us with (b) to address that kind of scenario.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you for the good information that hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Santa have given. Now here what I was arriving at is that we are talking of additional assessment and that additional assessment comes with it additional financial or tax demand and there is no way you are going to say that the additional assessment is going to make you pay less. No, they are probably going to ask you for more money and it is okay. But if I was culpable for probably fraud or the additional information that is going to discredit me for stating that you made some mistakes here and so forth, fine. But here we are saying every piece of information refurnished was okay, but the URA officials simply mishandled the information.

Now, why we want a stand-alone clause is that adding to clause 22 where there is need - Because clause 22 is saying, there is need for additional assessment, the conditions are a, b, c, d and so forth and now we are finally going to go down and say, but this section will apply only when the need for additional assessment is at the insistence of the tax payer but where it is at the insistence of the commissioner then there must be no additional assessment. That is what we are looking at. So there should be a stand-alone clause. Chairman of the committee, don’t you agree with us really if you are a businessman?

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, why don’t the members allow us to pass clause 22 because that is on additional assessment by the Commissioner-General and then they propose another clause after clause22-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us look at it this way. Supposing somebody proposes an additional sub clause 8 to the effect that the provision of sub clause 6 shall not apply where the error leading to the additional assessment is occasioned by URA? Does that solve the problem? In which case the rest of the provisions remain. So, Chairman-

MR SSEBUNYA: Let us have a rephrase of sub clause 6(d) to read as follows -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Sub-clause 6(d)? We are still on clause 22 (6) (d). We want it to be rephrased- 

MR SSEBUNYA: Okay, we can vote on the chairman’s proposal and then we go to sub clause 6

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I am asking you to propose, I cannot propose.

MR SSEBUNYA: Let the House propose another sub-clause (8) that agrees with the chairman’s proposal which is- I do not want to draft on the microphone.

Mr Chairman, insert a new sub clause (8) to read, “The provisions of the sub section (6) shall not apply where the error leading to the additional assessment is occasioned by the commissioner.”

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I have no objection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You had another issue.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I propose that we rephrase sub clause 6(d) to read, “The due date for payment of any penal tax interest being the date that is not less than 45 days from the date of service of the notice.” We have changed the days. In the committee you proposed that we change the days from 28 to 45 days.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Members, the amendment is to remove 28 days and in its placewe say 45 days. It is to enlarge the period from 28 days to 45 days.

MR OMACH: I have no objection, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No objection from the minister. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, for avoidance of doubt, in 6(b) I am saying the amount of penal tax and interest , if any,  payable in respect of amount assessed as a result of sub clause 2(a). The justification is to avoid doubt that if it is an additional assessment as a result of disallowing an expenditure, which information is with URA, the tax payer should only pay a principle assessment but not topay a penal tax as interest.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But I thought that it is captured by saying that if the circumstances leading to the additional assessment are arising from an error occasioned by the commissioner, it will not apply to the tax payer. In other words, the whole of that clause will not apply to the tax payer if the error is occasioned by the commissioner.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, this is an error occasioned by a commissioner raising an additional assessment where it should not have been maybe as a result of- I do not know what error you are looking at but I want to give a live example. Assuming you have said transport paid to my workers during work is Shs 20 million, that means that transport is an allowable expenditure. Then URA comes and says no, of this I am going to disallow Shs 2 million, which will be subjected to tax. That will mean an additional assessment. It is not an error of URA. Rather URA is saying, no I am going to disallow this but he has the information of the transport allowance.

So if the tax payer says, okay because I have agreed, let me pay the additional assessment since you have disallowed this then it should not be subjected to penal tax because the tax payer has committed no crime because he was not told in time that the Shs 2 million would be disallowed. That is why I am bringing this.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I think that the proposed and passed amendment under sub-clause 8 covers what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes because if you looked at it and said it was okay, then you come later and change your mind; they are saying it will not apply because the circumstances leading to the additional assessment is occasioned by you, it was not there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we have passed clause19 talking about self-assessment. Self-assessment means I file my returns, I say these are my accounts, the profit I have made is Shs 1 billion, tax is 30 per cent, which is Shs 300 million. After six months, URA says, we cannot accept Shs300 million; so you must pay an additional tax of Shs 100 million which comes to Shs 30 million. 

Then I say, since you have disallowed, you go ahead; does that mean I should pay penal tax interest from the day when I file the return on 30th June? No. So we have to put this up to cater for that, because that is not an error on the part of the commissioner. I filed an assessment, which he has had for six months and later disallowed. So what happens if I agree to pay the Shs 30 million – that Shs 30 million will be due from the assessment but will have no penal tax.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, how do you cure that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am curing it by stating that the amount of penal tax and interest payable in respect of the amount assessed as a result of sub clause 2(a) – we are removing the one, which states that it was not wilful; nor fraud nor negligence on the part of the tax payer. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, the member has submitted his amendment digitally and we have received it; so I accept it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to that amendment from the honourable member from Budadiri West. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete sub clause 3(c). The justification is that the requirement to pay 30 percent to the commissioner to consider the objection will restrict taxpayers from objecting tax decisions some of which may lack merit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put that question to that deletion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23

MR KAKOOZA: On clause 23(2), I want you to guide me, Mr Chairman. It states; “An objection shall be in the described form and shall state the grounds upon which it’s made and should contain sufficient evidence to support the objection. It seems to leave much discretion to the commissioner which may be abused. What is meant by sufficient evidence? 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, Hon. Kakooza by the way is a member of the finance committee. My problem is, he should be working with the chairman instead of debating this Bill now; it is ours. We should be the ones to debate. Is he procedurally right to keep taking us back when he is a member of the committee of finance?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The member sought some information on these issues, but I think the question here is on discretionary powers. They are handled on a case by case basis. You cannot put a standard rail on it. What then would discretion be about?

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, what happens after you get the sufficient evidence? Because I would be at your mercy as the taxpayer and you could do anything to me at will depending on your discretion. So what would I do as a taxpayer?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But can you give the commissioner powers without the discretion to exercise that power?

MR KAKOOZA: Much obliged. 

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, on rejection of an objection decision; here they limit it to the tax tribunal. Let us state here that you may apply to the tax-tribunal to review the decision or to courts of law. The justification is that you cannot limit me from having my case heard. 

MR OMACH: No objection, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: A person dissatisfied with the objection decision may apply to the tax-tribunal or to review the decision – courts of law is basically automatic. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I appreciate the spirit in which hon. Nandala-Mafabi  brings this amendment. But when we say that he will apply to the tribunal or courts of law, I think it remains ambiguous. We need to state whether after dissatisfaction with the tribunal, an appeal will be made to higher courts of law.  We need to make it more clear and show that after dissatisfaction with the commissioner, you can go to the tribunal and after that proceed to the High Court. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, the other challenge with this area is that it is generally open. It does not state the period in which the person objecting can object to the tribunal. I think it is important for us to be particular on the period in which such circumstance can be handled. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Let me read the proposed amendment to give the timelines. Clause 24(b) reads, “A person dissatisfied with an objection decision may within 30 days after being served with a notice, of no objection decision lodge an application with the tax appeal tribunal for review of the objection decision”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: After being served the notice of no objection?

MR SSEBUNYA: Notice of objection – sorry. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Does that take care of Busongora’s concern? Okay I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There was the issue of the court.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I think the court is known for making ends of justice meet. So I would think the way this provision is framed is satisfactory enough. It states; “A person dissatisfied with any objection decision and the period within which you are allowed to lodge your application is given and we use the word, “May apply”, that does not tie your hands. You may take the dimension of the tribunal or if you feel that that decision is going to injure you, you can run to court. So making this provision is actually a well-known fact.

MR EKANYA: I am seeking clarification from hon. Omach. We have had cases where people jump the tribunal and go to the High Court, and the High Court refers them to the tribunal and they end up in a ping pong situation. I thought we created a tribunal with experts as the first place of call; and then from there you can go to other courts. Why don’t we allow the system to work like that? It does not stop you – go to a tribunal, and if you are dissatisfied, then you can go to court. Otherwise we are creating a ping pong.  So I want to find out from hon. Omach whether you are comfortable with the ping pong; and therefore what is the essence of having a tribunal?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, you know I am neither happy with ping pong nor with pong ping. (Laughter) So, I agree with the shadow minister that we phrase this so that if one wants to go to court, they should do so after they have been dissatisfied with the decision of the tribunal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That means you create a new sub clause there or you want to create a whole new clause?

MR OMACH: I think he just finished redrafting it. So if he can submit it – It can be within the same month; we only need to rephrase it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we can have the first as one and the one on court as two. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, if we are to tie the hands of anybody who is aggrieved to first, as a must, go to the tribunal, which I think is very dangerous then we can have it read thus: “A person dissatisfied with an objection decision…” then we can bring in the amendment that the chairperson of the committee tabled. So, instead of using “may apply” we should use “shall; apply” to the tribunal to review the decision. This will mean that it will be a must for that person to first apply to the tribunal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, you might be dissatisfied but when you don’t want to appeal.

MR ANYWARACH: If that is the case, then we can maintain the use of the words “may” apply to the tribunal to review the decision. I don’t want it to be called the decision of the tribunal because we cannot do that. But we can say thus: “A person who is dissatisfied with the decision of the tribunal may …”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Having looked at clause (b) 24 and when you look at clause 25 (a), you realise that it talks about tax assessment. Clause 24 talks about objection to a decision.

But Mr Chairman, an objection – I think clause 24 must be rephrased to talk about review of an objection decision or an assessment. This is so because one can accept an objection but issue a different assessment. When you read it means that one only goes to the tribunal when they have refused an objection. I think here we should talk about both the review of objection decision and assessment. So, we can say thus: “…may in 30 days go to the tribunal for the review of the decision of objection or assessment and (b) if he is dissatisfied with the decision of the tribunal  he can go to the courts of law to review the assessment or the objection.” This means that a person shall not first go to court. They will first go to the tribunal for that review before going to the courts of law. Is that okay, Mr Minister?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, at this point you are no longer dealing with the assessment; you will be dealing with the objection to the decision on your assessment. This is about objection because you will have made your case to the commissioner and it has been objected. That is why even in that part it is called objections and appeals.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I now withdraw the word “assessment” and just say that the person will deal with this in the tribunal in 30 days. And in case of further dissatisfaction, the person can now report to courts of law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay, minister?

MR OMACH: I agree with that, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, should we split it into two paragraphs?

MR OMACH: That comes under paragraph 2.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, so there will be 24 (1) and (2) to deal with the issue of going to court after 30 days if they are dissatisfied with the decision of the tribunal. Is that okay. I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to add onto what hon. Geoffrey Ekanya said. I don’t know how many of you have been before a tax tribunal. In the tax tribunal the problem is the Ministry of Finance because they are the ones to appoint the commissioners. And that tax tribunal sits only in Kampala. It doesn’t sit anywhere in Mbarara –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Will that be captured under this provision.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, I wanted to add onto what the hon. Geoffrey Ekanya said –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, this is clause 24. You cannot raise anything under this. Please be relevant.

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 24 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, on this clause I want to suggest that we make exception. Someone might be going out of the country on matters of health but they also have tax issues. Recently while even the assessment is still going on  - this clause gives the commissioner discretion – we need to create an exception where additional assessment has been made – somebody may be denied –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This part has nothing to do with additional assessment. This is only about collection and recovery of tax.

MR EKANYA: Yes, I agree with you on that; it is about collection of tax. But business of that person may still be in Uganda though the person may be going out –(Interjections)– yes, you can talk about permanency but we are leaving the powers to establish the degree of temporary or permanent to the Commissioner-General.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 29 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, on this clause about recovery of tax through persons owing money to the taxpayer, we propose that in sub clause 4, we delete the words “a pension” appearing in the second line. The justification is that pension is tax exempt and not attachable in most laws.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAKOOZA: On clause 32, Mr Chairman, please help me.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On clause 32?

MR KAKOOZA: No, clause 30, sub clause (2), on the recovery of taxes from third parties. When you read it, you see the parameters of a Commissioner General to recover money when it is not yet the due date. When you read it, you see that this clause applies to a person who pays taxes through a third party. When you read it as it is, this provision can be abused because the parameters given to the commissioner to conclude that tax is not yet due and will not be paid by the taxpayer at the due date. It leaves the discretion to the commissioner and it overrides the taxpayer’s contest.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, we have just passed the recommendation given by the committee and Kakooza is a member of the committee. 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chair, the contention is that recovering money from the third party, this is what clause 30(2) means - It overrides a person’s right to contest a decision made by the Commissioner General. It gives away the right of a taxpayer to context. Read it properly and see, when you read it as a lawyer he can interpret and find out. It overrides the taxpayer’s right to contest any tax that may be deemed. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member for Kabula, this is about collection and recovery of tax. It turns out that you who has failed to pay somebody else owes you money and it has come to the notice of URA or the commissioner so instead of pursuing you they will make arrangements to get money from the person who owes you money.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chair before you put a question; there is a fundamental question here. This is somebody owing you money or holding your money like the bank. URA is going to write notice to me, say hon. Kakooza that please Kakooza has a tax liability of this amount of money that we are going to recover from the amount that you owe him. I am okay with this whole provision but my problem is where there is a notice there should be a specified period with in which I am informed because you have to give me some benefit of doubt to respond to your notice..

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Propose, member.

MR ANYWARACH: I am proposing for at least 45 days.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where?

MR ANYWARACH: For example where he says that a person to whom a notice is served.

THE CHAIRMAN: Which paragraph or clause?

MR ANYWARACH: That is clause 33: “A person to whom a notice is served under sub clause 2 shall pay the amount certified in the notice under the sub clause by the date specified in the notice being a date the amount due to the taxpayer or held on the taxpayer’s behalf”. There are two mistakes here. It has an agreement that the person to whom the notice is addressed really owes the money. That is one assumption.

Two, he has to pay as soon he receives the notice. I could be sampling the money I received from somewhere. I could be collecting money and say yes I will pay you but I should be given a period 45 days.

By the time the Commissioner General reaches this measure then it is in her judgement that may  be the taxpayer is about to disappear and a case in point is when URA wanted to get money from heritage and heritage was in a hurry to leave this country so the due dates dose matter in the notice.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, you see if it is not on the due date then there will be issues of interest. Now they are saying you will not pay more than the tax. If you are given more days then they charge the interest. Doesn’t this complicate the whole situation because the amount is due today; you pay it today.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chair that due date has an assumption that I owe Mr Kakooza money and you have credible evidence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If don’t owe him the money you are free to say that you do not owe him the money.

MR ANYWARACH: This is where I am coming to, so you must give me a period within which I respond to your notice so that if I am denying I will not be disapproved.

If I receive the notice today and you tell me to pay the money I think there is a big question here. I really pray that the House understands the dimension along which I am looking at this; because if you are going to give notice-(Interruption)

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman I thought that sub clause 3 was drafted in a legal language that my brother from Pader is very well versed with- 45 days is on a higher side and if we must put any days there it can only be 14 days. Otherwise the way it is put here it gives details of the days that the taxpayer becomes due to pay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What about 5? Where a person served with a notice under sub clause 2 is unable to comply with the notice by reason of lack of monies owing to or held for the taxpayer the person shall as soon as practicable and in any case before the payment date specified in the notice notify the commissioner accordingly. Because the notice that is given to you gives you a due date that you are supposed to pay by this date;now you have the responsibility to come and say no, I don’t owe this money or I don’t have the money with in that period or  before the due date.  So, if you have to propose a timeframe it might have to come here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This is to deal with agency notices. What it means URA says we are demanding Shs 100 million. Immediately they put an agency notice on your account in Standard Chartered Bank and they instruct them to immediately transfer money to URA but you could be having issues with URA where you have not agreed and why should they grab the money. 

When URA takes the money, to return it is not easy. It is one of the most complicated things. One of the live examples I can give; URA put an agency notice to one of bankers of Bugisu Cooperative Union, that was Bank of Baroda and their argument was that BCU never deducted withholding tax on the money they paid one Muzungu who sold them land and they took Shs 450 million and yet it is the Ministry of Finance which paid the Muzungu directly through UIA without us being involved and they should have deducted it. As we speak now, we have never got the money.

So with an agency notice, you should give me an opportunity to verify and write to me if I have failed and then I can deal with it. In fact, I would not have raised it but because I have a practical experience where they took money which they should not have taken and we are still struggling with them. So, given that, having put in the agency notice – it should take some time because it means that the money will not leave the account as whoever has it, will not pay me until I have cleared my problem with URA.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But, hon. Member, have you read 5? The member for Pian.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you. I think that we have kind of enforced 29 – from 28 – a debt due to the Government of Uganda and there is a procedure given for the commissioner to recover the money. But if you come to 29 and 30, the title of that section is to enforce tax collection and has nothing to do with assessment or what. It is about collecting money that is due. You have gone all through the procedures of making sure that this money is due and that you are evading, failing or avoiding paying the tax. This is about enforcing collections and I do not see the need for time here because the tax payer is just evading or avoiding to pay the tax – it is about enforced collection of a debt that is due and it must be collected through any means, including disposing of your assets if that is possible or getting money from the person that owes you the money.

MR OMACH: Chair, with the guidance that you have given under 5, we propose that you propose the question and we take this as it is.

MR KAKOOZA: Clause 32 is on the recovery of URA money through a third party – (Interjections)- no, you see you are going to collect money from the bank which has issues and I must verify. You people, we are business people –

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to clause 30, as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34

MR SSEBUNYA: On clause 34, seizure of goods, in sub clause (1), delete the words, “Or will not be.” The justification is that the provision should only operate for a tax that is due and payable but not yet paid by the taxpayer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: To delete what?

MR SSEBUNYA: The words, “Or will not be” in 34 on seizure of goods.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But how will it leave the sentence?

MR SSEBUNYA: The sentence will read, “The Commissioner or a Tax Officer authorised in writing by the Commissioner may seize any goods in respect of which there are reasonable grounds to believe that it is tax payable in respect of the supply, removal or import of goods that have not been paid.” And we delete, “Or will not be.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “The Commissioner or a Tax Officer authorised in writing by the commissioner may seize any goods in respect of which there are reasonable grounds to believe that it is tax payable in respect of the supply, removal or import of goods that have not been paid.” In other words remove, “Or will not be paid.” That is the amendment.I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36

MR SSEBUNYA: Under the priority of Withholding Tax and VAT, delete sub-clause 3 and the justification is, One, that sub-clause 3 excludes Withholding Tax and VAT from liquidation proceedings;

Two, attempts to amend the provision of the Companies Act and Insolvency Act to do with authority payment of debts in case of winding up and;
Three, section 12 (6) of the Insolvency Act provides that after paying the sums referred to in sub-Section (5), the liquidator shall then pay— 

a)	The amount of any tax withheld and not paid over to the Uganda Revenue Authority for 12 months prior to the commencement of insolvency; and

b) 	Contributions payable under the National Social Security Fund Act. This section shall apply notwithstanding any other law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal from the committee is to have sub-clause 3 deleted for those reasons advanced by the chairperson. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Further amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Priority of Withholding Tax and VAT means that these are advance payments and in some cases like Withholding Tax which is supposed to be deducted when you are tax due at a particular time. For VAT, there are refunds and sometimes, this is where you have input tax more than the output tax and it is supposed to be refunded. But we have said that if a taxpayer delays to pay, you charge interest. If URA delays to refund, they should also pay interest so that this will ease the method of effectiveness of URA. What URA does is that they say that they are still doing audit and it takes a year while the taxpayer is suffering with –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Information.  Recently after the budget, we had a breakfast conference organised by Price Water House –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, at this stage, you propose the amendment and then you speak to it. We are not here for breakfast meeting any more, please. (Laughter). What is the amendment to which you are speaking to? He has not even proposed amendment yet!

MR EKANYA: I was just giving hon. Nandala-Mafabi information that the Minister for Finance, hon. Maria Kiwanuka, in that breakfast meetings agreed that henceforth, the same treatment that URA imposes on the taxpayer should be imposed on URA and she is here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would you like to lay the recording on Table or the minutes of that meeting.

MR EKANYA: Hon. Maria Kiwanuka is here seated.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Given that recording that hon. Ekanya has relayed and played, it is in that context that I am saying any money – if a tax payer is making a claim to URA and it is not paid and URA is applying delaying tactics, interest must be applied which is applied to the tax payer. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please propose the amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Since sub clause 3 has been deleted, I am going to propose that any money which is due to a tax payer and has not been refunded shall attract interest.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You stop where you are.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, when the taxpayer has not paid the tax.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You stop where you had-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It shall attract interest. Okay.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, hon. Ekanya knows that this is lunch time not breakfast. We do not accept the amendment that is being proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. What we promise to do is toexpedite fast repayment. This is because you are the same persons appropriating the funds. The funds that the URA collects do not belong to them. So we shall ensure that they expedite the refund of whatever is due to the taxpayer.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am a businessman and I know what is going on in the business community especially when you give a businessperson an open cheque. It is an open cheque and I know how they have been fictitiously claiming money from URA then adding interest on top. Honourable member, let us tow a cautious route. I know that I am one of the tax payers and sometimes I claim- Yes, I do pay tax I think more than you but I am not in favour of this and we should not give open cheques to these people.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, here we are not talking about fictitious claims of Eng. Byabagambi. We are talking about a claim that has been verified, is audited and is factual but URA deliberately delays to credit the account of the taxpayer. The same should apply to the goose as it applies to the gander.

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Chairman and honourable members, when URA collects money it goes direct to the Consolidated Fund. So when URA is required to pay back that money, URA does not have the power to go directly and withdraw that money and pay it. There is a procedure that has to be followed to make sure tax payers’ money is protected –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we make a budget here and URA is given money for refunds. Is the Government Chief Whip who we respect very much in order to come and say that the refunds, which are due to the taxpayer, are not budgeted for and that means the taxpayer is not entitled? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, now you know the procedure but we also know that those monies are released in quarters and sometimes the quarters get exhausted so there might be delays. Yes, honourable minister.

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to add on to what my honourable colleague has said. We must be very careful with the private sector when you are issuing what can be an open cheque. I am from the private sector and I can tell you that government is seen as an orphan. So there is a possibility where you can have a claim that has been verified and it is put somewhere. 

I am not saying anything about anybody in URA but these things happen in the private sector.We push until you tell us to stop so if you leave the door open, they pass right through and it is legal, it is not immoral in the private sector. So a claim may be made and verified and somehow it is not presented for three months, six months, a year then interest is claimed and disposed of.

Mr Chairman and honourable members, URA like any other body can always do better. This year we have put into force strict efficiency measures to make sure that refunds go out on time. We would like the august House to take that from us and to know that as soon as verification is made, the refund process will start.

MR EKANYA: Clarification. Can we put a time limit upon which if the refund does not come through then it attracts interest? Yes, let us put a time limit because that is what we agreed. We can say within a period of 30 days and after exceeding that period, it starts attracting interest. 

MS KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, I have heard the request of my honourable alternate, which I am sure he has been planning for quite some time. I have just received it, I will analyse it and come back with a time frame. I beg to submit.

MR MULIMBA: Mr Chairman, the procedural issue I would like to raise is whereas the concerns of the members are genuine in respect to refunds; I want to draw your attention to the Income Tax Act, section 113(1) which talks about refunds reads the tax payer may apply to the commissioner for refund in respect of any year of income of tax paid by withholding tax, instalment or  otherwise in excess of the tax liability assessed to or due by the taxpayer for that year - I want to go to 113(5),“Commissioner shall, within 30 days of making a decision on a refund application under sub-section (1), serve the person applying for refund a notice in writing of the decision.” Mr Chairman, will it therefore be procedurally right for us to continue debating on a period when it is emphatically placed in the law I have just read?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, each tax law makes provision for these things including the Value Added Tax Act section 44; interest on over payments or late refunds. Where the Commissioner General is required to refund an amount of tax to a person as a result of (a) repeal, (b) a decision of the tax appeal tribunal or (c) a decision of the High Court, he or she shall pay interest at a rate of 2 per cent per month compounded on the tax to be refunded. So it is taken care of in the existing laws.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, this is what this tax procedure is trying to harmonise and that is why you see we are arguing. So the reason is that if that is where it is, we should import that and put it here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is already in the Act of Parliament.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, the objective of the tax procedure, which you know very well, is to harmonise administration of tax otherwise what we are doing here is not new. It is in the current Income Tax and VAT Act.  But to simplify and fill those gaps, we are seeking that for ease of administration, what is there be brought in the tax procedural code.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, this law we are passing now is not repealing the Value Added Tax Act; it is not repealing the Income Tax Act so those provisions are very alive in those laws. If we were repealing them, we would be importing them here but they are already there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have no objection if we are saying we should continue with that but I want to make a proposal, which I want the minister to listen to. I have VAT refund of Shs 50 million but I have corporation tax of Shs 100 million. When I want to pay, URA says no, you pay the Shs 100 million, the other one you will get a refund. Why doesn’t the taxpayer net off -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, that is not part of this provision –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, this is VAT and withholding tax. So I want to make an amendment that a taxpayer can offset his tax liabilities on any tax head which has credit and pay the balance, if any. 

MR OMACH: No, Mr Chairman. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have an account in URA on VAT. And in VAT I am entitled to a refund of Shs 50 million. I have cooperation tax to pay worth Shs 100 million, and the money is mine. Do you want me to pay Shs 100 million yet you already have my Shs 50 million? Why don’t you offset that and I pay the balance of Shs 50 million? If you refuse, that means you want to collect and keep my money so that I suffer while you are enjoying free cash. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have you looked at 2(c)

MR BAHATI: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has a point but that issue of offsetting is already somewhere in the law. Secondly, from the accounting perspective, you can offset that. If you have some advance taxes that you know and you have tax owing, you can offset it. So I do not think we need to put it here. But if you give me two minutes, I will look for it in the law and give you the answer. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In accounting, there will be a liability of Shs 100 million and as asset of Shs 50 million then you can knock it off. But URA will say, once it is due, pay the Shs 100 million; we shall refund the other amount.  The argument we are raising here is, if I have my money with URA, we should deduct it – we offset it. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, you will forgive us if we do not make the correct reference in terms of law. But this is Value Added Tax section 42(b) and it says: “With the consent of the taxpayers, where the taxable person’s input credit exceeds his or her liability for tax for that period by Shs 5 million or more, offset that amount against the future liability of the taxable person or apply the excess in reduction of any other tax not in dispute due from the taxpayer”.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is for VAT, but supposing I have withholding tax more than I can consume of my cooperation tax, and I have VAT liability of Shs 20 million. It should be used the same way to offset. What we are trying to do here is to say that any excess tax can be applied to offset any unpaid tax which is due. That makes business simple.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, with your permission, I would like to advise that since we have adequate sitting – members are participating from the gallery. But I want to appeal to colleagues that we need to support the private sector to create jobs for the youth. If we stifle the private sector; the current growth of the economy, hon. Maria Kiwanuka, you know that we have moved from 10 to four because the private sector is suffering. Therefore, the proposal of balancing tax is the best option.

Mr Chairman, I move that hon. Bahati and my brother over there take a seat in front here so that members who are participating from the gallery can – they are interfering with the proceedings of Parliament –(Interruption)

People in the private sector have loans, government is defaulting and domestic arrear is huge and now you want URA also to become part of the domestic arrear – really, why don’t we have mercy on ourselves and our children? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Ekanya to suggest that I am seated outside the House when actually I am in the demarcation of the House and I am bringing very important information that is helpful to the House? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the way this House is structured is in such a way that it should be briefed all the time. The person seated in that column directly behind me – we refer to that area as a technical bench, not gallery. The galleries are up there. What they do when they are sitting there is to pass notes and advise us so that we make the correct decisions. Most of the times, the technical bench do not address us.

Actually, if you want me to educate you on this subject, there was an instance when the late Wapakhabulo was the Speaker where everybody was kind of stake, a member from the technical bench was invited to speak from there to the House. Not on record, but to speak so that he could be heard and his professional understanding of the subject could be understood by the House so that we could proceed properly. That is the purpose why that bench was created there. So please do not make very big issues about this; consultation is the best way to facilitate this House to move properly. Otherwise they would have locked them up somewhere.

MS OSEGGE: I need to understand something. I want to believe that this is the proceeding of Parliament and if the technical bench were technical officers of Parliament, probably I would have no problem understanding that. I do not know –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Technical officers of any department that can inform on any particular matter that is before the House. This is not some hostile force that you have in the House; that is why that provision is made. You see people exchanging notes and you see them going to consult – 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I think you have given the House wisdom and I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi had an issue –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: May be he now wants to be the shadow chairman. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in short, you have advised us that if we want anything, we can cross over there and pick it and come and speak with information. All along, we had thought that, for example the Ministry of Finance officials – we thought they were only supposed to advise the Ministry of Finance. From now on, the House is informed that if I need any information, I can go and pick it. Mr Chairman, if you see me crossing, please allow me take information. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, but you see, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are found of understand issues in this House as if you are sitting on the mountains –(Laughter)– this is the House of Parliament. There is no advise that the Speaker gives that should be ridiculed, please. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman –(Interruptions)– no, I cannot apologise, I am entitled to take technical advice from the chairman.I am entitled to that guidance. Apologise for what?
Mr Chairman –

MS KWAGALA: Point of procedure, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, let us proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Do not always stand for the sake of being heard to please – (Interruptions)

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was seeking a procedural point incumbent on the situation that the hon. Nandala-Mafabi is a member of the finance committee. And you were constantly guiding him in vain. Your gesture allowed me to abscond that procedural point.So is it in order for the hon. Nandala-Mafabi to undermine my capability by insinuating that we stand just for the sake of being heard?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The hon. Nandala-Mafabi is not in order to undermine any other Member of Parliament. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for your wise ruling. Learning is a continuous process and I can come to this House with another idea. And when I come here I will tell you that we may have erred or tell you that what we are doing is not good and we will move on. So, I wouldn’t mind other members of the committee bringing in an idea that can help to move the process because learning is a continuous process. What we are raising here is being done in good faith to help the private sector y and Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Having said that-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, having said that, what we are saying is that the Tax Procedures Code Bill is trying  to make the administration collection of tax simple. The rates of penalty for example on interest should be the same.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, let me make a suggestion. Hon. Minister, these provisions are in the VAT law; they are in the Income Tax law but there are aspects that have not been captured in any other laws. He was talking about the withholding Tax and other things. Would you like to think about these as we come back at 3 O’clock to proceed from there because we had agreed that we would be rising at 2 O’clock for lunch and resume at 3 p.m.? You will then advise us on how to go about these. Will that be okay with you?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, these are the procedures. We are trying to harmonise this law on the procedures -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, what I am saying is: can you now go and prepare properly to come and make that statement?

MR OMACH: Yes, so long as the Shadow Minister of Finance will not over eat during that break. (Laughter) So, he will under eat –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, honourable members, we will stand over this clause, to continue with it when we come back.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole  House report. I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Tax Procedures Code Bill, 2014” and has stood over some clauses and handled upclauses  toclause 36 – passed and stood over some. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF WHOLE HOUSE

1.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move  thatthe report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Let us take a one-hour break. We resume at 3 O’clock. House suspended to 3 O’clock.

(The House was suspended at 1.54p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.00p.m., the Deputy Speaker Presiding_)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE BILL, 2014

Clause 36

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let the minister first advise us because I had told them to go and consult over something.

MR SABITI: When you look at clause 36(2), we are talking of exceptions; are local governments as entities regarded as persons because we have seen local governments suffer. That is only  the interest I have this side.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we get that clarification? They are legal persons, body corporate especially local council III and V.  Is it? Yes so they are considered as persons under this law? Under clause 36, those exemptions; they are legal persons, so does that apply to them?

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker at 2(a) is it legal persons and local governments or we take it as legal entities and they are part and parcel; are they exempted-“shall not be subject to attachment in respect of any debt or liability of the person.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Does the person in this law include legal persons?

MR OMACH: Yes, Mr Chairman it does.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Person in this law has the same meaning as in the Income Tax Act. What is that person in the Income Tax Act? Hon. Minister I am still waiting for a brief from you while I look at this. This is what a person is defined under the Income Tax Act. “Person includes an individual, a partnership, a trust, a company, a retirement fund, a government, a political sub division of a government and a listed institution. So it is all covered. Honourable member, you have the full presence of the learned Attorney-General.

MR OMACH: Chair, for us as Ministry of Finance we did not have any issues on clause 36 so unless the chair –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I had asked because of issues like those are in other laws; they are in the Income Tax Law; the VAT law and the member for Budadiri West was raising the issue of Withholding tax; can it also apply, but if does not apply it does not have any legal provision in any other law dealing it? That is why I had asked you to see what the way forward was in that aspect. Can we stand over it? 

MR OMACH: Lets stand over it chair.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us stand over clause 36 and we allow for consultations to finalise this.

Clause 37

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 37 do stand part of the Bill

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38 agreed to.

Clause 39

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, clause 39 recovery tax where a company is left with insufficient assets, we do propose to delete clause 39. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The whole of it?

MR SSEBUNYA: The justification, one, the clause empowers URA to lift the corporate veil without giving the taxpayer the opportunity to defend himself. Two, that all instances of lifting the corporate veil and holding of somebody liable should be subjected to a court process where the guilt of the official is determined by the court. 

It is section 20 of the companies Act that provides that the High Court may where a company or its directors are involved in acts involving tax evasion, fraud or where save for a single member of a company the membership of the company falls below the statutory minimum to lift the corporate veil. Three, URA should not on its own determine that an arrangement was entered into with a purpose or effect of rendering a company unable to pay tax; the conclusion should be reached by an impartial tribunal or a court. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the committee proposes to delete clause 39 in the Bill and replace it. Just delete so that we treat the space that it occupied as if it was empty. I put the question to that deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR EKANYA: I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister; Jachan Omach.  Clause 43 is talking about Tax Clearance Certificate. Last year, we wanted to introduce a tax on transport services because currently we face a challenge where one company is in charge of sea transportation, forwarding, warehousing and this creates complications.  So, the governments of Kenya and Tanzania have moved very far to unbundle this so that the tax of each of this unit can be handled separately.

Last year, we talked to the Ministry of Finance so that companies that are doing sea transportation, forwarding, freight and warehousing can be unbundled so that the Government can raise revenue. But here, you are only talking about freight transport services. It leaves us the other section and this leads to evasion. So, if you do not mind, can you amend this clause so that we can take care of these sectors? 

MR OMACH: The principle is accepted. Let him make the proposal.

MR EKANYA: I beg that we stand over it so that we can work with hon. Jachan Omach on the best proposal and then we bring it in a few minutes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is the specific proposal that you are making?

MR EKANYA: The specific proposal is that for purpose of tax clearance certificate in 43 – a tax payer in passenger transport, it talks about freight but I would like to introduce warehousing –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Passenger transport service is not freight. Freight is cargo.

MR EKANYA: Yes, freight is cargo in relation to (b) and thank you very much – in relation to warehousing, forwarding and sea – these are four components.

MR OMACH: Tax clearance certificates, the transport providing;
Transport services or; 
A freight transport service with a goods vehicle or;
What the shadow minister has proposed on warehousing, forwarding and clearing 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is (c) now; warehousing, clearing –

MR EKANYA: What about transporting at sea?

MR OMACH: You are the one bringing the proposal and I had wanted you to draft it digitally but now you want to do it analogue. So this will obtain a tax clearance certificate from the commissioner as proof of compliance of the taxpayer’s tax obligation. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So we are introducing warehousing, clearing and forwarding. Is that all inclusive now?

MR EKANYA: It gives us the other for which I have forgotten the terminology. The companies that deal in shipping and forwarding. In fact, the right word is shipping companies.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What about freight transport?

MR EKANYA: Freight could be air but shipping is specific

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That would be freight. Freight is cargo transportation whether on land, sea or air or on your back.

MR EKANYA: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay now. Learned Attorney-General, is that okay. I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to

Clause 44

MR ANYWARACH: There is not much of an issue here but when you look at clause 44 (7) where they are saying, “A practice note that has been revoked in whole or in part continues to supply a transaction commenced before the practice note is revoked; (b) does not apply to a transaction commenced after a practice note is revoked to the extent that the practice note is revoked.” 

I think that I may need to be clarified. These two provisions here lack the command of law. “Continue to supply...” describing it a little bit casually. I think that it should have been, “A practice note that has been revoked in whole or in part shall continue to apply to a transaction commenced before the practice note is revoked.” 

MR SSEBUNYA: What have you removed?

MR ANYWARACH: And then the saying “to be” but when you say, “it does not apply”, I think it does not impute any motive clearly sanctionable and so the committee should come up with something clear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, the member for West Budama County North.

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Thank you. I have slight difficulty with this particular clause especially 44 (1) and that in effect –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we deal with this one first and then we come to what you are raising? The issue on 44 (7), is there anything structurally wrong with the construction? Yes, that is what the hon. Member is raising. 

MR ANYWARACH: To put it clear, I am of the opinion that it should have been like, “A practice note that has been revoked in whole or in part shall apply to a transaction commenced before the practice note is revoked or shall continue to apply.” At least, there should be a language of command and then in (b) we are now going to say, (b) “shall not apply to a transaction commenced after a practice note is revoked to the extent that the practice note is revoked.” Just those two corrections.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: I do not have any problem with his formulation. He is drafting in the active voice which is okay. This is more passive and I have no problem with him.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The law is always speaking. Now the formulation in (a), we delete “continues to apply” and its place put “shall apply to transaction commenced before the practice note is revoked.” – “Shall continue to apply”

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, “Shall continue to apply to a transaction commenced before the practice note is revoked.” And in (b), “shall not apply to a transaction commenced...” That is the amendment proposed. I now put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My difficulty is with 44 (1), “The commissioner may issue practice notes stating out the commissioner’s understanding of the application of a provision in a tax law.” My understanding of this clause, and I would do with guidance of the learned Attorney-General here, is that we want to empower the commissioner general of URA to interpret the law. 

I just hope to God I am wrong in this particular understanding but if that is what we intend to do then it would mean that we are moving away from an age old practice that only the courts of law have the power to interpret the law; the legislature makes the law and the Judiciary interprets the law, which would be an infringement of the constitutional order as we know it today.

The second level of my argument is this that if we do not intend to achieve that then this particular provision is redundant. If we do not intend to empower the commissioner general to interpret the law in any way or to attempt to interpret the law then this particular provision is redundant. I was about to propose that we delete this entire provision except if I am advised otherwise by the learned Attorney General.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, if you are in charge of implementation of a particular law, how do you do it without interpreting it? Yes, you have to demonstrate your understanding of what the law says. If you are wrong like in this case, the practice note is not binding on the tax payer in (4).

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, if the practice note is not binding on anybody it is redundant. For whose consumption is it? Is it for the consumption of the commissioner and the people he or she employs? That is my difficulty. It is either redundant or it is an infringement of the Constitution.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, maybe if the words ‘setting out with the commissioner’s understanding’ is his problem then we may say, ‘The commissioner may-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it is the whole principle.

MR SSEBUNYA: Because the commissioner general is allowed as he is empowered to issue practice notes. If we agree that the commissioner general issues practice notes then let us remove the words ‘setting out with the commissioner’s understanding’ because you are on interpretation of the law. If what you do not want to hear is that it is a privilege of-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney-General, what does the Chief Justice issue? Are they practice directions? Are they instruments or they are below instruments?

MR RUHINDI: The practice directions normally issued by the Chief Justice are relatively below statutory instruments and they are guidelines as this provision is saying. This is what the commissioner general is doing. This is my understanding of the law and in implementing it, this is what you are expected to do and there are guidelines.

I agree with you, Mr Chairman, because this is implementational and that is why they say no one should plead ignorance of the law. How do you know the law without interpreting and understanding it? Now really understanding the law and interpreting it does not in any way infringe on the right of the courts for instance the constitutional court to do its job under Articles 137, 139 - We should not confuse the two and I have always had this argument more often than not, moreover sometimes from lawyers that for instance the High Court is not supposed to interpret the Constitution, how?

It is only when an issue is raised that – In fact, there is an Article saying that for instance where a constitutional issue arises and an aggrieved party or any party to the case says ‘I want this matter to be referred to the Constitutional Court’ the court has no choice but to refer it there. That is what the law says. And it also says that the court may also forward it to the Constitutional Court.

Now it looked mandatory and it was stifling the work because for anything that would appear in court, anyone would jump up and say, this matter should go to the Constitutional Court but now the courts, the Judiciary and the High Court, have been mandated to assess whether there is merit in a matter being referred to the Constitutional Court.

In other words, the right to understand the law, the right to implement it and the right to guide on its implementation is also a constitutional right.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I am grateful to the learned Attorney General for a presentation well made. Now I have a much bigger problem after listening to him. The practice note if you put it in other words, is an internal memo of the commissioner general to his/her staff. It is not binding on any practising advocate, it is not binding on any tax payer, it is not binding on anybody except the commissioner general and his/her staff. It is strictly an administrative matter.

That begs the question, why must we legislate on the internal management processes of an organisation? We still come back to the same conclusion that this particular provision is absolutely redundant and it would do no harm even if we dropped it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Odoi Oywelowo for giving way. The word says ‘practice’. It is what you do in normal practice while performing your functions. For example, the commissioner must issue a practice that given what I have seen in this law, the best way is a, b, c. There is no need to put it in the gazette. We are saying you are going to gazette it then after gazetting under (4) it is not binding to a tax payer. What would be the reason for gazetting if it cannot bind us the tax payers? Because what was the purpose for it being in a newspaper?

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman and hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I wanted to seek clarification while using this opportunity from the Attorney-General to inform the House on whether practising notes are the same as an internal memo. I do not think that we should be legislating on an internal memo here and requesting the commissioner to take it to the gazette. I think these are different things. We need an understanding of the practice note before we move forward otherwise we are going to get confused. I do not think it is an internal memo.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the people who implement the law under the direct supervision of the commissioner are diverse and spread very far. To avoid somebody generating his own notes and saying this is the practice note as issued, it must be gazetted and the presumption of the gazette we all know means everybody now knows. That is why it is gazetted. That is why even some small notices, less significant than these ones, for purposes of the public getting to know, are also gazetted so that everybody knows what is going on.

If you have a problem with it then that is reason enough for you to say, well what has been issued in this one is completely incorrect and you take action on it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Why I am raising this issue, is because I am recalling experience; a commissioner of tax would issue what we call practice notes for the staff to use –(Interjections)– practice notes are internal; I am giving information because I have been there. Unless you are speaking of recent things, but in the early 90s and the late 80s, when we were gaining the income tax, a commissioner would issue what we call tax notes to tell staff how to do certain things. But he cannot change the law, but simply tells them how best to understand it. 

The law is already here, this is basically an internal note. But to gazette notes – that is why they are called practice notes; it is the practice of the staff; otherwise a tax agent of tax consultant would have to rely on the law. Those are his personal way to manage the office and these are internal notes. How can we now legislate for an internal memo?

He says a practice note is not binding on a taxpayer yet under sub clause (2), you are gazetting it. Why do you gazette something which is not binding? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But honourable members, there was a member holding the floor. 

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: I will accept the information from my brother from Tororo. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you my chairperson of the District Road Fund Committee and MP for West Budama North. The clarification I have – in fact this practicing note is creating confusion. It says in 7(a) “A practicing note that has been revoked in whole or part continues to apply to transactions commenced before the practice note is revoked”. 

I thought this transaction is between a business person and URA or its staff. Is that internal transaction – it says that it does not apply to transactions commenced after. What transactions are we talking about here? Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo, I am seeking clarification. Is it buying stationery with office or what?

MS NANKABIRWA: I also need clarification. When I read sub clause 44(4) it says, “A practice note is not binding on a taxpayer”. I want to know, are we gazetting an internal memo yet it is not binding to a taxpayer? I need clarification on that.

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, my understanding of the practice direction, issued by the chief justice; permit me to start from there is that it has its foundation in the judicature Act. And direction to judicial officers and practicing advocates for the betterment of the administration of justice. 

Now if you leave that alone and come to the provision of clause 44, you do not see any of the tenets of the practice direction issued by the Chief Justice here. You only see one tenet; you only explain your understanding of the law as the commissioner general to the people you employ. It has completely had no complication to the taxpayer who is the immediate consumer – the immediate consumer is not even your employee. The immediate consumer is the taxpayer. It has no application to any agent of the taxpayer. 

If you want to explain the application of any provision of the law to the people you employ, you do so by training; you take them to a seminar – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we passed provisions relating to tax agents. What guidelines will they use; what standard guidelines will they use to follow the procedures that they are expected to follow when they are doing things for the revenue authority? 

Secondly what is the purpose of gazetting; gazetting is simply saying, public announcement of the guidelines. The fact of gazetting does not make it law. you could as well publish it in a newspaper, but this time they have chosen to have it in the gazette so that the presumption is everybody’s – so that all the taxpayers know; all the tax agents will know it and all the people implementing the law will know what it is from the opinion of the commissioner. 

And the commissioner is not going to sit in one dark room and generate these on his own; he has a full legal team, a full panel of directors and commissioners who will sit and develop this together to guide the process. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, hon. Fox Odoi is using another word which is not here; he is talking of practice guidelines. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He was giving the example of the court. 

MR SSEBUNYA: What is here is practicing notes and what we know about practicing notes is that these are for easy interface between URA and the customers. So it is not internal as it has been alleged and it is not here stated that this document is internal. The document is public and that is why it is going to be gazetted and circulated widely in the newspapers. So it is a document to guide taxpayers of VAT, excise duties and all taxes that a taxpayer would like to pay. 

By the time you move from home to revenue authority, you must have some documents to refer to while interfacing with them. I think that is the implication of the document. 

MS BINTU: Mr Chairman, we passed civil laws here where we gave powers to certain officers to make regulations in order to be in position to administer certain issues which may not incorporated in a law. To my understanding, these practicing notes are sorts of regulations which we are asking the commissioner to put in place and have them gazetted so that people can be in position to interpret them and know what they are supposed to do? I am in a dilemma; I want to find out from you. Are they the regulations which we usually incorporate in certain laws and we are simply changing the language here?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, to make a law and then say that it is not binding; I think it is contradictory. This particular provision, I would think is an administrative arrangement within the URA. We really do not need to legislate for something that contradicts what we already have. This provision here is practically nullifying the law we have already passed. 

Supposing the commissioner general quotes a particular provision from this law in a practice note and now you say, what she has quoted is not binding on a taxpayer. I find that contradictory. What do we lose by deleting this particular section? It is just administrative. It is not binding.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we have the learned Attorney-General say something about this subject.

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes, but just to give information to my committee member - if that is what hurting this whole provision –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But why don’t you listen to the Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think in part, the submissions of colleagues on the Floor have some merit. I recall a practice direction that was issued by the Chief Justice and this related to evictions on land – you remember that time when evictions of land particularly of bona fide and lawful occupants was becoming rampant –not that there is no law, there is a law that for instance where you are in doubt as magistrate or judge, you visit the locus in quote. But the main trust of that particular practice direction to emphasize the need - particularly where there is a bona fide occupant and there is a court order and you are hearing that case, you must visit the site.

Now it would certainly be defeating, in my opinion, if you said that is not binding because how do you enforce. So, for as long as what is being issued is not in conflict with the parent legislation but is rather implementing the parent legislation, whoever is hearing a case must look at all those circumstances to determine what has transpired. So, I think this sub-clause (4) of Section 44 is also a bit problematic to me. My advice would be that we focus on the guidelines and lave out the binding or non-binding nature. This means that this provision that talks about it being binding on the commissioner, should be taken as a given that anything you – that is why people for instance go to apply for judicial review to challenge an administrative action simply because you have actually taken powers in an ultra-vires manner. You occasioned some irregularities and so, Mr Chairman, we should leave out the aspects of binding and non-binding matter. But the practice notice certainly should be made.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney-General, you may also help us here. Would you therefore be able to cite that according to this practice note, you taxpayer is liable for this and that or you would cite only the law?

MR RUHINDI: You certainly cite the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPRSON: So, what does that make of the practice note?

MR RUHINDI: There is no doubt that practice are evidentially important. If for instance you are adducing evidence, you are calling witnesses and you say that even this matter was in the practice note, it is will be asked for. When it is seen, they will look at what it says. So, certainly evidentially, these practice notes would be very relevant at that stage.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am a bit disturbed by the Attorney-General’s explanation. By him saying that whether it is binding – no that the aspect of it being binding or not bringing should be left, then what would be the essence of us legislating on this practice note yet we are not certain whether it binds to the taxpayer or the commissioner general?

I would like to think that by removing part four from this provision, we shall, in essence, be saying that actually it is binding to both the taxpayer and the commissioner general. In other words, we are simply saying that practice notes shall be binding to the commissioner general and the taxpayer. If that is, then it is as good as law in itself.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I have a sample of a practice note of 2007. When you study then, you can see their importance because as much as we are legislating on this law, there are some details that are very important for the administration of tax but are not captured here. For example, there was confusion in 2007, for purposes of income tax where there were boundaries of Kampala. The commissioner general had to issue a practice note detailing the composition of Kampala. 

There also other issues to do with insurance on whether the six per cent withholding tax applied to the insurance agents and brokers. So, I think these practice notes are very important because tax is a very complicated issue. So, it needs to be simplified as much as we can. So, if a commissioner issues these practice notes, they help the staff but at the same time help taxpayers. This will ensure there is no excuse. So, if we delete these legal terms of it being non-binding, then I don’t see any reason why we cannot maintain this issue. It is very important that they are maintained, in my opinion.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I think the honourable member over there has brought it out very clearly. First of all in the definition clause, I tried to look through and I am not sure I saw practice notes. So, to cure thus defect, we need to define practice notes clearly not just by usage and so on the way the hon. Fox Odoi is trying to correlate it with what happens in the Judiciary and so.

Two, to really define who are subject to the practice notes – is it the taxpayer or the employees of URA or the agencies as you had cited, including even the freight forwards and so on.

If we got on to delete it – when you go to 45, you will see practice notes appearing where it says that in private ruling – see (2) where it says that the commissioner may reject an application for a private ruling if a) commissioner has already decided the matter; b) the commissioner is of the opinion that any existing practice note adequately covers the matter that is subject of the application. So, it is running through. This means we need to give this provision a second opinion. And I want to propose that we stand over it so that the committee chairperson and the minister of State of Finance, Mr Jacan Omach, the learned Attorney-General, should come out, like the honourable member for Ndorwa has said, on the importance – because there are some anomalies that we might see now. But if those anomalies can be cured by the commissioner general issuing the practice notes, then we really need to hold it and not just a mere memorandum or internal memo as hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo was saying. Thank you very much.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The object of the practice note is given in 44 (1) and the commissioner issues this note, why? To set out the commissioner’s understanding of how a certain provision of the tax law must be applied. To make it official this is gazetted. I do not see how this then becomes not binding on the tax, I do not see how this does not become binding on the commissioner’s staff. For me if we could amend 44(4) by making it binding on the taxpayer the rest is okay, Mr Chairman.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I must admit that I am now a lot wiser than when we started this debate. I listened very carefully to the learned Attorney-General and many colleagues who have made submissions on this matter and I also listened to you very carefully. If the tax note supposed the hand maiden of justice in this matter, they must apply and they must be binding on the taxpayer and on his agents and that is the case I have made right from the very beginning. My position is that if we deleted 44(4) this provision would be acceptable to me. The other alternative is we amend 44(4) to make the practice note binding. If we intend to give directions for better implementation of a law that direction must have some binding effect. It is law except that it is in relation practice. The application of a particular provision. Can I therefore propose that we delete the word “note” in 44(4) and put this matter to vote? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney -General wouldn’t it be better to just delete 44(4) in its entirety than talking about binding or not binding.

MR RUHINDI: Deleting 44(4), I am comfortable with that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put a question that Clause 44(4) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45 

MR KAKOOZA: I think there was an oversight; we had agreed in the committee that 45(9) if you read it, a private ruling is not a tax decision for the purposes of this Act. We passed a decision the other provisions that anybody who wants to contest will go to a tribunal then courts of law but this one seems to be left like this that a private ruling is not a tax decision for the purposes of this Act. It gags the taxpayer from appealing. I remember we had agreed in the committee that a taxpayer should be given a fair treatment to be heard. What this means is that a taxpayer cannot object to any rulings of the commissioner general. It is a constitutional right to appeal a decision of an administrative body should be upheld in this clause. If you say that a private ruling is not a tax decision for the purposes of this Act, and you have passed provisions where we have said that this procedure code allows anybody when I am not satisfied I can go to a tribunal or to the High Court. It contradicts what we have passed. I thought this one can be deleted.

MR SSEBUNYA: It was debated in the committee but I don’t know what is tantamount to a private ruling. Supposing there are all sorts of rulings, are they final?

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, thank you for yielding the floor. Private ruling is actually the subject of clause 45, the commission may upon an application in writing by a taxpayer issue to the taxpayer a private ruling setting the position of the commissioners regarding the application of a provision in a tax law to a transaction entered into or proposed to be entered into by a taxpayer. In instance this is a tax decision in respect of this particular provision. The problem is that we still state that it is not even binding on the person who voluntarily applied for it.

How can you apply for a position of the commissioner general, the position of the commissioner general can be by way of a decision and it must be binding on then you have recourse to an appeal process to the tribunal and to the court.

I propose that we immediately delete 45(4); a private ruling is not binding on taxpayer to whom it has been issued. We deal with it like the one in clause 44 and 45(9).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is almost like a case stated. The kind of procedure where you do not know how to go, then you go to court and you say on this matter what is likely to happen? In other words it is not a decision, it is like a guidance about something you want to know in advance about but which you are not sure of then you seek the opinion of the court in this case of a case stated or you go the commissioner and say by the way I have this kind of situation what is it likely to be? And then he says if it is this, this is the law, my opinion would be this. It is in other words an advance advice to you which should not - because there is no decision as such. There is an issue framed for guidance but the particular decision that is taken is not of a nature that will affect your status.

I am just trying to give an analogy for case stated for courts opinion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the commissioner is the one who is the owner of this law, he applies it on day-to-day basis and he says - assuming you want to import 20 containers of goods, you go to him he says, if you import these goods the cost will be the value multiplied by this weight as per the law. I go and import my goods, I bring - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It does not go that far, where it stops is that you go to the commissioner general and you ask that I want to import this container, what will apply, then he tells you, if you do that this will happen, can you appeal on that? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, he says that if you import cement which is under HS Code 20, for example, and indeed you go there and you confirm that it is there. Now I go and import my goods and I bring but the commissioner says, “No, you are wrong. My advice is not supposed to be used.” If I make an error because of your advice, I must seek recourse because you are the custodian of that law. Now the reason why this is going to be done is – you see, if you look at 4, the commissioner general wanted at an appropriate time to run away from her or his decisions or advice because you got somebody who is professional in that area to assist you. And if you are a professional and you advise somebody wrongly, then it is called personal liability to you. So why does the commissioner general want to run away?  

Mr Chairperson, I want to concur with hon. Odoi Oywelowo and hon. Kakooza that when you give me advice, it should be binding and you should not run away from it. 

MR KAKOOZA: You see, this clause says in 45 on private rulings – “A private ruling is not a tax decision…” what is it? If it is a tax decision because when you complete it, “A private ruling is not a tax decision for the purposes of this Act.” So, why is it not a tax decision because the commissioner general who is going to use a private ruling is depending on what materials, what I have done and what I have imported? In case that I am dissatisfied with what decision has been taken as a private ruling, I had the recourse of stopping ahead and say that because of your refusal, I can go to the tribunal that will interpret for us the law that you want to use as a practice ruling – that the HS Code of cereals on Chapter 6, Classified and Harmonised Code which you are calling Chapter 18, I say, “No. We go to a tax tribunal.” When you go to a tax tribunal, it will say, “Please, the tax payer is correct.” But here it means that I have no leeway to appeal that decision and I must be given fair treatment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us clarify this issue. Why they are saying that it is not a tax decision is because it is a decision that is anticipatory. There is nothing before the commissioner apart from an opinion being sought. So, it is not a tax decision per say. If you say that you want to import 15 containers of tobacco, which things will apply to me and all that, the commissioner will say that if you do that, this and this will happen and so will give you guidance on your situation.

So, it is not a tax decision because there is no commodity that has been taxed yet. It is anticipatory – this is my understanding that they are setting this so that you can have access and have in advance, knowledge before you get into the transaction. This is what is here. Let me hear from the member for Ndorwa.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, a commissioner general of URA is a public officer and not a private thing. So if I write and if you read Clause 7, “A private ruling is issued by serving a written notice of the ruling on the applicant and the ruling shall set out the matter ruled on, identifying the tax payer……” It sounds official and a serious issue. So if we again go ahead and say that it is a casual opinion, it complicates. So, we really need to go to the bottom of this clause and find out why we need this clause on private ruling.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Finance, what is this animal called private ruling which you have put for us here? (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: The Minister for Finance.

MR SSEBUNYA: Oh, they are asking for finance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: First let us understand what they mean because I could be wrong. But from reading it, it is what I would understand. Let us hear from the authors of the Bill as to what they mean by this.

MR EKANYA: Hon. Omach, carry your cross.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairperson, private ruling under 45 (1) in a way gives the definition – that the commissioner may upon application in writing by a tax payer, issue to the tax payer a private ruling and this means that the commissioner in response to a request by a tax payer is giving his or her opinion in writing. So, that is the definition. 

We are saying that when a situation like that occurs, ruling setting out the position of the commissioner regarding the application of a provision in a tax law to a transaction entered into or proposed to be entered into by a tax payer. So the commissioner general is responding to a request by a tax payer and we are saying that under 45 (4), a private ruling is not binding on the tax payer to whom it is issued.

Now when it comes to 9, you are saying that a private ruling is not a tax decision for the purpose of this Act. It is giving guidance to the tax payer who has asked in writing for an opinion of the commissioner general and that is my understanding.

MR EKANYA: Clarification, Mr Chairperson. There was this gentleman from Bugisu who wanted to bring here Tiger batteries and he sought clearance and to me, it seemed like a private ruling – Uganda is liberalised and open market so you can import. When the gentleman brought it here, he was denied opportunity to be cleared - he is a gentleman called Mafabi from Bugisu. I am just giving an example of a private ruling. I have another case where the investor procured land to put up an ICD and they gave him all the requirements but after building and investing a lot of money, the licence was not issued. Do you get me? It is similar to private ruling. You seek advice from URA, put money and then the matter is not binding.

I think, Mr Chairperson and colleagues, the commissioner general is a learned person competent with technical people on the bench who are very schooled and should therefore give a decision that is binding to him and the tax payer. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The member for Rukiga County. Okay, clarification from the Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: The challenge that I have – it seems that I am maybe getting a small technical legal problem in my head. (Laughter) Because if you say that this decision is binding on you and there are lawyers here and the Chairperson is also a lawyer – would you appeal it? Because if you say that it is binding on you, would you appeal it? Something that is binding on you? Think about it. (Laughter). 
 
MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, I just want clarification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I had picked the members for Rukiga, Padyere, West Budama. Please be brief.

MR SABIITI: My understanding and particularly in 2, we say that it will be gazetted. Now, I equate this with a standing order. These are like standing orders, but in different institutions, and they are binding. I look at these practice notes as the equivalent of standing orders. That is what we are on; 44.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are now on 45.

MR SABIITI: I withdraw.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, there are only two issues. We have the private decision and we have the tax decision so we are saying, the private decision is not a tax decision but if we go to the definition clause, what is a tax decision by the standard of this Bill we are making? (a) says a tax assessment or a decision on any matter left to the discretion, judgement, opinion, approval, satisfaction or determination of the commissioner other than the decision made in relation to a tax assessment. This is what they are telling us a tax decision is under the definition clause. It means even that opinion itself is actually a tax decision.

So by legislating to say it is not a tax decision, there must be a peculiar reason justifiable enough for us to accept that it is not a tax decision otherwise the opinion of a commissioner, written or not written is a tax decision.

Two, we are looking at where under 45 they are saying where there is conflict between the practice notes and the private decision, private decisions will take precedence but remember we have already given the force of law to the practice note and then here we are trying to say a mere opinion must take precedence over - that is 45 let me read it. They are saying in 45(5) that where a private ruling is consistent with any existing practice note, the private ruling has priority to the extent of the inconsistency. So here we are now trying to say, the private ruling takes precedence over what we had already given the effect of force to.

So I think there is a conflict here. We need to understand this very clearly that even if it is an opinion, it is a tax ruling or decision. Two, if that is true then for it to take precedence it must be more of a tax decision than just an opinion to take precedence over practice notes. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. 45(1) deals with two sets of transactions. We already entered the first transaction. Now if you enter into a transaction that attracts tax, you are liable to pay tax so if you seek a private ruling in respect to a transaction that you have already entered into from the commissioner general, that private ruling will certainly be a tax decision. It cannot be anything else. It just cannot be advice, that we advise that you should have paid taxes amounting to so much. It must be a statement of a decision reached by the commissioner general having due regard to the provisions of the law and the facts he presented to her.

The second set is transactions anticipated. I would agree with you, Mr Chairman, that if there are transactions anticipated, they do not attract tax and therefore you can never have a tax decision in anticipation. So we need to probably break up the two transactions. If we bundled them together; transactions that already attract tax liability and the ones that are anticipated, it would bring complications. Therefore I still propose that we delete (4).

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think we have made a mistake in the first clause where we have passed the practice note and I think we are about to make another one here when we talk about binding or not binding.

Mr Chairman, for us to write and say that a practice note for example which we have talked about - here we are talking about a commissioner’s ruling, is binding to a tax payer. The effect is that once it is made, the taxpayer has to do it and it cannot be challenged because it is actually allowed by law. So once the commissioner has issued a practice note and we say it is going to bind a tax payer to a private ruling then it is actually law itself so somebody cannot go to challenge it.

So I would think we maintain that it is going to bind the commissioner but not the tax payer. Because of that document, the tax payer can actually go to court and challenge it but as long as it is binding to the tax payer then there is no recourse because that is the decision already determined by an Act of law. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I beg to differ from the previous speaker. Given 45(5), the fact that the private ruling takes priority over the practice note and given 45(7), by the time the commissioner issues the ruling, he or she has taken into account all that is given under 45(7). I do not see how we can come to the end and say, this is not a tax decision. It is a tax decision that is binding. You could challenge it if it is not proper but I think it is binding both on the commissioner and on the taxpayer otherwise we shall end up with serious contradictions.

My proposal is that we amend 45(4) by deleting it and then 45(9) by deleting the word ‘note’ and we say, ‘A private ruling shall be a tax decision for purposes of this Act.’ 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this is how you access a private ruling. You have a set of circumstances affecting you as a taxpayer but you are not certain about what the implications would be. So you seek the opinion of the commissioner and he will give you that opinion. You can agree with it or not. If you do not agree with it you go on. The assessment will go on and the taxes- Whatever you have been accessed to pay, you will be required to pay. If you do not agree with the assessment, you raise an objection because the assessment is now a tax decision. 

You can raise an objection to it but before that, you have a set of circumstances and you do not know which way to go so you seek the advice or the opinion of the people who are implementing these things and say, by the way I have this kind of situation, how do I handle it? How will it be then they will give you free advice and say okay this is it. These are the circumstances and this is how it will work. You have the option to say no, I do not agree with you and they will go on and do the assessment. That is how a private ruling is supposed to work. So, it is not a tax decision, and it cannot be binding on you. You just said: “Can you advise me on this?” and I advised you; you are free to take my advice or not. But, my advice cannot be binding on you. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, supposing I accept the private ruling of the commissioner general and yet it has errors; who takes the liability? You see the commissioner general is an authority on tax matters of the land. I seek advice and the commissioner general gives me advice on tax assessment. I go ahead and comply. Then the following day, on additional assessment or any other action establishes that the private ruling was in error – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The private ruling cannot be an assessment and can never be an assessment. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I am saying it is advice like we have said. But if I comply with that advice and it is established that it had omissions; who takes the liability?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There you file an objection. 

MR KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I am seeking advice from you. There is what we call professional guidance. You go to your lawyer and seek legal advice; you go to your doctor and seek medical advice. The question I am asking is, is the advice given binding or not? 

In this case the commissioner general is an expert on taxation; he is supposed to be a technical expert on taxation. If the medical advice is not binding on the one seeking it, then why should an opinion of the tax collector be? Unless we base it on a law and say, in accordance with this law, if you advise then you will be held responsible; but if it is mere opinion, then I do not see the difference from a legal opinion given by a lawyer or when a medical doctor gives you advice. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, we may need to change the heading to remove the word ‘ruling’. If we define the word ‘ruling’, according to the dictionary here, it is an authoritative decision as one by a judge on a debated point of law. So it is authoritative, unless we change it and say, “Commissioner’s advice”. But if we talk about a ruling, then it must have some command in it. 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I brought this matter because I have been in the practice; I have been a clearing agent in URA and I know the ambiguity of the laws we make in this House. When you are not specific, it becomes a problem to the implementer. If you say a “private ruling” is not a tax decision for the purpose of this Act – any businessman can do that then – I agree with your explanation if you are saying that a private ruling is a tax decision and I have recourse in case I need to appeal that decision. But when you say that a private ruling is not a tax decision then it becomes redundant. 

So I agree with those who say that a private ruling is a tax decision for the purposes of this Act. And within this procedure code, I can see how I can go against that judgment. But if you say otherwise, then it gives me options for appeal.

MR ATIKU: Mr Chairman, despite it being an opinion or advice, when you read 45(1), it indicates that should you not consider the opinion of the commissioner general and you do things the way you think is right, then you are bound to be charged and there are penalties. That means the opinion of the commissioner general has implications. If you do not follow them, the law will catch up with you. If you follow it and implement them then you have to pay the taxes and you will have no offences. 

So I propose we maintain the definition as “private ruling” because whoever will be consuming the advice will be aware of the implications of either obeying or disobeying the advice. 

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think this clause 45 has become so problematic in the way that we have a definition and yet we keep insisting that a private ruling is not a tax decision. This shows we are headed for more disaster in the definition clause. 

Mr Chairman, once again, let us look at the definition clause. It says that tax assessment or decision on any matter left to the discretion or judgement, direction, opinion, approval, satisfaction or determination of the commissioner -”, to that extent I propose that this clause be deleted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The whole clause?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. You really laboured so much to explain to the House what constitutes a private ruling and I want to agree with you. If this is advice given by the commissioner general, then it is not binding on the person who has been advised. 

The honourable member from Ndorwa laboured to define what a ruling is. So we are now in the middle and we must get out of the middle – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are in the middle of what?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we are in the middle of determining whether a private ruling is binding or not. I call it the middle because when you call it a private ruling, by definition of a ruling, it becomes binding. 

However from your explanation, it is not really binding to the person being advised. So, the way forward is - I am looking at several items in this clause. There are those like when you read (3) – this is very important for us. It reads thus: “Where a taxpayer has made a full and true disclosure of the nature of all aspects of the transaction relevant to the ruling and the transaction has proceeded in all material respects as described in the taxpayer’s application for the ruling, the ruling is binding on the commissioner in relation to the taxpayer to whom the ruling has been issued.”

The Chairman, this clause is very important and it shouldn’t be deleted. However, when you look at (4) and it reads, “A private ruling is not binding on a taxpayer to whom it is issued….” This one is also key, based on your explanation.

So, as I conclude –(Interruptions)

MR MAGYEZI: Honourable member, I am seeking clarification from you in relation to what you are talking about. Look at 45 (1), the manner in which this ruling is sought and the manner in which it is given. The taxpayer approaches the commission not through backdoors. You apply in writing and seek clarification on the provision in the tax law. And the commission will issue a ruling setting out the position of that commission. That is an official position and so, it is not something you can start meddling about. The commission will say that is binding on them. So, if it is binding on it, how can it not be binding on the taxpayer when the commission is bound to implement this official position?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, hon. Musasizi for yielding the Floor. I have just been running through some content from the internet. But I also listened very carefully to the Minister of State of Finance under the guidance of the Chair. I have come to a conclusion that the guidance of the Chairman is correct and we cannot move away from it. You see, the minister put it differently. If you seek professional advice from a tax body that is supposed to implement the tax laws of the land, that advice can never be an ultimate decision for purposes of taxation. And it can never be binding on you; it can only be binding on them as stated in the clause. It cannot be binding on you because you can have recourse to other provisions of the law. So, given those circumstances, colleagues, I would plead that we pass this clause as it is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let me just give this information and we see how it helps us. The Member for Ndorwa talked about the definition of a ruling. I want to say that a ruling is a ruling. A private ruling is different under the tax laws. 

Anyway, we have just been looking at the Australian Government Taxation Office Website to see what they say about private rulings and this is what they say: “A private ruling sets out opinions about the way a tax law applies or would apply to you in relation to a specific scheme or circumstance.” One would apply for a private ruling if not sure or certain bout how a tax law applies to one circumstance. It is about one’s own affairs; the affairs of another personality or entity. If you are their legal agent or representative, then each ruling is specific to the NCO and cannot apply generally to another. That is what sets it aside. So, it is not a tax decision but something you seek because you are not certain of how the law will apply to your situation. So, there is a distinction and this is from – you can visit this website.

MR MUSASIZI: Based on that, Mr Chairman, I want to propose that you put a question.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, before you put the question, there is the issue of which one takes precedent in case of a clash, between the practice note and the private ruling?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You know it is because the practice note is general. But private ruling is specific to this set of circumstances. That makes it different in how it will apply to the circumstance of this particular taxpayer. So, because the issues are clear and the case is known, it becomes specific. So, whatever you say there has got to be more authoritative than the general application of things. 

I now put the question that – honourable minister –

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, sorry to irritate you. I am sorry because I saw what you were going through. But if you look at 45 (3) and (4), are they unison? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, they are.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, this is a law proposed by the Minister of Finance –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The honourable Minister of Finance is out of order even before you raise that point of order.

Okay, can I put the question to Clause 45 – have we amended it? No, Okay, I now put the question that –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I also have been looking at the law. When you at the VAT Act, Section 79, you will see a practice note and in Section 80, there is a private ruling. So, I have confirmed that there are few of you who pay taxes. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Including yourself because you have just confirmed now. (Laughter) 

Okay, honourable members, I put the question that Clause 45 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I wanted us to consider penal tax but before that I want to put the House on notice that I will recommit 46. I will tell you the reasons later.

But on clause 48 on interest on tax due, they are saying that if somebody – penal tax for defaulting to furnish tax returns – you are clearly saying the higher of the two – the two per cent of tax payable or the ten currency points per month.

Mr Chairman, a penal tax is just a tax paid for failure to do something. These days, it is Shs 200,000, which is 10 currency points. But if you do not pay a tax which is due because you have already paid a penal tax then you will be charged interest on the tax not due. If you say two percent per month for the tax you have not paid at the same time you charge this person two percent interest on the tax not paid that means it comes to four percent. My proposal here is to delete (a) and so that (b) becomes 10 currency points.

Justification

Any tax which is due and not paid will be subjected to interest which is already a penalty.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What the provision is saying is that there are options, they don’t apply at the same time but whichever is higher will be the one that will apply. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The moment it is beyond Shs 200,000, it is 200,000 which is higher. What I am trying to say that if it is two percent of what is payable per month, for example, if you are supposed to pay tax of Shs 2 million the penal tax on that will be two percent on 2 million per month at the same time you will pay interest on the two million because you are supposed to have filed a return and you never filed so that you are able to pay the tax on time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Mafabi, first make the point. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Well, I wanted to allow him; Mr Chairman, let us be in absolute terms. We want to say the tax payable is Shs 200,000 or 2 million. If you are supposed to pay two million, that two million will be carrying a penalty of two percent. At the same time because you never paid the tax, it will also carry interest because it was due sometime but you never filed a return and now they have put you here you must pay two percent on that tax. That is double but a penal tax is a penalty which is just straight. That you never did X, your payment is 10 currency points per month if you delay to pay that is understandable but if you apply it on the principle tax, which is due and at the same time you apply interest. It is double jeopardy.

MR KAKOOZA: There was an oversight here because they always put whichever is higher to avoid double jeopardy. The reading of this could have been a taxpayer who defaults in furnishing a tax return by the due date or with in a further time allowed by the commissioner under this Act is liable to pay a penal tax whichever is higher, two percent of the tax payable of the return per month. That is how the drafting is always done in tax laws. But when you leave it higher, then it would carry the meaning he is giving. They always put whichever is higher so that they do give a double punishment.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, I think you need to ask and understand. Maybe you have a capacity problem. What he was saying –(Interruption)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we all know that the qualification for being a member of Parliament is the equivalent of A’ Level. Is the hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to suggest that hon. Kakooza does not have the capacity to understand the submissions he has just made?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the members of this House are equal, please respect that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I respect that. What I was trying to raise is, it is saying under the Act, is liable to a penal tax equal to a higher or one of the higher:

Two percent of the tax payable under the return per month or part of that month that the return is outstanding. What it means here, if the tax payable is Shs 100 million, you will pay two percent of Shs 100 million which is 2 million. That will be two million for the number of months when the return is outstanding. Or if it is less than Shs 200,000 you pay 200,000 per month. But for any outstanding tax which was due and you never paid under the same law you are charged two percent per month. What I am trying to say here is that if take A) you will pay two percent for the penal tax then you pay two percent for interest when the return is outstanding. For the interest it is okay because you have retained the money but for the return not being done you should pay one figure.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I am seeking clarification may be hon. Nandala can help me by making reference to the internet or income tax Act because I am looking at hon. Okoth looking at his internet the hard one. If you read 53(3); recovery of penal tax; penal tax shall not be imposed on a person for an act or an omission if the person has been convicted for an offence or an act or omission. Because we need to look at this penal tax in totality from where it starts up to where it ends, and also look at our internet about the income tax and the VAT. I see some notes going on so that we move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I know I am not supposed to pass any communications when I am not sitting as Speaker but there are children who might be leaving soon so I must make an exception and announce them here. In the gallery this afternoon we have pupils from Happy Times Senior Secondary School, Wakiso District. They are represented by hon. Nansubuga Sseninde and hon. Isa Kikungwe. They are here to observe the proceedings so please join me in welcoming them.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me be simpler and slow; assuming you are supposed to file your tax return on 30th June of 2014, by August you have not filed - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Mafabi may be being an expert in this area may be you may advise us, is this is a brand new situation being proposed or is it part of an existing framework of the law. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the 10 currency point has been there; this upper one is the new one. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, this is being imported from a law which is already existing. Under the Income Tax clause 15(1): Penal tax for failure to furnish a return of income: “A person who fails to furnish a return of income for a year of income within the time required under this Act is liable to pay a penal tax equal to 2 percent of the tax payable for that year before subtracting any credit allowed….” 

So, this already passed by this same Parliament and it is just being imported.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Read it to the end, honourable minister. 

MR OMACH: “…before subtracting any credit allowed to the tax payer on his or her chargeable income or 10 currency points per month, whichever is the greater for the period the return is outstanding.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Why I am raising that it is a problem is the reason where it says per month. The two percent applicable is for the year and I seen the law. But here, they are saying two percent of tax payable and returns per month. So if it is amending the law, that is why I am saying no because it will be too high while the person will be subject to interest. That is why we are saying that if we are retaining the old one, then it will be two percent of the tax payable under – (Interjection) - for the year but not per month. If that is agreeable and it is importing, then there I will go with it – two percent per annum and not per month.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, if you are importing it from this law, then you import.

MR EKANYA: Import the right good.

MR OMACH: It is imported, Mr Chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So you are proposing an amendment to your law now- to the Bill to take the terms provided for in the Income Tax Act? Is that what you are proposing?  

MR OMACH: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Honourable members, the reading of that provision will now be, “A person who fails to furnish a return of income for a year of income within the time required under this Act is liable to pay a penal tax equal to two percent of the tax payable for that year before subtracting any credit allowed to the tax payer on his or her chargeable income or 10 currency points per month, whichever is the greater for the period the return is outstanding.” This is what is in the law.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The problem with that is that we are importing from the Income Tax Act and Section 151 of the Income Tax Act does not deal with furnishing returns. Clause 48 deals with furnishing returns.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am sure his Ipad has a problem. (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: That is true.

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: I withdraw. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So what is the problem now? Are we together? Are we okay now? So we put the question to the amendment which will be in the terms provided in the Income Tax Act Section 151 – is that correct as I have just read?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the amendment proposed in Clause 48. Can we now improve the language to “whichever is higher” instead of “greater?”

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. We shall amend that to be “whichever is higher.” So that it is better language. I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question and agreed to.)

Clause 48, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49

MR LUBOGO: Thank you. I have read the VAT Act and also in the clauses that we have passed, it has come out clear that by deleting or amending Section 44 the way we amended it to make –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It cannot come at this stage. You will have to recommit.

MR LUBOGO: Yes, that is the procedural issue.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This would be hardly the time to do that.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you. I intend to move a recommital.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Clause 49

MR MAGYEZI: Unless again this is imported - tax payer who fails to maintain proper records being given a penalty of double the amount of tax payable – I find that outrageous.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On Clause 49?

MR MAGYEZI: A tax payer who fails to maintain proper records as required under the tax law is liable for penalty of double the amount of the tax payable unless this is again an import – that failure to maintain records attracts double the amount of the tax payable is outrageous. My proposal would have been that we again put a simple penalty of two percent – the tax payable is 10 percent but to double it, is outrageous.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is also part of Section 152 of the Income tax Act and is exactly the same wording.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is but they are saying “deliberately”. You can be sick and you fail. So I think that if we are importing, we should go by the words here. You know when this Income Tax law was being made, it was done very carefully to avoid people mismanaging it. This one is clear and it says, “A tax payer who deliberately fails to maintain proper records for a year in accordance with the requirements of this Act is liable to pay a penal tax equal to double the amount of tax payable by the person for the year.” That is better.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We put it that we take the terms provided in the Income Tax Act again. Correct? Should we make that amendment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is very good but can we also say that – the only amendment we shall say is “tax payer” because it is now referring to tax payers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So it is, “A tax payer who deliberately fails….” Please, proceed minister or chair.

MR SSEBUNYA: “A tax payer who deliberately fails to keep, retain or maintain any record as required under a tax law for a tax period is liable for a penal tax equal to that higher of or double the amount of a tax payable by the tax payer under the tax law for a period to which….”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is there anything wrong with the –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let us import.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In the exact terms.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We import.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So can you restate it now?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “A tax payer who deliberately fails to maintain proper records for a year in accordance with the requirements of this Act is liable to pay a penal tax equal to double the amount of tax payable by the person for the year.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that acceptable? But it is part of the law. We do not want the new formulation in 49. They want to import the formulation, which is already in the existing law so that we avoid this – the member for Ndorwa.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I thought we could improve on what the previous Parliament did. I think the importance of this is that all taxpayers should maintain records. How are we going to know who is deliberately refusing to keep records and who is failing records?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is a question of fact and good drafting because now they prove that you deliberately did not do it. It is a standard of proof.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I agree with the House but it will be an uphill task.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have done that many times in court because the facts will speak louder than the person. Okay, I put the question to that amendment. Yes, honourable minister.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I just wanted to clarify that this will affect all other taxes like Duty and VAT. This is just for clarification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The wording is now saying ‘a tax payer’ for all kinds of taxes here so this is -

MR EKANYA: Clarification, Mr Chairman. How about the issue of the currency point?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There were no currency points in this one.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I wanted to add (b) onto what he was reading to be 50 currency points -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, double the amount assessed is punitive enough. If you do it then - Why do you want to water it down again? We have deleted the existing clause 49 and we are replacing it with this one. Okay, can I put the question to the amendment as proposed in clause 49? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have an issue with 50(4) which reads: “Penal tax is not payable by a person under sub section (2) if the person who made the statement did not know and could not reasonably be expected to know that the statement was false or misleading in a material particular.”

Mr Chairman, I cannot imagine that someone prepares a statement, sends it for verification to a tax body and comes back to claim that he or she did not know what they were preparing. I therefore want to propose that this section be deleted.

Also on 4(c), “the tax shortfall arose as a result of a clerical or similar error”. My concern is, where does this clerical or similar error come from? If I am preparing returns for tax purposes and at the same time I am given lee way to say that while I was preparing my returns, I committed an error and therefore I want to be allowed to make corrections, Mr Chairman, this will open up for tax payers to always have an excuse of avoiding this penalty.

Maybe like we had debated earlier, if the tax body is the one making errors, it can be accommodated but we need not allow errors from taxpayers.

MS KWAGALA: The clarification I am seeking from you is that, for example, if the goods are overvalued and that is from the side of the person supposed to declare the taxes- For example, I am importing 10 containers of tiles from China and what they declared as the expected tax is not the case, am I just supposed to proceed with what was declared previously yet we give way to the tax body to adjust? Why not the traders also? That is the clarification I am seeking before you seek for deletion.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, when you are preparing returns, you are expected to base them on ascertainable values. You do not make assumptions. By the time you send your return to URA, it is assumed that you believe to the best of your knowledge that the return is true and fair. That is why previously we have always had an argument in the committee with the minister that these returns must be prepared by accountants because if you allow x, y and z - I do not want to use names for this case - to prepare returns, cases like what the honourable member is concerned about arise.

So I would not want a law that allows these mischiefs and anomalies to continue occurring. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I do not think it should be a big worry to prove what a clerical mistake is because it can be proved. For example, the totals are 15, 20, 30 and then the total in another document is saying 43 and then when you are transferring on this other document, say you transfer 42. It would show that it is a clerical mistake, which can be corrected. I mean the evidence can show that it is a clerical mistake. But what should be worrying us is the burden shift apparently.

Penal tax is not payable by a person under sub section (2) if the person who made the statement did not know. On whom are we passing the burden of proof that this person did not know?

MR ANYWARACH: I have a situation here, Mr Chairman. If you are buying a company for example and a person gives you all the clearances, information like this is a tax return. You can say, I furnished URA last year and since you are taking over from this year, this is what you need to proceed on. Now for the last two years probably this company has been making under declaration of the returns. Surely I take over in utmost good faith. I think this provision here is intended to protect me from being charged for what I did not connive to do. I think it is in good spirit.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to build from what hon. Musasizi has already presented. As you said, if it is in good faith well and good; but provided you legislate on it to that effect. That means those who are ill-minded will try to use it. After all, they will hide under the cover that it is a clerical error. Mr Chairman, as you used those figures, this means every now and then, returns will have to be audited to find out whether there are clerical errors and these taxpayers will always hide under that after all there is a law that protects them. So I support hon. Musasizi’s submission. 

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 50 is on all fours with section 153 of the Income Tax Act. And my submission here is that the draft to the Income Tax Act is better than the drafting of clause 50. If you permit me, I will read section 153 of the Income Tax Act: “Penal tax in relation to false or misleading statements -

    1. where a person knowingly or recklessly makes a statement to an officer of Uganda Revenue Authority that is false or misleading in a material particular; or

    2. omits from the statement made to an officer of the Uganda Revenue Authority any matter or thing without which the statement is misleading in a material particular and the tax probably payable by the person exceeds the tax that was assessed as payable based on the force of the misleading statement or omission that person is liable to pay a penal tax equal to double the amount of the excesses”. 

If the minister has no objection, since we have already established a practice of migrating sections, we could as well migrate this one to the current law. 

MR MUSASIZI: The imported section would be clearer than what has been proposed in Bill. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I just request the member that we retain the Bill the way we have proposed it. As the member knows, they discussed this with the finance committee and they agreed to this. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would tell you what happened to the report this morning, but I do not what to get there. What we want to do is for purposes of progress and we are supporting the minister of finance to make sure the tax procedures code is harmonised. 

Let us harmonise this firs. If you have serious amendments, you can bring them after we have done this because now we are importing sections which are similar. If you heard what hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo raised, it is very clear that the purpose of the tax procedure code is to harmonise procedures in all taxes. That is why we are bringing them. 

I am happy because I even got technical advice from the technical bench. They said that these are just imported from VAT and the Income Tax Act. So if we are importing, then let us deal with it as it is. All these taxes, clause 53, 54, 55 – in fact by now we would have finished this law. 

So for purposes of progressing, I propose that the minister concedes; we import this amendment and go to the next. 

MR OMACH: Okay, Mr Chairman, I accept the importation but it should be tax free. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay so what would be the full text? Then what happens to the issue of determining whether a person has made a statement – (Interjections) – so we adopt what the honourable member has just read. Honourable members, the proposed amendment is to remove what is provided in clause 50 and replace it with what is provided under section 153(1) of the Income Tax Act and of course the modifications will apply so that it is general application to all tax laws that we are passing. Is that okay? I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 51

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 51 is the same as 154; penal tax for understating provisional tax – we just import this and move on. 

MR OMACH: I am okay with it, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that section 51 be amended in the terms provided under section 154 of the Income Tax Act and of course the general application to all other tax laws will apply accordingly. Do we need to read the wording of the provision? I now put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 52

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I move that clause 52 be deleted unless the minister advised otherwise; we have agreed on the principle to move very fast. That is the objective of the memorandum of the Tax Procedure Code. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So we delete it and then?

MR EKANYA: We import a similar provision from the Income Tax Act because it does not exist.

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, clause 52 is very important. The duty to apply for registration required under a tax law is the duty of the taxpayer. And if we are talking about collecting taxes, we must ensure that persons who are required to register under any tax law do register. This provision is very important and we should not dispense of it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 52 stand part of the bill – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, everybody is supposed to register for tax – I mean all of us. If you don’t –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Let me give you information –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But the honourable member has not even made a statement. Before he speaks? Please!

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, with your permission, let me give information to hon. Nandala.  Two months ago, the Office of the Speaker, through the Parliamentary Commission said that we needed new tax identification numbers and I delayed to submit. I had to miss my salary for two months. So, if you are not registered for tax, it is a very serious matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is why I am saying this is dangerous. Everybody including that woman who sells bananas on Mbale streets must register for taxes. The law says that a person who does not apply for registration as required under a tax law is liable to a penalty. That means whatever the size of your business; you must register for taxes, failure to do so you are supposed to pay 50 currency points. But in this case, who qualifies to register? Are you putting a threshold? If that is true, then there should be no preservative assessments which are being raised under the Income Tax Act.

So, we can delete – otherwise everybody must register for taxes. If you just talk about taxes, these women will be harassed and that will be very dangerous, you might cause an uprising in this country.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I do not agree with the deletion of this clause. So, of course as the hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said, it is really not meant for those selling tomatoes and the like. So, I propose that we retain clause 52 as it is.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Who are those to register because the Act will say that if your turnover is Shs 50 million, you register? But for income tax, the moment you earn more than Shs 250,000 per month, you have to register. So, who are these people to register?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Isn’t there a threshold?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, we can define a person in this particular aspect so that a person who is liable is known. Like in the case of the Income Tax, it is at Shs 50 million.

MR NANADALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, let me help to draft it. It should read that anybody with gross turnover of more than Shs 50 million must register. Why? It is because VAT is at Shs 50 million – it is true this is the wrong place.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, why don’t we qualify by saying that penalty for failure for registration under those different Acts because it cuts across the board. It works with the excise, VAT – we can also mention those Acts where registration is required.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, when you look at this clause carefully, you realise that it says that a person who does not apply for registration as required under a tax law – this tax law must specify who should register. When you go to the VAT Act, it will tell you; the Income Tax Act will also tell you. So, I don’t know my elder brother, hon. Nandala –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 52 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in this clause, we have to import clause 155 with modifications.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, could the Member holding the Floor clarify why we have to import. Otherwise, we are now lost. Is this better or worse than the existing one? What is it? We can’t just import it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I think clause 53 as it is, is okay because it has all those things. If you do clause 155 – it has two cross references that are not relevant to this particular legislation.

MR EKANYA: We have to import clause 55 with modifications so that we can remove the cross references.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, you don’t just do it for the sake, honourable member. Look at the two provisions as they appear. The others were different in many respects. But these are the same. So, why import?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Why is the minister involved in this? It reads: “Where good cause is shown by the person liable to penal tax, the minister may on the advice of the commissioner remit in whole or part of any tax payable.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Minister, why are you coming in here? Look at clause 53 (5). It reads thus: “The minister may, on the advice of the commissioner, remit in whole or in part any tax payable.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is allowed in the old law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 53 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53 agreed to.

Clause 54

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to propose that for purposes of clarity, we get back to the furnishing of returns under the VAT or Income taxes. That will help us to move very clearly.So, on this about the failure to furnish returns under returns – it is 137.

Mr Chairman, here we now go for 137 –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is no difference. We should adopt this clause as it is. Okay, I put the question that clause 54 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56

MR BAHATI: I want to suggest that we say a taxpayer who deliberately does not maintain records instead of knowingly or recklessly. I think recklessly does not -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 56 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 63(b), there is that lower paragraph which says that a tax officer commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 48 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.

But when you go to the other one, that is the opposite which is under 2(b), when he commits an offence, he is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 25 currency points and imprisonment not exceeding three years. This one is 48 currency points and two years, this other is 25 currency points and three years. To harmonise this issue, there should be 25 currency points and one year and this is like it was in the old law. 

MR OMACH: No objection, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So it is how many currency points? It is 25 currency points in 63(1), the closing paragraph 1 - at the end, instead of 48 currency points.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the first one is about the tax officer that is 48 currency points and not exceeding two years. But next year, we shall amend it to be in harmony with the Auditor-General’s law because this is not punitive.

This is the one that entices the tax officer. This is too big, it says 25 currency points that is okay but again that the period of imprisonment should not exceed one year. If you can harmonise it on the same rates; 48 currency points and not exceeding two years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And then 25 currency points it will not be three years because here 48 is two years. You are proposing that we remove it from three years to what?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: From three to two, when you make it two years, then the currency points would be the same. It will be 48 currency points and not exceeding two years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So what do we do? 48 two years, we do the same? The amendment is in clause 63(2) and in (2) instead of 25 currency points, we put 48 currency points and instead of three years, we put two years. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 63, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 64

MR KAKOOZA: Clause 64, is not consistent with the laws we have passed like the Insolvency Act and the Companies Act. It leaves -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Specifically where?

MR KAKOOZA: The offences; to lift a veil of a company should be through a competent court and not a body. When you read this clause 64 as it is -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Particularly where? Point out exactly.

MR KAKOOZA: When an offence under tax law is committed by a company, an offence is treated as having been committed by a person. That is 64; the chief executive officer, managing director, a director. I thought that the parameters should be explicit within this section so that URA is not left to determine when it should lift a veil.

This is because that is what it means - offences by bodies of persons, the CEO, MD, Secretary to treasury and other senior officers of the company - the acting or purporting to act in that capacity. This whole section deals with a company which has evaded taxes but here it gives URA powers to determine to lift a veil whereas in the other laws, it should be a competent court to do it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, hon. Kakooza may have a point but I have never seen a company committing a crime, it is the individuals in the company who committee crimes, then they hide behind this corporate veil. For tax purposes, I think we should go further. The other one we can deal with it.

Whoever files a return, it is not Nandala-Mafabi and company, and it is Nandala who committed the offence. So for us to go to court to say that it is the company which committed the crime, so remove the veil and we look for the man behind. This is already okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 64 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75

MR EKANYA: I like that speed, the Minister by statutory instrument with approval of cabinet amend schedule 1. Mr Chairperson and colleagues, schedule 1 is about currency points. We have been arguing and agreeing on clauses that we have passed based on the principle of currency points. Therefore, I would like that we delete that and we move it to clause 2, that the minister may, by statutory instrument with the approval of Parliament, amend schedule 1, 2 and 3. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Currency points?

MR EKANYA: Yes, because you know that currency points can determine the penalty, the offences and have a serious relationship with what we have passed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But we have always given currency points issues to the minister in all the other laws.

MR EKANYA: Yes. But on this one, all clauses were passed on this Tax Procedural Code. Many clauses have issues of currency points.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Currency points will apply across the board to any other law and not just this one. We had given the authority to the minister to do currency points and I am even wondering why they are putting it to cabinet. 

MR EKANYA: Okay for that matter, then let us leave it with Cabinet – (Laughter) - at least we have some sober ministers that will be able to manage this issue.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, because we have always given this authority to the minister, I am wondering why the minister in charge of this Bill decided that it should be with the approval of Cabinet.

MR KABAJO: Thank you. I just want to seek clarification. Many laws have a schedule with currency points. Is it possible to amend a currency point in a specific law but the other laws remain with a different figure or if you change the meaning of currency point in one law, does it mean that all the others are also affected?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: All the others. There will be a statement of general application to wherever the issue of currency point is mentioned. The change will take effect to all laws.  

MR KABAJO: For that matter, I remember that there is a place where we put issues that affect all laws. Although I am not a legal person, there is some definition that we put somewhere where if you make a change, it affects all the laws. I think that that is where this one would then fit since any change to it would affect not only that law where you have changed it but even all the others.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The phrasing has always been – the learned Attorney-General, maybe can help us with this – okay, the Minister for Finance.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairperson, although I did not go to school like the Attorney-General, I went to college. We agreed that we make this to correspond with other laws -

MS AMONGI: Yesterday we had the same phrase.

MR OMACH: So, can I finish? 

MS AMONGI: No, I will help you. 

MR OMACH: I am being helped.

MS AMONGI: Yesterday, on the Excise Duty Bill, on 19 – the power of minister to amend schedule, “The Minister may by statutory instrument with the approval of Cabinet amend schedule 1 and 2.” So we have been having the same approval by Cabinet.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, then we leave it as it is and the other one is by approval of Parliament. We are satisfied with 75 now. I now put the question to that clause 75 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76

MR SEBUNYA: On clause 76, we propose on the matter of repeals that in sub-clause (1) delete paragraph (a) and insert the following, “Sections 92, 94-110.” This is to correct the cross reference.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What –

MR SEBUNYA: The difference is that there was 92 - 110 but now we have put 92, 94 - 110. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So in other words, you are retaining 93?

MR SSEBUNYA: Excluding 93.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you retaining 93 in that law?

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Why is that?

MR SSEBUNYA: This is to correct cross-reference. I think the references should be on 92, 94-110. The reference does not refer to 93.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So where is 93?

MR SSEBUNYA: It is skipped.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So you want to retain Section 93 of the Income Tax Act? 

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 76, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 76, as amended, stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 76, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 77

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Transitional provisions.

MR EKANYA: I am seeking clarification from hon. Omach on clause 77 (3) because clause 77 (1) says that, “Prosecution commenced before the commencement of this Act shall continue and be disposed of as if this Act had not come before;
(ii) Where decision for making main application, appeal or prosecution has expired before the commencement of this Act, nothing in this Act is to be construed as enabling the application, appeal or prosecution is made under this Act by reason only to the effect that no longer period is specified in this Act;
(iii) A tax liability that arose before the commencement of this Act….

I find a contradiction with (i) and (iii) because (iii) says, “A tax liability that arose before the commencement of this Act maybe recovered under this Act.”So, I want clarity because I find ambiguity -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the word you want to use is not ambiguity. You want to use another word because it is not ambiguous at all. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairperson, you have guided because for him, he is reading it in the King’s English while it is written in the Queen’s English. There is no ambiguity.

MR EKANYA: No, hon. Omach. The contradiction and lack of clarity “…but without prejudice to any other action already taken before the recovery of the tax.” That means that we are going to be applying both laws concurrently in certain action. So, we need to be clearer because tax laws are supposed to be clearer and easy to be understood by a common person.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But what is not clear about this provision? It is simply saying that a tax liability that was already in place before the commencement of this Act will be enforceable under this Act and the enforcement will not prejudice whatever action that had already been taken in recoveries in other aspects. So what is not clear about this?

MR EKANYA: In case of any complication that arises from any person that I know, I may visit your chambers for redress.  I, therefore, concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 77 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 77, agreed to.

MR BAHATI: You recall that we were supposed to formulate something to accommodate –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we first deal with this because there are clauses that we have stood over and all those things are still there.

MR BAHATI: It was advised that it fits well here because it was going to require amending another Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where does it fit?

MR BAHATI: Clause 78.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: A new clause 78?

MR BAHATI: Yes, a new clause 78.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR BAHATI: Hon. Members, you will recall that we established a committee to handle agents and we discovered that if there is any problem, there is nowhere that the decision of the committee can be appealed and so this clause appeals to the committee’s decision intended to cure that and we are proposing that Section 14 of the Tax Appeals Tribunal Act is amended by substituting 4 (1) with the following, “Any person who is aggrieved by a decision under a tax Act by the Ugandan Revenue Authority or a decision by the committee established under section 12 of the Tax Procedures Code Act may apply to the tribunal for a review of the decision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What did you mean by a taxing law?

MR BAHATI:  A taxing Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Action or the law?

MR BAHATI: That is how it is captured in the Tax Tribunals Act. So all I am importing here is “Or a decision by the committee established under section 12 of the Act - Procedures Code Act.” The rest is maintained as it is in the Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we shall not oppose whatever you say but what he is raising is that he is mentioning section 12 because the committee was not in the tax law or those tax Acts which they are mentioning.

I think we should say we are not so sure if it will remain 12 when we start numbering. We should say maybe the committee established under this Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Will that be okay, Attorney-General?

MR BAHATI: That is okay, Mr Chairman.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I agree with the modification moved by the former Leader of the Opposition.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, can you now restate it for the Hansard, honourable member for Ndorwa?

MR BAHATI: Section 14 of the –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So what are we doing? Are we creating a new clause 78? We have to be specific that you are proposing to bring a new clause 78.

MR BAHATI: Clause 78, appeal to the committee’s decision. Section 14 of the Tax Appeals Tribunal Act is amended by substituting for sub-section 1 the following: “Any person who is aggrieved by a decision under a taxing Act by the Uganda Revenue Authority or a decision by the committee established under this Act may apply to the Tribunal for a review of the decision.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? I put the question to that amendment.

MR ODOI OYWELOWO:Mr Chairman, I have no problem with the substance of the amendment but I have a problem with the home of the amendment. Clause 78 is under transitionary provision and this is a very substantive provision. I do not know why-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, 77 is transitional provision.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: So why shouldn’t we put it before the transitional provision? Why after? We should introduce it at 77 and move the current 77 to 78; transitional provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It could actually have fitted just before 74. Learned Attorney-General, before you come to regulations as long as that section does not have a different heading in the chapter; miscellaneous here- yes, learned Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: It can be inserted just before 74.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So the proposal is to insert what has been proposed by the honourable member for Ndorwa immediately before 74 as a new 74. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 74, agreed to.

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2

MR SSEBUNYA: Schedule 2, under tax laws, insert a new paragraph (e) as follows: Game pool betting that is control and taxation Act. This is also a tax law and should therefore be included in the application of this court.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 3

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. First of all, under the Companies Act, every company is supposed to have audited accounts. Two, we have also found in our laws, which we have passed that anybody who keeps wrong records will be punished and the only way to keep wrong records is when they are audited. I think this Schedule 3 is misplaced because you will not hold anybody for having kept wrong records. As long as I have less than Shs 500 million, I do not need records because my work is not subject to audit.

Also under the Companies Act, again we are contradicting the Act which says every company will appoint an auditor to audit its books.

Three, this one can bring a problem. If a man or woman wants to evade taxes, he will decide to form five companies. If he knows his turn over is Shs 5 billion, he will form five companies and divide this money and eventually, it will fall under Shs 500 million so this one is misplaced. If they want a threshold then we should put it like the VAT threshold.

MR RUHINDI: I think the clarification that we may seek is whether the application of this minimum threshold will go back to clause 15(5) because I think that is the origin, which says a taxpayer with an annual turnover of the amount prescribed in Schedule 3 shall furnish, with the taxpayer’s return of income audited with the taxpayer’s return of income, audited financial statement’s prepared by an accountant registered by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda.

Is the qualifying statement the person and the calibre of person to audit so that audits can be allowed as he says under the Companies Act but in the case of this threshold and above, it must be audited by an accountant registered by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda? I think that is the explanation we may seek from the sector ministry.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, just give me one minute to consult.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, while consulting on this, can we go to the clauses we stood over? 

Schedule 4 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we are inserting schedule 4 – we are proposing to insert schedule 4 which is a criteria for determining whether a person is a fit and proper person to register as a tax agent such that the commissioner has some benchmarks. It reads, qualities for professional suitability:

1. 	In order to determine, for purposes of this Act, the professional and moral stability of person proposed to register as tax agents, the commissioner shall have regard to the following qualities in so far as they are reasonably determinable in respect of the person concerned:
    a) His or her general probity.
    b) His or her competence and soundness of judgement for the fulfilment of the responsibilities of the tax agent.
    c) The diligence with which he or she is likely to fulfil those responsibilities and 
    d) His or her qualifications and experience. 

2. 	Previous conduct and activities and without prejudice to the originality program:
i)	The commissioner may have regard to the previous conduct and activities of a person concerning business or financial matters and in particular to any evidence that the person;
    a) Has been convicted of the offense of fraud or any other offence of which dishonest is an element; or
    b) Has contravened the provisions of an Act designed for the protection of the members of the public against financial loss due to dishonesty, incompetence and malpractice; and

3. 	Additional information: the commissioner may request any person to furnish additional information as may be necessary in determining the professional stability of a person proposing to register as a tax agent. 

Honourable members, for justification, the Bill does not provide criteria for assessing a fit and proper person. I beg to move. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, did that come from the committee? Anyway, let me leave it to the honourable members. 

MR SSEBUNYA: The Bill has a fit and proper person. So to operationalise that, this schedule should have a benchmark. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman and honourable members, I think this is one of the misplaced provisions. It is stopping people from registering. Under the current regime, there are ways of assessing whether a person is fit and proper. You go through police and Interpol clears you. If you are doing business, you have billions – you must register for VAT. 

Now you are introducing a new clause which is kind of prohibitive. Anyway, let the House decide. 

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, whereas we appreciate the initiative of the committee and their innovation, I was trying to quickly imagine and maybe I will get clarification from the chairman. How measurable is soundness of judgement; how do you foresee this qualities. Please clarify. 

MR SSEBUNYA: That is why we said: “If they are reasonably determinable” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, is it an addition that you want on your law? 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I request the committee to drop this proposal. 

MR SSEBUNYA: I think it has been a long day –(Laughter)– the minister has stopped on the schedule. I agree to withdraw. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, can you now address us on the other schedule?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, on schedule 3, we proposed it in this manner because of availability of accountants country wide. We still have this limitation. And secondly, the capacity to go into smaller business communities would be a problem. So we are praying that for this time, we take it as it is. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that schedule 3 stands part of the bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 3, agreed to.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, under 36, the submission from the hon. Nandala-Mafabi as mentioned earlier, the former Leader of the Opposition, he said, under 36(4), “Where there is any tax over payment in any case and there is demand for tax under another tax held, the over payment will be applied to settle the outstanding tax to the extent it is due.”

Mr Chairman and honourable members, we are saying that these are already covered under the value added tax Act Cap. 44(1) sub-section (2) where the Commissioner General fails to make a refund required under section 42(1) within the time specified within that section he or she shall pay interest at the rate of 2 percent per month compounded on the amount of refund for the period. 

Then under the Income Tax Act, 113(1) under sub-section 3(a): “Apply the excess in reduction of any other tax due from the taxpayer.” And we think that these are already covered under these two Acts so that we request hon. Nandala-Mafabi to withdraw.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So this covers the whole tax spectrum – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if you heard well what the minister read, he said, in VAT, interest is 2 percent on the tax due for refund. Here he is saying it can be offset. Our proposal is, for example, if URA has come to demand for VAT from me of Shs 20 million. But you have withholding tax of Shs 6 million. Before I pay the 10 million, knock off the six million and I pay the balance which is four million. 

I have colleagues who were detained. One was detained for Shs 2 million yet he was demanding Shs 10 million from URA and his account was blocked. URA should have said, since you have this amount, let us knock it off and you get your refund of Shs 8 million. 

So my proposal which honourable members should really understand and agree to is that even if we deduce all those – this is tax harmonisation code. We are saying any excess tax on one tax head should be applied to settle any outstanding taxes to the extent it is; so that if you are demanding from URA, they refund. If URA is demanding from you, you pay the balance, very simple. 

MR BAHATI: I just want to appeal to the minister to revisit his decision because it is not only good practice, but it is actually good manners that if you have my money and demand money from me, we can find a way of sorting it out. And one of the key taxes that will have been affected is Withholding Tax. When businessmen supply Government, they withhold 4 percent. But this 4 percent is never accounted for in time although they go on to suppress them on other taxes, which they might have not paid.

So, what we are saying is that we should ease up tax administration and make sure we harmonise it well. So, I want to request the honourable minister – the good man I know – to maintain the spirit that we had before we left for a break.

Mr Omach: Mr Chairman, I would like to request for the indulgence of the House that we allow this to pass the way I have read it –(Interjections)– no, but I have not finished my submission – because we need to look at the implications, first of all, on the revenue harmonisation and secondly, on the administrative aspect of it. But in principle, we accept what the hon. Nandala-Mafabi has raised. But we could, maybe next financial year –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to remind the honourable minister that yesterday we also adopted other provisions as a matter of principle. So, since it is agreeable to the principle of being fair and the good manners as the hon. Bahati has said, then we will adopt the principle and they can sort out the administration. In any case, the principle that you offset from one head if you owe on the other – that is perfect for us. So, you can still look at how you will administer it.

But besides that, Mr Chairman, there are so many businessmen in this country who really cry out to Government over their dues. It has become a very big hindrance to doing business in this country. Government owes them and Government has not paid yet we continue to push them to a tight corner. I would like to plead with the good man, the honourable minister, to be a fair man in this respect too. Thank you very much, Chair.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, if this could be imported form Section 113 of the Income Tax Act and Section 44 of the VAT Act then we can agree to this. I am saying this because the way that the honourable Nandala-Mafabi has drafted it, we need to import from these two sections to improve on his draft.

So, l request for 36 second –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You can cross reference the provisions of Section 113 of the Income Tax Act and 44 of the VAT Act.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, I don’t think the importation of the existing sections from the Income Tax Act and the VAT Act will sort out this. The challenge we have is that if I have a claimable refund under withholding tax but at the same time I have a deficit under the VAT Act, can my claim on withholding tax be accepted to offset my VAT deficit? Apparently, that is not acceptable. And these are the provisions in the VAT and the Income Tax. So, the importation of these two clauses will not cure anything. What we are requesting to do is allow the harmonisation so that what we want can be effected.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, allow me provide some information. It has been a practice in some companies that once their withholding tax is withheld, at the end of the financial year, they calculate what has been there and they offset. It is the same thing done to VAT. You claim what you have there. 

As the minister has said, both the VAT and Income Tax Acts, allow the offset of this and not any other. So, I don’t find it a problem –

MR OMACH: Okay, Mr Chairman, allow me to read this again under the Income Tax Act – apply the balance of the excess if any in reduction of any outstanding liability of the taxpayer to pay other taxes not in dispute or to make provisional tax payments during the year of the income in which the refund is to be made.

So, when that is combined with what the hon. Nandala-Mafabi has presented, then there will be a cure of that challenge because in his draft he said thus: “Where there is any tax over payment in a case and there is demand for tax under another tax head, the overpayment will be applied to settle the outstanding tax to the extent it is due.” Then, if we import the one in the Income Tax –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you have both?

MS ALASO: Just help that I would like to seek from both the hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the hon. Minister. The provision in the Income Tax Act specifies that this can only be offset for that year. But I am imagining a situation where the obligation of the taxpayer or the excess due from the tax authority is probably slightly higher – it will go beyond that tax that can be assessed in that year of income – but let us think that for this particular taxpayer, the tax authority owes him Shs 6million for example, but his obligation is something lie Shs 2million. This means that you still go on to withhold that taxpayer excess of Shs 4million until the next year of assessment? Will that be fair for you to continue withholding that taxpayer’s money instead of refunding it? That is my dilemma.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, what is the actual problem with the draft by the hon. Nandala-Mafabi? Can you advise the House? 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, after I read Section 3(b) of the Income Tax Act, I saw the hon. Nandala-Mafabi stand to amend his submission. So, maybe if we could combine that –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The minister just doesn’t want to look at my handwriting, but since you want me to use the law, 113 is for refunds, we have no problems with refunds they can follow the normal procedures until you refund. What we want to do is, there is something which is under 113(b) (a) and (c). Where the commissioner is satisfied that the tax has been overpaid, the commissioner shall apply the excess in deduction of any other tax due from the taxpayer. That means if I have my VAT and there is income excess, then I should offset, the balance of excess will be refunded to the taxpayer.

If my handwriting is not good, we should import the whole 3 and put it as 3 in 36. The reason is that anybody whose tax is paid URA should use the other excess to offset.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, you saw the Attorney-General accepting that amendment, so I do accept it as well.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the actual amendment now is to put a new sub-clause (3) because the existing (3) was deleted by an amendment in clause 36. To insert a new sub-clause (3), which will read as follows:

“Where a commissioner is satisfied that tax has been overpaid, the commissioner shall:
    a) Apply the excess in reduction of any other tax due from the payer.
    b) Apply the balance of the excess if any outstanding liability of the taxpayer to pay other taxes not in dispute or to make provisional tax payment during the year of income in which the refund is to be made.
    c) Refund the remainder if any to the taxpayer. 

That is okay? That is the amendment that is being proposed, I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 3

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 3 is definition. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 1, agreed to.

The Title to the Bill, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we have not talked about clause 2; should we pass it? Because it says that this Act shall apply to every tax law specified in schedule 2.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 2 was passed at the beginning.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach):  Mr Chairman and colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach):Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code Bill, 2014” and has passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach):Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE TAX PROCEDURE CODE BILL, 2014

6.30
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Clause 68(1) be recommitted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no 68(1).

MR LUBOGO: Clause 68(a)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is your motion seconded? Motion is not seconded so it is collapsing on its own weight.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE TAX PROCEDURE CODE BILL, 2014

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach):Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code Bill, 2014” be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is that Bill entitled: “The Tax Procedure Code Bill, 2014” be read the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE TAX PROCEDURE CODE ACT, 2014”

THE DEPUTY Speaker: Congratulations, hon. Minister, the chairman and the committee members, the members and the shadow minister for this very elaborate exposition on this. I also congratulate the hon. Member for Budadiri West for his input in the processes of this Bill.

I think we have done very well on this Bill.

6.32
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Hon. Speaker, I really want to thank you and the Members. The Members here are you servants. Next time you want to look at royal members, look at the screen. The issue of tax is very serious, there are campaigns going on in the constituency and I will want to request you that through your office the Parliament office needs to congratulate these Members so that voters do not vote out these Members. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will require a formal motion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I also want to thank you very much for your patience. With such tax laws, you will have so many divergent views but you stayed the course. But, Mr Speaker through your office, just a plea to the minister of finance; in the tax tribunal, we were talking many cases all over the country which are pending and the thing is just useless.

In the tax tribunal, if you see the commissioners who are there, they are people who have retired. When you have retired, it means that instead of waking up at 5 a.m., you wake up at 8.30 a.m. or 9 a.m. and by the time you reach office it is midday. It is a serious matter and I want to plead with the Minister for Finance to think about the tax tribunal. Let us have just a tax tribunal functioning and I will only stop there. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we still have a few other Bills to finish but we have done so well so far. So do you want to say something in that regard?

6.35
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, I would just like to add onto my shadow; we two are inseparable. The substance always has its shadow with it and thank you all, hon. Members, who sat here not just today or yesterday but throughout this tax process. You have really shown that here we have not a group of individuals but a group of leaders who will take the hard decisions, sit on the hard benches and do whatever it takes to get the job done.

Mr Speaker, so far, your Formula 1 racing skills are admirable and you have not crashed in a single corner yet – [HON. MEMBER: “When is the reception?”] The reception will be decided as soon as we finish all the other outstanding Bills that the Speaker has mentioned. (Laughter) But thank you very much and as an Ex-Officio member of the House, I can only admire you and can see the skill that takes you through the furnace of the election. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have two Bills that have not yet come to the House: The Supplementary Appropriation Bill which we need to consider to close the other financial year and will pave way for us to handle the Appropriation Bill for this financial year, which has started. So, those two Bills are not yet with us hon. Minister. You need to fasten them so that they can come forward and we handle them. 

We also still have the Excise Tariff which if we finalise with the other Bill, would be withdrawn formally because all the provisions of this Bill are taken care of in the Excise Duty Bill which we have already passed. But there are some issues, as I had informed you the other time, that may need us to look at it again when the procedure is followed.

We also have the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill which is ready for our debate. The report was already presented and we are only waiting for the debate. Had we gone to the committee stage?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR EKANYA: We are ready.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, it is true that we went to committee stage and we are ready to go through it clause by clause. So, we have these and also the report by the Committee on National Economy on this particular borrowing for Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals project. You remember the situation that arose –(Interjections)- hon. Member, please- that needed harmonisation between the Committee on Health and Committee on National Economy. The Speaker then ordered them to go and harmonise and all those issues; I think that they were about three pending issues which have already been resolved and the discussion will not take long because the chair of national economy is ready with the complete response to all the three issues that were raised before the House. If we were already not very tired, we would have actually taken a shot at it.

MR EKANYA: I beg to move that we conclude on Yumbe because this is delaying development. It just requires voting and I remember that I was one of the Members who queried a number of issues and then the Speaker ordered. These are very critical issues of health for our children and our generation. So, Mr Speaker and colleagues, it does not take more than 10 minutes

MR BAHATI: I agree with the Shadow Minister for Finance for being patriotic. We can consider this report and move forward in the next few minutes since they were just a few issues to handle.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the issue of VAT, we shall handle tomorrow so that we have more time to deal with it. I am sure that the ministers will have a moment of reflection so that by the time they come back here tomorrow, those are fine. 

Can we finish with this matter because it was already here, reported and even debated but two issues remained outstanding? Can I bring this matter forward and the chair can brief us and we see how to proceed because this is about Yumbe and Kayunga general hospitals.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY on the request by the Government to borrow $7 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa and another $15 million from the OPEC Fund for Internal Development plus another $15 million from the Saudi Fund for Development for rehabilitation and expansion of Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals project

6.40
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you have rightly guided, the rest of the report had already been discussed apart from three issues and the Speaker in the chair did direct that the Committee on National Economy, the Committee on Health, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development were supposed to go and harmonise. We did that and now the report is ready.   

Mr Speaker, with your permission, this is an addendum to the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by the Government to borrow $7 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa and another $15 million from the OPEC Fund for Internal Development plus another $15 million from the Saudi Fund for development, rehabilitation and expansion of Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals project. I beg to lay the original report on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYOOMA: I also beg to lay the related minutes on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes as well.

MR KYOOMA: With your permission, Mr Speaker, I beg to present.

On Wednesday, 30 July 2014, the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by the Government to borrow $7 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa and another $15 million from the OPEC Fund for Internal Development plus another $15 million from the Saudi Fund for Development for rehabilitation and expansion of Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals project was presented and considered by this august House. The House did raise the following concerns on the report:

    1. That the contingency cost of $5.2 million, an equivalent of 13 percent of the entire project cost was on a much higher side citing 10 percent of the project cost as the standard percentage that was always applied.
    2. That the $2 million for consultancy services which is 5 percent of the entire project cost was on a much higher side and that there was need to justify the essence of the amount.
    3. That why was there a charge on undisbursed loan funds – in other words, there was need to justify the charge.

Consequently, the Speaker directed the Committee on National Economy to make consultations with the Committee on Health and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development with a purpose of reviewing the report to address the raised concerns and then report back to the House and accordingly, I beg to report.

As methodology, in considering the directive from the Speaker, the three committees held meetings with the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and technical officials from the ministry, and also the Ministry of Health officials.

The committees also made reference to relevant documents including projects approved by Parliament, which have had varying contingency percentages.

Findings

Under contingency, the committee established that:
    a) Parliament has in the past considered and passed loan proposals with varying contingency rates. This is found in appendix 1. The committees were informed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that contingency percentages cannot be standard for all projects given that risk portfolios are different for different projects.

    b) Projects with components of renovations and civil works normally have unforeseen circumstances than what was actually anticipated thereby justifying need for funding from the contingency.

    c) Contingency comprises of physical contingencies, which range from between 7 and 10 percent and then price contingencies ranging from 5 and 7 percent of the project cost.

Mr Speaker, once contingencies are not utilised, they result into savings and these savings are either used for debt cancellation equivalent to the amount of savings or an arrangement can be made with the borrower, in this case the government and the lender, so that the savings can be used for another related purpose. This is found in annex 2.

To sum up the contingency issue, we actually did establish that according to the loans that have already been approved by this Parliament, the risk contingency was 7 percent but the highest was 28 percent. So really, there is no standard contingency. It all depends upon the risks involved.

Under consultant services, the committees established that: 
    a) The World Bank health systems strengthening project provide for a variation of between 2 and 10 percent in respect of higher consultancy services and are dependent on project documents.

    b) The consultant services will include among others- I mean in this case for Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals - the preparation of the detailed designs, preparation of tender or bid documents, invitation and processing of the bids including their evaluation and supervision of the construction work for the two sites that is Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals, which are quite a distance from each other as you are aware. 

Another issue was on charges on loans. On this matter, the committees established that while interest is paid on loan amounts disbursed, commitment fees are only charged on monies still held by the lender, which we call undisbursed funds.

We also established that delayed loan implementation is responsible for accumulation of commitment fees and we also did establish that commitment fees only become effective upon signing of loan agreements.

Observations and recommendations

Given that contingency provisions vary for different projects depending on the physical contingencies and/or price contingencies involved, and given the state of dilapidation for the two hospital projects, the committees observe that the 13 contingency provisions, as contained in the report of the Committee on National Economy, are within the allowable limits.

The committees therefore recommend that the 13 provisions in respect of the contingency be maintained as reported on by the Committee on National Economy to address the unforeseen emergencies.

The committees observe that given the comprehensive nature of the services to be rendered under the consultancy, the 2 to 10 percent recommended range of the World Bank health systems strengthening project, the 5 percent for consultancy services is also within the limits.

The committees, therefore, recommend that the 5 percent provision in respect of the consultancy services as reported by the Committee on National Economy should be adopted by this honourable House.

Conclusion

Having considered the concern raised by the House on the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow $7 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa, and another $15 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development plus another $15 million from the Saudi Fund for Development for the rehabilitation and expansion of Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals project, the findings deduced the observations and recommendations made, the committees wish to recommend that this addendum to the report of the Committee on National Economy be adopted.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you will recall that there was a report of the Committee on National Economy, in which report we did not pronounce ourselves because this reference was made to these three committees to look at it again before we actually take a decision. So in presenting this particular report now, they have made it to be an addendum to the report of the Committee on National Economy; the report that was before this House and was debated and then the reference was made.

So we have an addendum to that report. By approving the report, we will be approving the report together with its addendum. Will that be correct or should we first take a decision on the addendum?

I think the addendum is to the report of the Committee on National Economy, which has gone through another consultative process leading to the presence of this addendum. So the motion before us now is for adoption of the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow $7 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development and another $15 million from OPEC Fund for International Development plus another $15 million from the Saudi Fund for Development for the rehabilitation and expansion of Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals project. That is the motion, which is before you, which motion we have debated before and which motion we now need to find a way of proceeding with forward.

We can have some interaction on this starting with the shadow Minister of Finance.

6.52
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geofrey Ekanya): Mr Speaker, we have to pass this to move the country forward but I beg your office and that of the Leader of the Opposition that we need to conduct a study globally on how consultancies are charged in modern times. This is because there are changes in the way finance is managed because of the global financial challenges. We cannot continue in the past if errors were committed.

On commitment fees for undisbursed loans, we also need to undertake a study because to the best of my knowledge, I know of many countries that have negotiated with international financial institutions to vary and remove it. I think we also need to do serious study and have a report so that we have best practice in this House.

On the third component that is on contingency, we also need to a study so that we have standards. Last time, one Member of Parliament proposed that one of the challenges we have is negotiating these loans. That some of our people who go to negotiate these loans instead go to shop and the member requested the Speaker that we need to understand the procedure of negotiating loans and come out with standards in this House.

With these few words, Mr Speaker, I hope that we pass this loan but this House should come up with standards on negotiations and most of these issues. Thank you.

6.54
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have just two points, one that there was a project where we earlier approved a contingency of 28 percent. If we made a mistake earlier, there is no good reason for us to continue making mistakes. Twenty eight percent as contingency cannot be used for an agent in this particular case. I think the shadow minister is correct; we need some standard for this. 

Secondly, I have a question to the chair of the committee. Under consultancy, there is need to prepare design and the need for supervision. But he also talked of the need to prepare tender documents. I thought that under the ministries, we have contracts committees with technical people. Why do we need consultants to prepare tender documents?

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue was that the cost of contingency was on the higher side and that of consultancy. The committee went to the same group of people who prepared this expensive thing and were given an explanation which they have brought to Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not correct. The committee also looked at what we have done in this House before. 

MR AYOO: Mr Speaker, if Parliament makes a mistake, then it should not be used as normal practice in Parliament. We would think of getting back to the review and see how best they could have this cost reduced; but that was not done. We are looking at the issue of health; we need this hospital rehabilitated and expended. The report has been brought and we have to take it. But I want to say that this is not how we should proceed. Even sending the committee back has not yielded anything that Parliament expected. Parliament expected that the cost would be reduced and that we would save some money. 

So I want to state that the committee has not helped us much; but as Parliament we need this hospital rehabilitated. We shall approve this, but next time, we need to be tighter; because if we do not do the work, again they will make claims. We had proved the other time between two and five – this is not fair for our country. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.57
MR PARTICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee did not do a good job. I think it recycled what it has considered earlier and they are not bringing anything new to the House. I would like to address my mind to the issue of contingencies. Technically, contingences are a provision for situations that are not foreseen. You are going to do a road, and you are not certain about the underlying layers of soil and points of weaknesses that may arise; because you cannot see that at the time of carrying out the preliminary studies. So make a provision to cater for these unforeseen circumstances so that the project can be done to a logical conclusion. 

The project, which is our subject matter, is a rehabilitation project of not very complicated structures and you can go and do your evaluation to very close to accurate extent – (Interruption)

MR KABAJO: My understanding is that this project includes some new structures not just rehabilitating the old one. So that could have a bearing on what you said.

MR AMURIAT: These are accurately measured and you can make a budget that is close to it. When you talk about contingency in this case and the element of price fluctuation - the period we expect to take carrying out this project, I do not think it would take three years before we experience substantial price fluctuation, in which case the contractor would come and make a claim. 

I would like this House to firmly hold its ground and compel government to seek a loan where there is contingency of 10 percent. I do not think 13 percent was necessary. Even if precedence was made, it might have been a wrong one. Should we follow this precedence? The answer is no. 

I believe, as far as consultancy is concerned, the figure is more than necessary because all these activities that are enumerated are normal. We have seen projects being run for less cost of consultancy. We have seen projects successfully run with a provision of 10 percent contingency. 

So just because we would like this project to go on does not mean we should do the wrong thing. We could have a short delay and have a reflection on this and the extra money could be put to proper use elsewhere. 

I also would like what they mean by the urgent; and I am surprised it appeared here, that some of the un-utilised money will be taken elsewhere. I do not think that happens in this country. I have been in a number of projects and it is extremely rare that somebody would declare excess money. I rest my case. 

7.01
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, this reminds me of the time when I was the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy and we were trying to approve a loan request of NUSAF I. And Shs 100 million was requested without a project document. We had colleagues from Northern Uganda, say that if we delay it, that would mean we do not like them.

We passed the loan because we did not want to disappoint our colleagues. What happened was total mismanagement. So something may be urgent; our people are in need, it may come to Parliament and it gets passed, but the beneficiaries will not benefit; it is a few technical people who benefit from it. 

We need health; we do not even need to borrow money to rehabilitate our hospitals. We should budget for it from our budget. If you are not healthy, you cannot come to Parliament and debate; you cannot go to school and you cannot dig. That is why I am saying that health should be our first priority. And I want to tell colleagues that because Kayunga and Yumbe are in bad state – we needed the money yesterday. But we should not do it because we needed it yesterday, so that a few individuals eat the money in the name of the people of Kayunga and those of Yumbe.

Contingency is one area where there is a lot of theft. In fact when we approve loans here, I hear the chairperson reading: fifty, sixteen or seven – and that is in million dollars. When we do that, there are individuals who are happy because they are going to make money. 

There real output which would go there is minimal. I can tell you, if you are talking about materials which will rehabilitate this place, these are the materials; cement is from Tororo and Hima. The sand is from our lakes, blocks will come from Yumbe and Kayunga; steel materials are from Roofings; consultants are here in Kampala. 

Mr Speaker, if you are going to have a big foreign component, you are going to import and you are expecting floatation in the dollar rate at the international market - currently, if the value of a dollar here appreciates, our local material costs cannot match that appreciation. This is because if the dollar has gone to for example, Shs 2,600, it means that one will get more of the Uganda currency. But you will realise that the cost of materials in Uganda for example, sand, bricks and so on cannot move in that line.So, in that regard, I would like to say that for contingency, if it is more than 10 percent that is beyond. So, as Parliament, we should say that yes, we are going to borrow but the portion of the contingency should be disvalued.

I heard my brother say that they are going to get people to evaluate the bids. But I think that is a criminal act. And by the way after passing this money, the bids that they are going to make will be in relation to the money we have passed because they want to consume all of it. That is why I sometimes agree with the Chinese who come and do an assessment before they tell us how much they want to borrow and that if Government agrees to that – that is better. Otherwise, this business of bids when you have a tentative value every entity will be built towards that. And eventually the country will secure a projec5t that should have been done at a less value – I have just got ansms here from a colleague of Case Clinic. I am not sure that Case Clinic cost more than $10million. I am also sure that the hospital you are going to build will not be anywhere near the standards of Case Clinic – (Interjections) – you don’t know what you are talking about.

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I want to say that I am so perturbed – recently, I carried out a research – this business where you have donors bringing in money to help on our health status – I want us to do a revaluation. Why? A donor will say they have given us $300 million but you ensure the prominent staff are from your country. You are also using your cars and at the end of the day, Uganda gets only 10 percent of the donation. The rest goes back where it came from. They even go on to threaten us when we pass laws like that on homosexuality – they keep saying they will cut aid support to Uganda. We need to evaluate that aid being given to Uganda. We need to do that seriously. These donors are just using our name. If we don’t do that, we will be in problems. Those donors just claim they are giving us money when in reality, the biggest percentage goes back.

Finally, I want to request Parliament that much as we will pass this loan, we need an extra effort for us to move on. The Committee on Economy should be going to the field to see what they are doing in terms, for examples, of the designs and so on, which would be good for us. There is no need for the committee to use the experience in the past one year, talking to the same people whom the Auditor-General questioned. You people have really done a disservice to us. The committee should have gone to the field and report to Parliament what you found out. Otherwise, to tell us that you are using past experience worries me. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.09
PROF. KIDDHU MAKUBUYA (NRM, Katikamu County, South, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The people of Kayunga and those of Yumbe – in Uganda generally, we need these two hospitals in rehabilitated form. Actually we needed them yesterday and so it is important that we do everything possible to ensure the work gets underway as soon as possible.

The cost of consultancy – this is a recurrent theme. The level of expenditure on contingency is a recurrent theme. But for purposes of debating this report, I think this debate is important but it should be a notice to Government that these things are going to be examined more critically in the future – (Interjections) – yes, and the future is not too far –(Laughter)– yes these things are going to be looked into more critically. But for this occasion, we need to support the people of Kayunga and Yumbe.

I heard these voices and I think they are good voices that the money should not go to paper work. The bulk of the money should not go to paper work. The bulk of the money should go to building, procuring equipment but not paper work. Goods designs will not deliver healthcare. So, I think the basic thing here, honourable members is where is the guarantee that this money will go –(Interjections)– yes, that is the crux of the matter.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the role of local administrations in the implementation of these projects – we have the district authorities in Yumbe and in Kayunga – are they just going to look on? What is the exact role of these entities? There are elected officials in these two districts but I am not too clear on what their role will be in the implementation –(Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, I would like to inform the House that at the Ministry of Finance, we have come up with a policy that when we send money to the districts or when a project is started in a district, all the leadership in that district must be informed about the amount of money being spent. They also have to get the details of how this money has been released and how it would be spent. So, we call upon everybody who is within these units to keep their eyes – (Interjections) – no, I am coming. We usually give out the bills of quantity; we give you the details of the money that is to be released – that is the –(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Is the minister in order to come and confuse the House that when a project is set up in a certain area, the ministry comes up with a team to inspect and inform everybody of what exactly is happening to ensure that the amount of money is used properly and yet it is the opposite of what the ministry does.

There is a fish project in Bushenyi where the Government has spent more than $30 million. There is nothing to show on the ground what money which was borrowed from IDB has been spent on. That is where the minister comes from, so is he in order to tell us that the ministry oversees these projects yet some have collapsed? Where has this ministry of finance been?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that is more of a clarification, it is a factual matter that I cannot say which one is right. So that is a clarification for you, hon. Minister, please conclude.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Hon. Speaker, information is supposed to clarify matters that push us forward but this one has caused me problems. Is the minister saying that they are giving us a Government assurance that these two projects will be run with the participation of local governments? Because hon. Mawanda was saying that is not what has happened in one of the projects he is aware of. I think it would be a good thing if the minister was to say they are undertaking to implement this project with the actual participation and also give us a plan on how the local administration will be incorporated in the implementation process. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I just wanted to give you information that actually the matter he is raising is true. There was a problem with the Iganga district local government with the plan that the central government had come up with together with what the local government preferred. It took the intervention of the President to go and harmonise the two. I think the member is right in terms of how they work with the local governments in support of the Iganga Hospital. That is the reality because I remember it was brought here and it had to be handled like that. The member is right, how do you involve the local government in the plans that you implement there?

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker, finally, how did these two hospitals get into this sorry state which now requires these kinds of monies? I think we also need to look into that one and to promote this culture of maintaining these institutions in proper shape. We need to budget deliberately for maintaining these places so that we can avoid some of these costs.

Next time we are going to be looking forward in the general budget for votes on maintenance. How are you going to maintain the physical plan, the ICT plan and so on and so forth? Otherwise the country was here when these things were -_ we must have this culture of maintenance and budget for it.

Mr Speaker sir and hon. Members, for me I am for adopting this report but this debate has been helpful. Those who need to be are on notice that we shall be more careful next time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in light of the submissions of the member from Katikamu, because we have had this debate before - the concern is exactly what is being raised and the Speaker is speaking.

The concerns are that some of these things are hiked, can’t they be regulated, can’t they be standardised so that we know exactly what we are going into? But the House seems to agree that for these particular two hospitals, we adopt this. If that is the position, then it would be proper that I put the question that the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government of Uganda to borrow $7 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development and another $15 from the OPEC Fund for International Development plus another $15 million from the Saudi Fund for Development for the rehabilitation and expansion of Kayunga and Yumbe general hospitals be adopted. I put the question to that motion.

(Question and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have three bills now remaining, the next bill that is important is VAT, which will be coming tomorrow. This House is adjourned to tomorrow 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.16 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 September 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)

