Thursday, 22 September 2016

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. You will recall that there was business that we were not able to complete yesterday. We should have an opportunity to finish it today. We will see how we can bring it up and finish it quickly because that is business that ran over. I will adjust the Order Paper accordingly to allow us finish that quickly. 

Sad news, honourable members; yesterday, 21 September 2016, at Arua Hospital, we lost hon. Andruale Awuzu who served in both the Sixth and Seventh Parliaments. He was also Minister of State for Works and Transport. This House will, later today, receive a tribute motion. I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate this so that we can make some statements on his passing on. 

The rest of the programme as to what will happen will also be communicated by the Leader of Government Business. He died in Arua and his body is in Arua, but we thought it would be appropriate if we honoured him here while his body is in Arua, in a short time, and give our commemorative speeches in remembrance of him. Therefore, I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate this motion, which will be moved by the Prime Minister. Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure as Chairman of the Committee on Local Government Accounts. Yesterday, a number of audit reports for sub-counties were laid on the Floor of this House and referred to the Committee on Local Government Accounts. Today, I see on the Order Paper that more of such documents are going to be laid on the Table regarding local government town councils and tertiary institutions.

Mr Speaker, when I took over the leadership of the Committee on Local Government Accounts, the Auditor-General presented to me their expectations. He said that we should look at all the 1,086 subcounties, 176 town councils, 44 municipalities, 116 districts and all the tertiary institutions in Uganda, including referral hospitals and all secondary schools, which are now self-accounting. 

Mr Speaker, the Auditor-General is mandated, under Article 163, to do his work. Article 163(4) says, “The Auditor-General shall submit to Parliament annually a report of the accounts audited by him or her under clause (3) of this Article for the financial year immediately preceding.” 

Mr Speaker, it is now a constitutional requirement that, “Parliament shall, within six months after the submission of the report referred to in clause (4) of this Article, debate and consider the report and take appropriate action.” We are now mandated to, within six months into a financial year, complete two audit reports per entity. It would have been a good expectation, but in practical sense, it would be a miracle. Parliament has been blamed, time and again, for not having completed audit reports in time and yet there are contradictions in the law.

Mr Speaker, the Local Governments Act mandates the District Public Accounts Committee (DPAC) to consider the reports of the lower councils and be able to report, through the Ministry of Local Government, to this Parliament. Such reports would then be forwarded to the Committee on Local Government Accounts. As I speak, since decentralisation, this Parliament has not received any report from the Ministry of Local Government. 

Meanwhile, the Auditor-General continues to complain that Parliament is the problem; it has a lot of backlog and it should do its work. There are people supporting accountability in this country like our donors, who are also complaining that Parliament is not serious and that we are not doing enough to complete this work.

I rise on a point of procedure, Mr Speaker. First of all, it is extremely impossible for Parliament, especially the Committee on Local Government Accounts, to look at all these entities. We would have no time. If we were to look at all the entities even for one financial year, it would take us at least three years without doing any other work but looking at these entities one by one or even two per day to complete. It would be practically impossible and yet we also have other responsibilities as Members of Parliament in our other committees, constituencies and in the plenary here to continue performing. 

I know that there is a committee on rules and procedure, which we have appeared before as a Committee on Local Government Accounts and raised a similar issue. The procedural matter in my concern is whether we would be able to adhere to the constitutional requirement of six months, that is, December, to complete the first phase of this audit report. This is because the Auditor-General will again report to Parliament in December and we would be expected to complete that report in June, 2017.

There is contradiction in the law, Mr Speaker. The Constitution gives powers of accountability to the Auditor-General to audit and report to Parliament. In practicality, Parliament delegated its role at the lower government level to the district PACs to do their part and pass their reports, through the Minister of Local Government, to be tabled on the Floor of Parliament. 

This is a law that we made in this Parliament - the Local Governments Act. The contradiction is that up to date, the Ministry of Local Government has not presented any report, since decentralisation, on the Floor of this Parliament. However, outside there, people are blaming Parliament for not doing its work. I thank you for giving me this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, the point you have raised is a valid one. A few times I have mentioned it in this House from this Chair that we have a structural problem with the way we handle these accountability reports. If you look at what the Public Accounts Committee does, it is itself already overwhelmed. If you look at the local government accounts; yesterday, we received 35 reports of divisions and subcounties, not even talking about districts. As the chairperson has said, it is a big issue. 

The original concept in the law was that there would be a delegated kind of working structure. Parliament would particularly deal with issues of the central Government and its institutions and the district public accounts committees would handle issues to do with the district accountability and reports from the Auditor-General.

Parliament, acting under the Constitution, delegated that responsibility under section 88(7) and (8) of the Local Governments Act. I would like the Minister of Local Government to listen to me and take action. The reports from the district public accounts committees are supposed to be submitted to the minister. The minister is supposed to compile these reports from the district public accounts committees and submit them to Parliament. That has never happened. 

What is happening is that reports of the Auditor-General of tertiary institutions, secondary schools and LC III sub-counties, divisions and the districts are all being brought to Parliament directly. How on earth can the Committee on Local Government Accounts of Parliament deal with this? 

Honourable minister, either you try and do this or you might need to commission a study to review these processes because it is simply not working. There is no way you can expect the Committee on Local Government Accounts of Parliament to handle subcounties, municipalities, divisions, districts and still be able to report within six months. We also have a problem with how the reports are tabled. Yesterday, the reports we were handling were for 2012.

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, the issues as raised by hon. Reagan Okumu are very pertinent. However, as the Shadow Minister for Local Government, I have always been looking for an opportunity to request you for a day when this Parliament can talk about the status of decentralisation in the country.

Mr Speaker, the districts that I have interacted with have lost confidence because they have been overrun by the central Government. Nowadays, the ministers in various ministries go and work in the districts directly. Even regarding the PACs that we are taking about at district level, the chairpersons have resorted to appointing their campaign managers to chair them.

Mr Speaker, decentralisation, as a policy in Uganda, is failing. Every other day, the districts that we interact with tell you about their lack of capacity. I do not intend to pre-empt what we are discussing in committees now, but the districts have reached a situation where they are writing to the ministries to take away certain responsibilities from them. In districts like Buikwe, for example, they are saying, “We can no longer manage Kawolo Hospital; can you take it away?”

Therefore, Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay for this House to appoint a day to talk about the status of decentralisation in Uganda? Otherwise, all these problems we are getting regarding service delivery are because the districts do not have capacity anymore to do their work. They do not have staff and councillors and chairmen no longer have morale because of poor pay. Therefore, the whole country is in disarray and I do not know what my - (Interruption)

MR OGWANG: I would like to thank the Shadow Minister for Local Government for raising this matter. Mr Speaker, on Tuesday, my district had a council meeting. It was very unfortunate because whereas we, Members of Parliament, were elected and inducted, I do not know whether all of us here are aware that councillors at the local government councils at district level have not been inducted to date.

I do not know whether all of us are aware that districts do not avail councillors with information on what is required for them to monitor the Government programmes that we are talking about. Therefore, there is a big problem in local governments and I am happy that the minister is here.

It is worse with lower local governments. They lack even the basic tools to do their work and these include the Local Governments Act and the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Therefore, when you talk about us reviewing the status of decentralisation, I will personally second the motion, which is going to be moved by hon. Nambooze. 

It is too much and we must accept the realities on the ground in line with the decentralisation that we are talking about. That is the information I wanted to give you, honourable colleagues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is not the issue that was raised. The matter that was raised was the issue of accountability. My advice to hon. Nambooze is, if you want that debate, it cannot be caused by the Speaker but you can cause it by a motion that would come to the House and we debate exactly what you are proposing that the House should debate. 

It should come by a motion. I cannot sit here and say on Monday or Tuesday at 2 O’clock we will debate the status of local governments or decentralisation in Uganda. I do not know under what rule I would be proceeding on. Therefore, work under the rules and bring those motions that will lead us to have that debate that you know and feel is important for the House to have. That will be the proper way for us to handle it.

However, right now we are dealing with the issue of accountability and the role of Parliament in this. On what matter do you rise?

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Reagan Okumu for raising this issue. The strength of local government public accounts committees is being weakened even more because the central Government has appointed regional audit committees. I hope the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is aware of this. 

The district public accounts committees are supposed to get reports from the internal auditor of the district and the Auditor-General. They are supposed to examine them and then submit to council. However, Government has appointed regional internal audit committees, which now override the district public accounts committees.

What we are discussing is very critical, to the extent that even a primary school or a subcounty, which wishes to open a bank account, no longer seeks for mandate from the council but has to seek the mandate from the Accountant-General. However, he has confessed that he cannot do this. I think that the Minister of Local Government may need to give this further study. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.26
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Like my colleagues have spoken, we thought that decentralisation was creating a base where services would be taken closer to the people and that is what the majority of the population think. However, like you have heard from many of the speakers, services are not being taken closer to people but rather problems.

When we go to the issue of accountability, from the first day to the last day, we always have backlog. We have talked about the subcounties that were presented yesterday, but there are a huge number of them that were presented last year and some the year before last year and they have never been considered. You know the number of subcounties that we have in the country. 

We are of the view that in the interim, as the minister carries out a study on how we can revamp the decentralisation system, and as we consider the issue that hon. Nambooze has raised, – I proposed this to the Members who are working on the rules – as a temporary measure can we say that the district public accounts committees concentrate on the books of the subcounties and town councils. This will enable the parliamentary committee to concentrate on the books of the municipalities and districts, and it will help us to at least release some pressure on the backlog.

However, there is a problem with the appointment of the district public accounts committee members. Some chairpersons have appointed their campaign managers, irrespective of the competencies that they have. The other problem is that these people are supposed to hold the Chief Administrative Officers with their staff accountable, but it is the same group that is supposed to facilitate them to go to the field. Therefore, a majority of the members of the district public accounts committees are never facilitated by the Chief Administrative Officers for fear of them finding out the reality and holding them accountable.

During our meetings with the district public accounts committees, we realised that there is another problem of their reports not finding their way to the district councils. When a report is made, these people again give it to the Chief Administrative Officer, who is supposed to present it to the district executive committee and then the secretary for finance takes it up to the district council. When a Chief Administrative Officer sees that the report concerns him, he does not present it to the council for debate. Many times, you will find that even these public accounts committee Members cannot access council because they are not councillors. 

Therefore, we suggest that we use a similar model in Parliament, where the committee of Parliament handling local government accounts is a committee of sitting Members of Parliament. If we think that these reports must find their way into council, then we can also bring up the issue of ensuring that its councillors who become Members to this committee go down and access the council. 

We should also consider the capacity levels. As hon. Ogwang said, local governments complained to us that the ministry never put aside some money to have them inducted. The majority of them – (Interruption)

MR SSEMPALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know of a district public accounts committee, which is headed by a 69-year-old grade II retired primary teacher. In that situation, it becomes terrible; I do not think it is even possible to get results from there. Thank you so much. 

MR SSENYONGA: Mr Speaker, I have been part of the local government for quite some time. We did approach the Committee on Public Service and Local Government here several times. Most of the councillors are below senior four level; some are dropouts of primary five or six. The reports from the district public accounts committees are supposed to be submitted to the executive committee for scrutiny, and they are at the mercy of the executive, - mayors and whoever comes - who refer the matter to the council if they so wish. At the end of the day, you are deliberating on a matter which only you and the town clerk or the Chief Administrative Officer have knowledge about. 

This is why we came up with a recommendation, when I was still working with the local government, that one must have a minimum level of education at least for districts and municipalities. Otherwise, we shall continue lamenting until Jesus comes in 2040. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This was a procedural matter that was raised and I was going to rule on it but I allowed this because the matter is dynamic. Please, roll it up.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, in my conclusion, I would like the House, in the interim, to allow the Committee on Local Government Accounts to handle the reports of the districts. In order for Parliament not to miss out on its accountability mandate, they can handle the districts, divisions and municipalities as the minister carries out his research and possibly as we get a review and a full report on the performance of decentralisation. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think that the law is clear. The Local Governments Act, sections 88(7) and (8), are very clear; so, the issue of asking the Committee on Local Government Accounts of Parliament to get involved at the district does not arise. The issue of leaving the public accounts committees of the district to only deal with part of it does not arise because the law is clear. 

What does the law say? In subsection (7), it says, “A local government public accounts committee shall examine the reports of the Auditor-General, chief internal auditor and make reports…” In subsection (8), it says, “The local government public accounts committee shall submit its report to the council and to the Minister responsible for local governments who shall lay the report before Parliament.” 

Therefore, it is this report, which is laid here by the minister that should go to the Committee on Local Government Accounts of Parliament. They would have processed the whole thing and the committee of Parliament would now only deal with what the minister has presented. That is how it was intended to work. However, it has not been working that way because no report has come from the minister; no report has been filed from the Ministry of Local Government. Can you imagine the parliamentary committee going to subcounties? It is simply impossible. 

2.35
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Tom Butime): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I have a lot of respect for the former ministers of local government. I think they had good leadership skills and did a fantastic job. Therefore, I will not stand here and criticise them. However, I am now the one in the chair and I can assure you that I will abide and act according to the law. 

I looked at the list of the various reports and I noticed that even the one presenting them could not properly read the name of one of the subcounties. I wondered to myself why there was need for all this voluminous business. However, apparently, according to the law, the Auditor-General reports to Parliament. Therefore, we have to reconcile what you have just directed with the law. I can guarantee you that I will follow the law as stipulated. 

Regarding decentralisation, I can assure this House that there is no ministry that will override the law as far as decentralisation is concerned. We shall strictly follow the law, and we know what to do. Local governments supervise local government institutions in that jurisdiction. However, that does not stop the mother ministry from handling matters pertaining to a health centre III, for example. If Ministry of Health officials came, they would not be stopped from supervising and monitoring what is going on in a health centre III, health centre IV etcetera. If an official from the headquarters of the Ministry of Education and Sports went to the district, I do not think that he or she would be resisted; after all, there is a district education officer. 

The main problem is that service delivery has been hampered by the fact that all these ministries, at local government level, have not been comparing notes or even sharing responsibilities. In their thinking, once there is decentralised service, it is the local government’s responsibility. That is not true. As long as we are replicated in a district, it is our role as ministries to share responsibility. This is what was resolved in a meeting we had about one hour ago. 

Mr Speaker, in this kisanja hakuna muchezo period, for the next five years there is no doubt that there will be collegiality, comparison of notes, working together and harmony in the management of affairs in the decentralised districts. The Minister of Local Government will also carry out its supervisory work. If the need arises, I have no problem with dedicating a day to discuss matters of decentralisation and local government. I will work and discuss these issues with the Shadow Minister of Local Government, the Rt Hon. Speaker and the Leader of Government Business to create such an opportunity so that we can all come here and share in matters of decentralisation. 

Regarding induction, if there is anybody interested in inducting these new councillors or chairmen, it is the Ministry of Local Government. We would like to have informed and capable councillors, councils and leaders that are conversant with the law and with standards. It has been a matter of resources. 

I must say that this matter was discussed in Cabinet and a directive was given. While we prepare and look for funds to carry out induction throughout the country, the Ministry of Local Government was directed to write out a circular. That circular has already been written and dispatched to every local government, and it is on the modalities of how to manage their work as they await the actual induction. 

Mr Speaker, I can promise that tomorrow, I will provide copies to all Members of Parliament. They will be in their pigeonholes so that honourable members can have an opportunity to look at that induction circular, which is already at the districts. That will be followed by the actual induction when the resources are available. (Interruption) 

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I was following your explanation very critically. I remember that when we joined the council in 2006, the induction was done at the beginning. By 2011, when elections were held, induction was also done at the beginning. It is now over seven months and the councillors have started working but they do not know exactly what to do. 

The honourable minister is emphasising that he normally follows the law. I do not know what kind of law you are following. Do you have your own laws? The Rt Hon. Speaker was guiding the House and reading the law. However, I was following the explanation of the minister and I think we are not moving in the right direction. Please, be specific and tell us when you are going to carry out the induction of the district local councils so that we can pass on the information to the districts. 

MR BUTIME: Mr Speaker, induction is not in the law. There is no Act that stipulates that within the first five or three weeks, the induction course shall take place in the district. Induction took place in Parliament because of available resources. I am saying that as soon as resources are available, induction shall take place. I am not saying that it will but shall. I also said that we have actually issued a circular to assist these wonderful councillors to know what to do for the time being.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have some order? Let the honourable minister finish. Had you finished?

MR BUTIME: Mr Speaker, to wind up, I know the anxiety that exists in the entire country as far as the induction of councillors is concerned and we are working towards that. I have also said that the Ministry of Local Government will continue to carry out its mandate of supervising.

Lastly, I am ready to participate on that day when decentralisation and local government matters are being discussed, if that day is given. I am also saying that it is not yet in the law that induction shall take place 48 hours after elections. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you raised this matter.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I raised a matter on accountability but sometimes, as is the nature of this House, issues get diverted. I know that there are so many issues on local government and we could have another day to discuss this. However, this was specifically tied to the constitutional deadline of accountability committees clearing the audit reports within six months and the challenges therein. 

In the morning, we presented our position to the rules committee but alongside that, when the rules committee comes back to the House to amend the rules, there should also be the aspect of amending the Local Governments Act. On that particular aspect of accountability, I would like the Minister of Local Government to actively liaise with our committee on rules so that we normalise the situation because the way we are operating is not normal.

For purposes of improving the image of Parliament, the accountability committee on local governments will do the miracle by December and present a report to clear all that has been presented; this, I promise you. However, thereafter, we should normalise the situation and let things work normally. 

Otherwise, the image of Parliament out there is that we are not working, we are not doing anything because we are not looking at audit reports, we are not beating deadlines and the civil society are jumping and the donors are doing the same. The public is ignoring the important contribution of Parliament without looking at the magnitude of the responsibilities given to the different committees of Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this matter has been disturbing us and I think it is because of the gap that comes from the Ministry of Local Government, which the minister has undertaken to solve. 

If you look at our rule 170(1), it says, “Subject to the delegation of Parliament’s powers to the Local Government Accounts Committee under section 89 of the Local Governments Act, 1997, the Committee on Local Government Accounts shall be assigned the examination of the audited accounts in relation to the report laid before Parliament by the minister under section 89…” 

That has not been happening; so in the absence of that report, our own committee now goes to start looking at those things from the local governments themselves. This has been the gap that has been causing us these problems. Therefore, honourable minister, if you could pick this up and supply Parliament with this information, we would not be having the backlog that we have right now as Parliament would be heavily assisted. 

Regarding the day requested by the honourable member, if the motion is ready, we will be able to deal with that. Let us end that matter there.

Honourable members, you will remember that earlier I announced the death of hon. Andruale Awuzu. In the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have the family of the late hon. Awuzu. The House will be paying tribute to him, following an amended Order Paper this afternoon. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister will be moving that motion. They are here to join us in that and thereafter, they will proceed to Arua to join the rest of the family with the burial arrangements. I am sure that the mover of the motion will be able to guide the House as to the arrangements that will take place. Therefore, we will alter the Order Paper to accommodate this motion and also allow the family the time to go for this arrangement. 

Today we have mixed emotions in this House; we have both celebrations and sadness. In the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have Mr David Emong, the silver medallist from the Paralympics held in Rio, Brazil, and officials from the National Council of Sports. We will be dedicating a motion to Mr Emong David, who is a silver medallist. He is also here to receive this motion and that is why I am saying there are mixed emotions. After all, that is what life is all about; every time we celebrate and we also have sad moments.

We also have, in the public gallery, pupils and teachers of Dr Ambrosoli Memorial Primary School, represented by the honourable Prof. Ogenga Latigo and hon. Judith Akello Franca. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome.  

We also have pupils and teachers of Forest View Primary School represented by hon. Chelimo Paul and hon. Chemutai Evelyn of Bukwo. They are also here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome.

We also have teachers and pupils of Moyok Bright Parents Primary School and Mengya Parents Primary School, represented by hon. Mangusho Lawrence and hon. Chekwel Lydia, Kween District. They have come to join us and follow the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

There are Members who wanted to raise matters. I am going to ask them to endeavour to finish in a short time so that we can deal with the tribute motion. After that, we will deal with the rest of the Order Paper.

2.52
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under our Rules of Procedure, rule 48. I wish to let it be known to Parliament that I intend to move a motion seeking to introduce a private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Alcohol Drinks Control Bill, 2016”.

I have taken the option of moving this notice orally because I do not want to ambush Parliament. I would like all my colleagues and the entire country to be on notice to receive and debate this motion and the attendant Bill, which is a public health Bill.

Further, I take note that the Bill also touches on people’s liberty and hence, would require wide consultation. I, therefore, request that my honourable colleagues receive the proposed motion and Bill at the entrance and consult our people accordingly. 

Allow me, therefore, to make this oral notice and I promise to follow it up with a written notice to your office. I so pray. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, isn’t life very interesting? Two weeks ago, a Member was requesting this House to be granted leave to present a private Member’s Bill; I remember very well the honourable member now proposing to seek leave of the House arguing strongly that, that member should not even be allowed to present the motion. Now, she is giving notice of her own motion. I said it here. Life is really interesting. 

I said that neither this House nor any one of us has the prerogative to stop a Member of this House from seeking leave of the House to present a private Member’s Bill. The House can reject it thereafter but we cannot stop the Member from even asking. However, even that has to be interrogated later, because the Constitution in Article 94(4) is very clear that there is no limitation on the Member’s right except the financial provision limitation. However, our rules have made this proposal for seeking leave. In the process, we are using this leave mechanism to violate Members’ rights to proceed under Article 94(4). We may have to review these matters. 

Well, there is a ruling in the House by the presiding office then that the matter could not be discussed, so the House did not take a decision on whether to grant the Member leave or not. I will leave that as it is; I do not want to interfere with that. However, when the moment comes, that matter will have to be reviewed as to whether the Member can even be allowed to present her motion or not. I think that has even become an issue in this House - whether a Member can seek leave or not has now become an issue, not whether leave can be granted. We will leave that for another day. Notice has been given and received, but we shall handle it appropriately at the appropriate time. Thank you.

2.57
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

In 2010, calamity befell the people of Bududa District when they were hit by landslides and many of them lost their lives. It was a very sad moment for the country and for everyone. The survivors were told that they would be resettled in Kiryandongo District and they were 603 households. They were promised a house with a complete pit latrine, a water tank, two and half acres of land, among others. 

However, Government is taking so long to complete this resettlement programme. Since 2010, the Office of the Prime Minister has only managed to construct 101 houses, which are still incomplete because they do not have either a latrine or a water tank. It is only the houses that have been constructed by Habitat for Humanity, an NGO, and another NGO called G1, which has managed to construct 60 houses. In total, there are now 217 houses that have been constructed out of the 603 houses that were supposed to have been constructed and handed over to these people.

The delay has created two categories of citizens in the same place. Some are sleeping in houses and others under tarpaulins. To make matters worse -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please tell us what the urgent matter is.

MS KAHUNDE: Mr Speaker, the other challenge concerns the secondary school. These people were resettled in one of the ranches, which did not have people before. Therefore, it is very far for them to access the nearby secondary school; it is over 20 kilometres away. Children who sit for primary seven have to continue repeating from primary five to seven because they cannot go further with their studies. 

The other issue is that they have continued to remain under the Office of the Prime Minister. This has made it difficult for the district to integrate them with the local community, so that they can access Government programmes. 

Mr Speaker, their prayer is that Government prioritises the construction of the remaining houses and also establishes a secondary school to allow these children to continue with their studies. Also, that the Office of the Prime Minister hands them officially to Kiryandongo District Local Government so that they can benefit from the different Government programmes in the place. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, I said that you should be brief. I want only the urgent matters because we are really hard-pressed on time. 

3.00
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will liaise with my colleague, the Woman MP from Kiryandongo, and with my permanent secretary. 

I am aware of the programme that has been going on in Kiryandongo and I will continue liaising with her because her request has financial implications. I cannot stand here right now and say that we are going to do that. However, let me liaise with the Office of the Prime Minister and I will get back to the House and inform you on the progress.

3.01
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you all know, a few weeks ago, Uganda was hit by an earthquake and it majorly hit Rakai, the central part of Buganda and some parts of the west. It majorly hit Rakai but it was worse in Kakuuto County. I would like to appreciate the Office of the Prime Minister that supplied us with 100 bags of maize flour of 100 kilogrammes each, 50 bags of beans and other things. However, 1000 houses were affected and so, the things that were supplied like food stuffs, were not enough.

The worst scenario we faced yesterday and the other day, when we were trying to do more evaluation, is that people are not interested in food stuffs. They have their gardens, so they are interested in shelter because it was shelter that was affected. It is a very big problem; people are sleeping outside. 

Worse still, and this is very important, schools were affected. Fourteen schools were affected and children cannot start school yet schools are opening on Monday. Therefore, where are these children going to study from and where are they sleeping? This needs urgent attention from the ministries of finance, education and disaster preparedness. People were really bitter when they received food stuffs instead of building materials.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, when the incident happened, His Excellency the President instructed the minister to quickly do an assessment after giving a history of earthquakes in Uganda. The Office of the Prime Minister normally comes in, first of all to provide relief items that can handle urgent problems like food. However, when it comes to construction of schools, we have to work out a procurement modality to make sure that we have the iron sheets.

Since hon. Kyinyamatama Juliet has mentioned something on shelter for children, I think the Office of the Prime Minister can look for materials that can set up temporary shelters for the children that are going to school. I am committing Government to do this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable, please follow up with the Government Chief Whip and the departments concerned so that these matters can be handled. 

3.04
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. On Monday, 19 September, I visited Atutur Hospital, which is located in Kumi District, on the highway between Mbale and Soroti, for those of you who normally travel along that route. This was during the conclusion of routine monitoring of health services in my constituency. 

Out of curiosity, I requested to look at the register of outpatients and inpatients and what I observed was that the majority of disease prevalence in that hospital included malaria, typhoid and brucellosis. When I inquired from the medical in-charge whether people were being treated for those diseases, they told me that they were treating malaria, for which Government occasionally supplies drugs like Coartem and many others. For the other diseases, they informed me that they were not treated by Government as essential and therefore, the drugs were not supplied. This information took me aback. 

I would like to call upon the Ministry of Health to tell this House how essential medicines are sent to hospitals, so that my people can at least get essential drugs. Essential drugs may differ from place to place. If typhoid is prevalent in Kumi, why can’t the ministry use that information, which they have, to declare that disease prevalent and supply Kumi with essential medicines for typhoid or brucellosis? I would like the Ministry of Health to come up and tell us how they come up with essential medicines so that my people can receive treatment. Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Health will come here and explain how essential drugs are selected for various areas because I do not have the answer. She will come and inform us.

3.07
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to rise on an issue of national importance in regard to the situation of people suffering because of famine in Teso, especially the very vulnerable groups in Ngora. I was there the whole of last week and I returned yesterday.

Mr Speaker, I happened to meet the different communities in the district, especially those suffering from HIV/AIDS. They are in dire need because they can no longer take their drugs since the drugs need you to eat food. Apparently, there is no food and these people are very desperate. 

The expectant mothers are living in a very sorry state because of lack of food. You know as an expectant mother you need to eat well in order to build the immunity of whatever you are carrying - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would it be anything other than a child?

MS AMONGIN: In order to build the immunity of the foetus that you are carrying. I just wanted to find out if you were attentive. Thank you.

Mr Speaker, the situation is worrying. We have constantly raised this issue on the Floor of this House - the lack of food in Teso because of various factors. However, I would like to pray to the Government and especially the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees about this particular category of people - those on ARVS and the expectant mothers. 

I would like to imagine that I am pregnant and I have spent a day without eating - The same applies to breastfeeding mothers. Can a special arrangement be got to cater for these people in Teso and other places that are suffering from famine right now, with the meagre resources that Government has? (Interruption)

MS AMULE: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. Mr Speaker, I would like to add to what she has said. This matter has been debated in this House before - the status of famine, not only in Teso but also in Amolatar District, which is one of the districts that has suffered drastically.

Mr Speaker, aware of the fact that the major food in Lango sub-region is cassava, you have seen, in your pigeonholes, what has happened to Amolatar District. In addition, most of the members from her district and all other regions like Busoga, Buganda and Teso are actually harboured in Amolatar District. This is because we have about 53 fishing villages and people from all these neighbourhoods, up to Acholi where our Speaker comes from, are harboured in Amolatar. Therefore, if there is no food, this House should take note. Last week, I was in my constituency - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, are you debating now?

MS AMULE: No, this is the information I would like to give. Two parishes were asking me to buy for them 10 bags of posho so that they can at least take porridge. That is the status of famine that we are facing. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER9 Honourable members, I think the point has been made. We had a discussion on this matter of famine and shortage of food. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was supposed to liaise with the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and see what could be done. How far has that discussion gone, honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees has submitted a request to increase funding to cater for emergencies in the country to a tune of Shs 28 billion. I will be in a position to report to this House on Tuesday on how much we have been able to raise for them so that they can help the situation in the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We discussed this matter quite extensively and the issues keep coming up. I think you need to do something urgently to help the people.

3.13
MS FLORENCE WAMALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate my colleague from Rakai because they have succeeded in getting help from the Government.

Mr Speaker, on 11 August, Sironko District was hit by a landslide and on the following day, an assessment report was sent to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and the Office of the Prime Minister.  However, it is surprising that even after a month, not even a team has gone to Sironko to assess or give even psychological healing to the people of Sironko after this disastrous situation in the district. I am just wondering how disastrous a situation must be for the Government to act. Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I was not aware or I am not aware that when Sironko suffered the landslide, no team went on the ground to make an assessment. If I was aware, I would have caused it to happen. 

I would like to request that when colleagues write to ministers, they should give the Government Chief Whip a copy so that she can whip appropriately. However, I will go and interact with the minister so that he can brief us on what has happened and then probably, I will interact with her so that we mitigate the problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, extract the minute of that and forward it to the minister responsible.

3.15
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of public concern from Ngora County. Last weekend, I visited my county and went to about four health centres - health centres II, III and IV. When I visited them, I discovered a number of challenges.

The first challenge, which is very serious, is that all the essential drugs are not in the health centre IV in Ngora and there is no medical doctor. Can you imagine, even cannulas are not there for children! Coartem and the prickers for testing, especially for hepatitis B, are not there. We are a bit lucky because we have some vaccines. Unfortunately, there are no prickers. Last week, I bought some for Agu Health Centre but I could not buy for the other side because of the costs involved. I am going to visit them tomorrow and see what happens.

Mr Speaker, they told me the biggest problem is budgetary allocations. I am pleading with you and the ministry to make sure some of these issues are sorted out. Every day, we are burying people because there is no medicine. It has become a song. For me, I will not keep quiet because I was sent by those voters. My prayer is that the ministry comprehensively addresses the issues of the shortages of medicines in health centres in this country.

Secondly, the ministry should come and tell us why there is no medicine in Atutur; I am sure there is no medicine in Omoro, Abim, Sironko, Butaleja. That is why I am requesting the ministry to comprehensively tell us how we should address this matter. I thank you very much.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I believe what the bishop is raising-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is not the bishop.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: He is not the bishop? When I visited his constituency, he was being referred to as a bishop. I am sorry, hon. Abala.

What he is raising is not different from what has been raised by the honourable member from Kumi. I committed to inform the Ministry of Health to come here and specifically tell us how drugs are selected and explain the general lack of drugs in hospitals. Therefore, I am committing myself again to go and instruct the Ministry of Health to come –(Interruption)

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our Government Chief Whip presented names of ministers here. Also, in this same Parliament, the ministers requested their number to be increased to ease efficiency. 

Mr Speaker, Ministry of Health has four ministers. This is a House of representatives but at this material moment, the Chief Whip continues telling us that she is going to task the minister. Among the four ministers, none can attend to the people of Uganda in Parliament? Is it in order to continue having four ministers in the Ministry of Health if they cannot come and tell the country about what they are suffering from? Until when are we going to continue referring to them when the Prime Minister and the Vice-President are here? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, to who is the point of order addressed? You cannot address a point of order to the Speaker. I do not know how to rule for or against.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I will not get tired of encouraging my ministers to bring information to this august House because that is their duty. From the way we are progressing, maybe, it will require ministers to volunteer information in terms of statements written and laid on the Table so that we constantly inform Members of Parliament about matters that seriously concern our constituencies.

Mr Speaker, I conclude by assuring this House that the Ministry of Health will come here and tell us about essential drugs, how they are selected and also why the health centres IV do not have medical doctors like hon. Abala said, and yet I know the policy requires a medical doctor in every health centre VI.

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, thank you. I would like to ask whether we are moving well procedurally. This is because Members continuously raise some issues on the Floor of this House but we rarely get responses and yet we really deserve these responses as the representatives of the people.

Mr Speaker, I am, therefore, wondering whether raising issues in this House is helpful to the populace that we represent out there. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to be giving timeframes after a Member has raised an issue on the Floor of the House so that a responsible person or a line sector responds to them and we get some of them off our plates?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are moving very well. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE AWUZU ANDRUALE, FORMER MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT, VURRA COUNTY

3.23
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I stand here to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Awuzu Andruale, a former Member of Parliament for Vurra County. This motion is moved under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received, with grieve, the sad news of the untimely demise of hon. Awuzu Andruale, which occurred on Wednesday, 21 September 2016 at Arua Referral Hospital;

AND WHEREAS the late hon. Awuzu Andruale died after succumbing to diabetes;

NOTING THAT the late hon. Awuzu Andruale was a holder of a Bachelor’s Degree in Civil Engineering from Nairobi University and also completed the Young Officer’s Military Engineers’ Course at the Royal School of Military Engineering, Britain;

RECOGNIZING THAT the late hon. Awuzu Andruale served diligently in several capacities including, Chairman Board of Directors of National Enterprise Corporation, board member of National Housing and Construction Company, Minister of State for Local Government and Minister of State for Works, Transport and Communication;

APPRECIATING THAT the late hon. Awuzu Andruale was a patriotic, distinguished, hardworking and diligent citizen who greatly contributed to this nation with excellence and integrity;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:
1. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda.

2. 	That Parliament takes congnisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late hon. Awuzu Andruale to this country.”

I signed as the mover of the motion on behalf of the Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, Government Chief Whip and hon. Atiku. The motion is properly before the House, would you like to speak to your motion.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Mr Speaker, it is indeed with great sadness that Government has learnt of the demise of our colleague, the late hon. Awuzu Andruale, which occurred on Wednesday, 21 September 2016 at Arua Regional Referral Hospital after a long illness.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the late hon. Awuzu Andruale was born on 29 September 1940 to late Mzee Kilopa Awuzu and the late Norah Golya all of Arua District.

Education

The late hon. Andruale Awuzu attended his junior education at Arua Junior School. He later went to Kings College Buddo for his school certificate, Royal College Nairobi for his advanced level certificate, Nairobi University for a bachelor’s degree in civil engineering, and Royal School of Military Engineering in Britain for a young officers’ military engineering course.

Career 

In 1966, immediately after attaining his qualification in civil engineering, engineer Awuzu joined the Uganda Army as a cadet officer. On completion of training, he was commissioned to the rank of captain and was deployed as an engineer army officer until 1971 and chief engineer from 1971 to 1974. This was because of his dedication, determination and patriotism to serve his country.

As a professional engineer, hon. Awuzu would have joined any other lucrative organisation for a job, but he chose the army which many people fear, thinking that when you join the army you may die quickly. It was also thought that the army was for no knowledge - those who have not read. However, engineer Awuzu proved that wrong.

From 1975 to 1996, the late hon. Awuzu ventured into self-employment when he set up his private engineering company called ND Avenue Engineers. Later on, however, Government appointed him a board member of National Housing and Construction Corporation where he served between 1992 and 1996. He also served as a board member of National Enterprise Corporation (NEC), the production wing of the army.

Political Life

Mr Speaker, because of his commitment and love to serve his people, the late hon. Andruale Awuzu offered to serve the people of Uganda and in particular, the people of Arua as Member of Parliament. He was, fortunately, elected and he took over the constituency from the former Second Deputy Prime Minister, Dr Eric Adriko, who also was a member of that constituency.

On his first attempt as a Member of Parliament for Vurra County, on assumption of his duties as Member of Parliament, His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni gave him additional assignments by appointing him first as Minister of State for Local Government, in which position he served until 1998. His Excellency then transferred him to Ministry of Works and Transport, where he put him in charge of transport, a portfolio he handled until 2001 when he voluntarily opted out of elective politics. 

Community Service

Mr Speaker, from 2001 up to the time of his demise, the late hon. Awuzu was involved in private consultancy and social development projects such as churches, women development and youth activities. During his free time, he would also get involved in African music and play hockey as a goal keeper.

Cause of Death

Mr Speaker, the late hon. Awuzu died at Arua Referral Hospital after losing the battle to diabetes and hypertension, which he has battled for a long time. He is survived by four widows - the first lady is Naima Awuzu, followed by Jessica Awuzu, Peninah and then Eunice Ezaru – and 18 children out of these four wives, 13 girls and five boys. They are all university graduates. What I probably could say is that much as hon. Awuzu was a Christian, he was also a typical African who married four wives against his own faith. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I take this opportunity to convey my sincere and heartfelt condolences to the family, widows, children and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished, industrious and enterprising son of Uganda. May God rest his soul in eternal peace. In my religion we say Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi raji'un. I beg to move. Thank you.

3.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, on behalf of the Opposition in and out of Parliament, I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Awuzu Andruale. Reading through his biography and having listened to what the Prime Minister has said, we realise that we are mourning a great African leader. Our condolences go to the family, people of Arua, West Nile, Parliament of Uganda and the whole country at large.

When you consider the time this great African we are talking about lived, when Africans considered marriage for their children to be the key issue, he opted for education, a virtue that many of our people have not considered seriously. We have lost a leader who had 18 children and we are celebrating his life as a father who ensured that all of them attended school and graduated. 

For a majority of us, when we join public life, we tend to forget our families. It is even worse for us, the politicians, because we are taken up by constituency demands and public work, which sometimes is not appreciated, at the expense of grooming your own children. We are here to celebrate the life of a true African man, husband, father and yet well-polished leader. 

We would like to thank God for the gift of hon. Awuzu and pray that a majority of us pick a leaf from him and give time to our families and see our children through school. I would like to urge Government - The same schools our children are going through are the same schools the Awuzus went through. However, we are not seeing the quality of children getting out of schools to the level of the late hon. Awuzu; what has happened to our country? 

As we mourn the gallant sons and daughters of this country, we should look back at the way we are handling our systems. Yes, he is dead and we are here mourning him, but it would have even been right for us to speak about the late hardworking patriotic man while he is laying in state before us. I wonder why the practice has changed. Mr Speaker, we have lost our dear ones and we have always brought them to Parliament so that we make remarks about them as we see them before us. The late Awuzu served this nation. We have brought former Members of Parliament to this Chamber. He was not only a Member of Parliament but also a former minister. It would have been important for us to talk about this charismatic leader while we view him, Mr Speaker. We have done it before and would not be re-inventing the wheel. I wonder why the situation has changed. I pray that such senior citizens are accorded the respect they deserve. 

Mr Speaker, as we eulogise here in Parliament, we should also be able to consider the cries of the people out there. When everybody was speaking before this motion was read on the Floor, people were talking about the deplorable situation in which the health facilities of this country are. We may not have missed a point when we talked about this. I would like to say that much as the colleague has fought with the sickness he had for a long time, we can say that some lives would be saved if our health facilities were worked on and improved.

He is lucky that he has left behind some children who are doctors. It is unfortunate that they could not save their father even when they are struggling to serve many of the Ugandans. That is the unfortunate thing about death; even when you have people around you who are ready and willing to give you a shoulder to lean on and possibly give you support to live for the next minute, death comes and only God can say “no” to it.

We pray that as we say bye to our loved one, we also consider when that time comes and people are speaking about you; what will they say? When you hear echoes coming from the people he served when he was still Member of Parliament, they will say he was a uniting factor and a man who talked about road infrastructure, unity of all people despite their political and religious affiliation.

Some of us are here fuelling conflicts and disunity. We better rethink and ask ourselves, “when I die, what will be said about me?” Will people say, “we have lost a mother, father, uniting factor and a Member who everybody personally feels they have lost?” Mr Speaker, it is sad that at a time when our country is at crossroads, we are losing mature citizens who would even have the courtesy to say, “I think enough is enough, Mr President; some of us went through it and we voluntarily left politics and so you can voluntarily retire.” Such people are the ones we are losing. 

This world is a stage where each one of us comes and plays his or her part. Awuzu, you played your part and the country will miss your works but your family will dearly miss you. God gave us and has taken away. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you.

3.43
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for considering this motion at a short notice. We learnt of the demise of the former Member of Parliament for Vurra County yesterday by noon, and I am glad to be one of his sons-in-law.

Mr Speaker, hon. Awuzu has been a role model for us who are young in the political arena. I saw him when I was still a student and on many occasions, I also sought for advice and guidance from him. While Member of Parliament for Vurra County, he acted as a patron for students from West Nile region. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, if you consider the period in which he served in this Parliament and also before he joined active political life, you can agree with me that the gentleman that we are going to lay to rest on Saturday has had an invaluable experience of the politics of this country, right from independence to the time he died. Let us take into consideration the period he served in this Parliament, the time before we came or even joined active political life; you can agree with me that he was a living dictionary of the political experiences of this country. 

I vividly remember travelling with him during the dry and muddy season. There are times it would take us a full week to travel all the way from Arua to Kampala and back and then our goods would get stuck on the roads and perish. When the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) was fighting between Pakwach and Karuma, human beings were abducted and merchandise and property, including vehicles and buses, got burnt. Most of these things happened during the reign of our fallen father. 

Mr Speaker, what we can remember him for is looking at this suffering and asking Government to act on it. Now that there is a beautiful road all the way from Karuma to Arua, from Vuura to Oraba, we partly give him the credit. This is because it was him and other honourable members from that region that advocated for the tarmacking of this road. I think that has played a big role in the economics of the West Nile region. West Nile now contributes Shs 14 billion plus annually to the economy of this country and this is partly due to the advocacy he did. As the minister then, he also made sure that this infrastructure appeared in the ministry’s plan of action. 

Mr Speaker, as I said, I speak as a member of the family. The late was a passionate person. He loved his family. When the General was presenting the motion here and he mentioned the number of wives he had and the number of children, some people murmured. However, he stood out to provide for his children and gave them a chance to pursue their education until they rose up to the last ladder. As I speak here, one of his daughters is working in Namulonge and she holds a PhD in Plant Pathology. My wife is a master’s holder. Most of the girls are master’s holders and they are still rising in the education ladder. 

Therefore, the message he passed on to his children while they were growing up has been kept alight. For that, we think he acted as a role model that never abandoned his family and children. He did his part and that is why we see his children now playing a very big role in serving this country; he has not educated them in vain. 

The late had a history of diabetes and he collapsed just a few days ago. He was admitted in Arua Regional Referral Hospital until his demise yesterday. The plea that the Leader of the Opposition made here about lack of medicines and the ineffectiveness in most of our health units is something Government needs to take seriously. I know diabetes is a very difficult illness to manage and it is very costly. However, when you go to most of these hospitals, if you are a diabetic you have to foot the bill personally because most of them do not provide insulin. In most cases, the patients have to form associations and make contributions to be able to procure the insulin. Insulin is like a lifesaving drug; without it, you die. 

In the current situation today, people consider diabetes to be a disease for the rich, but it is no longer the case. Diabetes is now a disease for everyone. What happens to those who cannot afford to be members of these associations that help them to procure the insulin? I would like to pray that Government takes this matter seriously and begins allocating resources for this particular group. 

Just like the Leader of the Opposition has said, in actual sense we should have had our father lay in state for the public to view. He was a minister twice - Minister of State for Local Government and Minister of State for Works and Transport. Most importantly, he was a Member of Parliament of this honourable House. He is one of those who have left a legacy. I am sure the image of the Sixth and Seventh Parliament was something that was envied by some of us, who were still young and yearning to be here. I thought that it was also important if we did not rush this. The body should have laid in state; we would have paid respect while he was here in the House. Since this is a new precedent, I hope it will be kept like this for whatever reason. 

We will be laying him to rest on Saturday. I would like to invite all honourable members here and those that are out there to join us in Vuura County, Arua District, as we will be seeing him off as one of those who served in this very House. 

Despite the other discrepancies, I thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing the record of Parliament to capture this tribute. I think it is the most important thing. This motion concludes his political life and service to this country and rightly so. For that, we would like to thank you and pray that you will join us as we start the final journey in his life. I say this for God and my country. May your soul rest in eternal peace, Andruale Awuzu. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I propose this motion for debate, I would like to make a few remarks. We shall see how to limit the debate to allow the family travel upcountry for burial. 

At 7.30 this morning, Gen. Moses Ali called me and notified me of the death of hon. Awuzu. He died in Arua and burial is on Saturday. It would have required a special sitting of this House and transportation of the body from Arua to Kampala and back to be buried on Saturday. Since the body could not be here today, Parliament would have had to either sit either tomorrow or next week. It, therefore, became practically difficult for us to do this. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister suggested that we do a tribute motion, even if the body is not here, to recognise him and still go ahead with the burial on Saturday. 

It is not that any precedent is being set, but it is that the practicality of this particular matter imposed this to happen. That is why we have handled it in a pragmatic way. There is no other sentiment and other considerations except that, practically, it became impossible for the body to be brought here. However, the House still insisted that the tribute motion be presented and generally, agreed that we could have it. As you are aware, I have had to alter the Order Paper in order to accommodate this. Let us handle it as that. Let us take it in the spirit of this House that it is well intentioned to give good memories of hon. Awuzu.

Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Awuzu Andruale, former Member of Parliament for Vurra County; that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda on the demise of hon. Awuzu; that Parliament takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the hon. Awuzu. 

That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now. Honourable members, I do not how much time you are going to take; can we do two minutes each?  - You propose three? We shall then limit it to ten contributions. Is that okay?  We will start with the member for Kalungu East.

4.56
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (NRM, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking you, Mr Speaker, for that explanation. Some Members were not happy not seeing the body of the late here. However, I will also say that it is possible that circumstances may not permit. Recently, we lost hon. Kityo, who was also a senior Member here. He was from Mawokota but it was not possible to bring his body here due to similar circumstances. So, it is possible that we could not get his body here.

I would like to join all the honourable Members of Parliament here to mourn the death of a gallant son of Uganda, who I knew personally as a very hardworking and disciplined person that one would like to emulate. Studying in remote areas did not stop hon. Awuzu from becoming one of the best engineers we have had in this country. 

I would like to stand here on behalf of the people who come from Masaka to say that engineer Andruale Awuzu left a legacy there. One time, during his tours as Minister of State for Works and Transport, hon. Awuzu found Masaka District Local Government working on roads using labour-based mechanised technologies. He appreciated our efforts by one, ordering that the road we were working on using hands – the road from Nyendo to Kitovu Cathedral - be tarmacked. Until now, the Members of Parliament from this area will bear witness that the tarmac that hon. Awuzu ordered to be used there is the tarmac that we are still using on this road. 

Two, he also ordered his ministry to get one of the three graders that had been ordered for by Government for the country, to be given –(Member timed out.)

3.59
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here on my behalf and on behalf of National Enterprise Corporation, and also the security forces, to join my colleagues in paying tribute to comrade engineer Awuzu. 

I had the opportunity to serve under his leadership when he was the Chairperson of National Enterprise Corporation.(NEC) When he came to NEC, our chemistry mixed very well. Although he was a highly educated senior military officer, he was down to earth. He was a humble leader, a servant leader, and he offered his servants leadership and NEC progressed and prospered under his leadership. 

While working under his leadership, I found the late comrade, engineer Awuzu a very dedicated, patriotic peace loving Ugandan. During that time, there were some bit of instability in the West Nile region but he used to play both the roles of making sure that NEC progresses and at the same time going to the north to preach peace and  persuade those who had been misled to come back on track and be peace-loving Ugandans.

Comrade Awuzu was very patriotic. He loved his country, because to serve in the security forces you must be patriotic. He demonstrated that by constructing and improving rural industries. We started the army shop under his leadership; we even started the tailoring industry under his leadership. He was very practical and he knew what he would actually do to bring services closer to the security forces. So, NEC gained under his leadership. 

I, personally, and those who served under his leadership, gained tremendously under his wise leadership. I join my colleagues to pray to the Almighty to rest his soul in peace and comfort his family. I would like to assure the family that we join you in this sad moment and that we shall be with you to offer the guidance that you deserve. Your father –(Member timed out.)

4.03
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Madi sub-region in general and Moyo District in particular, and on my own behalf, I would like to extend our sincere condolences to the bereaved family members, to the Government of the Republic of Uganda, to the Members of Parliament and to the entire public for the demise of our beloved leader, hon. Awuzu Andruale.

My dear colleagues, the people of Madi sub-region do remember hon. Awuzu because of what he did for them, especially concerning infrastructure development. Most of our roads – the feeder roads and other access roads - were worked on by him and under his instructions. We are going to remember him for that.

We also remember him as a role model as was said before. As an engineer, a leader, a politician, an agriculturalist, he was a very good teacher, good family man and a peace builder. My dear friends, it was hon. Awuzu who resettled the people of West Nile from exile in Congo. When the people were in Congo and in Sudan, he worked tirelessly to make sure that our people are resettled and in the process he tried to bring peace in our area. Not only that, he worked as a moderating influence when there were peace talks between the then guerrilla leaders and the Government of the Republic of Uganda. We had UNRF I, UNRF II, West Nile Bank Front and so on. He was a moderating figure in that fight.

Family members, take heart; he is still alive. We shall continue remembering him because of what he has done. Mr Speaker, we are getting our medals on Monday and hon. Awuzu should get his posthumously. I hope he is going to be represented by one of the family members. May the soul of our gallant liberator, leader and servant rest in peace. Thank you very much.

4.05
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join this gallant House in expressing my deepest condolences to the bereaved family.

I would like to thank hon. Awuzu for the legacy he left. It will forever literally live on. The honourable minister served in the Ministry of Local Government and as Minister of State for Works and Transport. We are aware about two years ago, this country lost Shs 4 trillion that would have probably gone to help rehabilitate or reactivate our health system. Those are things that were never heard of during the distinguished service of hon. Awuzu. 

Mr Speaker, we should create a system as a country so that we begin appreciating the people that have left a distinguished mark on our country when they are still living. What we are saying right now is not heard by the deceased. I would love that we begin looking at the time after Parliament. I am interested in knowing what happened when he left Parliament. In other countries, the moment you leave Parliament, for example in the USA, they cluster you according to your profession. I would have expected the hon. Awuzu to probably have been appointed or signed up for a commission or elsewhere. We have to encourage a culture in this country that shows that there is life outside of Parliament.

There are many men and women in this country that have served but out there have been literally forgotten. We only get to hear about them again when something close to this happens. Mr Speaker, I would like to ask your leadership and this House to create a system where our brothers and sisters, our leaders, can continue serving their country outside of this House.

Hon. Awuzu, you made your mark and you left us a challenge. I will pledge to make this country better than you probably left it. Thank you.

4.09
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to a fallen gallant son of Uganda and to bring sincere condolences from the people of Mitooma to the family.

I worked with the late Awuzu in the Ministry of Local Government. He was minister of state and I was principal assistant secretary at that time in charge of finance and administration. He was a highly principled person, disciplined, quiet but very thorough in everything that he did. 

As colleagues have said, he was approachable and a true servant leader, kind and understanding. He was very admirable. His very presence commanded respect. He was a highly polished politician and not corrupt at all. As people have said, he was a role model. He leaves a huge challenge for us who are walking in his footsteps.

We have learnt that the late Awuzu had a big family -four wives and 18 children - but he was able to look after these children, able to see them through school and to be there for them. If only every Ugandan parent could do this, then maybe the issue would no longer be about the number but the quality of life. We would then try to debate about how the services can be provided to accommodate these numbers of quality Ugandans.

However, as it is, people just produce children and some of them are called “Museveni children”. They produce and think that the President or the state will look after them. That is the tragedy of the current nation that we are living in. 

May the soul of hon. Awuzu rest in eternal peace.

4.12
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the honourable colleagues and members of the family of hon. Awuzu in paying tribute to him.

Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I would like to say this: I associate myself with all the good things which have been said about hon. Awuzu. Death has a very important place in the African life and in human life generally. From it, there is something for the living to learn. As we prepare to bury him on Saturday, we should ask questions about this and questions which will apply to us who are here. 

The care provided to elderly people- In Uganda, we have children’s hospitals, women’s hospitals but I have not seen or I am not aware of the existence of elderly persons’ hospitals. There are many elderly people with special healthcare needs - diseases like diabetes, high blood pressure, etcetera - which need special attention. We must prepare for this and make sure that every corner and region of Uganda has a hospital to take care of the elderly people. We are going to pass through that road of aging, even if you have children.

I have seen elderly people in villages looking for care. I am not saying that hon. Awuzu did not have proper care. However, elder persons sometimes have big problems. The elderly people get scattered into different parts of the world. Therefore, there should be a home or hospital for them as a point of reference, close to home. My people in Arua, West Nile, very far there, - you may find somebody deep in Obongi moreover an old person – if they are to be taken care of, the doctors and the good systems are here in Kampala; they are very far. How do you bring these people here? 

Mr Speaker, during this moment of bereavement, therefore, I would like to draw your attention to planning for proper care for the elderly people. Hon. Andruale Awuzu, rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

4.15
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to the late hon. Andruale Awuzu. The people of Arua once more are mourning because they have lost another great son. We are still mourning the late Rt Rev. Fredrick Drandua - Bishop Emeritus of Arua - who died and now the late hon. Andruale Awuzu has added more sorrow to the people of Arua.

Mr Speaker, Andruale Awuzu was very intelligent. He was the first engineer in West Nile. He also made sure that he encouraged young men and women to go to school and take up this profession. One of those young men is my son. When he was studying engineering, I asked engineer Andruale Awuzu to give him an internship placement when they were constructing the Kapchorwa road. He encouraged him to finish up his job.

I got to know engineer Andruale Awuzu better when he was here as a minister. He did his work as a minister honestly and diligently. Many roads were constructed under his leadership. Kapchorwa Road is one of them, Fort Portal Road, Mubende Road, Koboko Road, Kaya Road and many others.  All these were done under him and he did this with honesty and the works were well done. We must praise him for the great work he did.

The late engineer Andruale Awuzu was also a very kind gentleman. He loved his constituency very much. He loved to see that women delivered in good health facilities and he sacrificed a lot of money to see that women delivered safely in his constituency. He was very hardworking, honest and well behaved in the way he did his work and everybody admired him.

To the family, he has been catering for his large family and I am sure he has some assets. He was very developmental and he had some houses. I know these are now in the hands of the family. However, I ask the family to make use of those assets he left behind to educate the remaining young children so that they realise their goals. 

The people of West Nile will continue to mourn engineer Andruale Awuzu for the great loss and the work he has done. My sincere condolences, on behalf of the people of Koboko and on my own behalf. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you very much.

4.18
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I associate myself with all the kind words my colleagues have said about the late engineer Awuzu.

Mr Speaker, a story is told of an old man who took his telephone set to a technician for repair after taking very long without receiving a call. He thought that the phone had a problem. However, after the phone was tested, the technician told him that the phone had no problem. This old man asked why it had taken people very long to give me a call. This is the dilemma our old people face; at times, we tend to forget them.

Mr Speaker, when we were school children, we were made to learn all the names of the ministers and their portfolios. Most probably, they were few those days. We came to know about hon. Awuzu through our teachers. I had just written a note to hon. Nankabirwa here that I expected her to be one of those people who went to school and studied about this man.

Mr Speaker, what I would like to say is that as a country, we should get a system of utilising and relating with our people who retire from service. As a country, we decided that we shall give only Shs 20,000 to any citizen who reaches 60 years and this programme was rolled out in some few districts. Even in those few districts, the old people have not received their money, and in other districts like Mukono, people are asking when they are going to receive their facilitation as the old people because it is not forth coming.

Mr Speaker, I have used this opportunity as we mourn our father to remind the country and myself and this Parliament that our elders are retired but they are not tired. They can be useful and they are very resourceful. It is very sad that we get to remember these people when they die, and some who are less privileged do not even get their names mentioned. 

I convey my sincerely condolences to the family on my behalf and on behalf of the people of Mukono Municipality. We, in Mukono, have a great relationship with the people of West Nile because of the Mehta factories; so in a way, we have also lost one of ourselves. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.21
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am at pains because my former colleague, the late hon. Awuzu, is no longer with us. I had wanted that he be ushered in here by our Sergeant-at-Arms, but it has not happened. 

This brings to my mind how we mourn our dear leaders. The late was a former minister and he served in various capacities. The late was an ardent supporter of the Movement, a peace lover and peace builder. However, he does not deserve to be mourned the way we are mourning him today. I am at pains because formalities must be put in place on how we mourn our great leaders. 

I would like to ask the Prime Minister, is he going to be given an official burial? That must be answered. Is Government going to take over the arrangements to give our gallant son a decent burial like we have done for others? It should not be in passing like we are doing now. We have seen people who have passed on but they have been brought here and we have really given them a decent send-off. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I still believe – Rt Honourable Prime Minister, you are representing Government; our brother died yesterday and you hurriedly organised this tribute without making full arrangements. It is not difficult for us to organise a chopper to get the body up to Kololo and we go receive the body and then bring the body to Parliament and pay tribute. (Applause) Now, the body is very far somewhere. We do not know how our brother is and yet we are saying we are paying tribute. 

I am at pains. I would have loved that the Sergeant-at-Arm would say, “Honourable Members, hon. Andruale Auzu” and we would come here and salute him. Now we are doing things as if we do not have any Government. We cannot get a chopper just from Arua to Kampala in just 25 minutes for us to organise to pay tribute to him? (Applause) No, I think we should do better. It should not be that we decide on who should and shouldn’t receive that; it should be a standard format. If, for example, hon. Okot-Ogong passes on, God forbid, you must have a grand entry and exit. (Laughter)

Therefore, Rt hon. Prime Minister, as I conclude, what arrangements do you have in place, as Government, for sending off our brother?

4.25
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Mr Speaker, you are forgetting me so quickly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you didn’t have a constituency before.

MR JAMES BABA: No, in the Eight Parliament, I had a constituency.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I meant in the Ninth Parliament.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, I also would like to pay tribute to the late Auzu Andruale, as a son of West Nile and nationalist who contributed immensely to this country.

It is a pity he has died but I would like to associate myself fully with what hon. Okot-Ogong said that a man, who has done so much for this country, deserves better. However, it is not too late. At least, we can compensate this now during the actual burial arrangements. I have seen the Prime Minister is taking copious notes; I am sure Government will give Eng. Andruale a befitting farewell to compensate for what has not been done to bring his body to Parliament.

Mr Speaker, this engineer who has died achieved whatever he wanted to in life. When we sat for Primary Leaving Exams, he achieved Grade 1. He went on to Junior Secondary and achieved Grade 1. Actually that year, him together with Eng. Dr Eric Adriku were among the 21 students in their class who all passed with first grade. Twelve of them went to Buddo to start secondary school education. That is why I am saying whatever this man wanted to achieve, he got it. He wanted to do engineering, he got it. As an engineer, he worked diligently. As a Minister of Works, supervising those works; he made sure if a road was to be seven metres, it would be seven metres. If a road was to be six inches thick, it was that. (Applause) The engineers of these days must take note. Don’t cheat the taxpayers.

The late Andruale wanted many children and he got them. He wanted four wives and he got them. This was a remarkable achiever, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) 

For us in West Nile, he was a pioneer engineer who did a lot for this country. We would like to remember him for the great work he did in our area, and of late, the foundation he laid for starting Muni University. He –(Member timed out.)

4.29
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I came here in 2001 as a Member of Parliament representing Mityana North in the Seventh Parliament. I found hon. Andruale Auzu here and he was in Cabinet. By then, like any other Member of Parliament, I had not acquired a House in Kampala. So, I requested Eng. Andruale Auzu to allow me stay with him at his home in Kyambogo. He hosted me for over three years and very many people thought I was his son. However, this is a man from West Nile and I was from central Uganda. I am saying this to show how nationalistic the person we are sending off was. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Andruale Auzu was a family man. He loved his family. He believed in himself. Very many men of this country have more than one wife, but they hide. You are not yourselves and when they ask you how many children you have, you always mention the two or three at home. However, hon. Andruale Auzu believed in himself and we are paying tribute to the rightful man. I would like to say this man was a real African; he loved what he was doing and he was there to pay the price for it. That is why he was able to educate all his children; he loved them all. I would like to appeal to colleagues to always emulate the late hon. Andruale Auzu. 

Mr Speaker, it may be impossible that whenever we are paying tribute to deceased friends and gallant Members of this House to always bring them in the House. However, I propose that given the mortality rate of this House - when I pass around here, I see very few people who served with hon. Andruale Auzu in the Seventh Parliament; we are very few still present in here. If our Rules could allow, at least for a portrait of such a fallen honourable member to be brought to the House so that people are able to know him, as we pay tribute for Members who may not remember him.

To the family and Mama, I would like to say we are part of the family. We are still with you even when Papa has left us. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

4.32
COL. TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge Central County, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I served together with the late Andruale Auzu in Cabinet. He was Minister of State for Works and I was Minister of State for ICT. We launched together the new driving permit system. My driving permit number is 00001 and his was 00002. All Members here with driving permits should know that mine was the first and his was second in the whole of Uganda.

He was a very humorous person. I had the opportunity of staying with him and this time not at his home, but at my village home. He stayed at my home twice and every time he came as the Minister of Works to inspect the Kampala-Fort Portal Highway, he would stay at my home instead of the famous Mountain of the Moon Hotel, which he very much liked. 

Like I said, he was a very humorous person. One day in the morning, he educated me on how to best harvest rain water because he was an engineer and was laughing at me saying that I was wasting resources; I needed to harvest rain water.  I cannot call the system of rain harvesting at my home the Awuzu system but he did correct all the mistakes, which were being done by the technicians about water at my house.

Being an engineer at his time; deciding to join the Army, he must have been a very courageous Ugandan. Being an engineer and he joined the army after his studies at Nairobi University because engineers at his time would have enjoyed the best. Isn’t it? After all they were very few. However, to have joined the army is a clear pointer that he was courageous and a first class Ugandan because many Ugandans feared and still fear to die. They think that when you join the army, you die the next day. 

However, some generals, brigadiers, colonels and captains are here. Some of us are standing here. So, it is not true that one can die as soon as they join the army. We should always remember that one can be highly educated, go to university – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up. 

COL. BUTIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me say that this engineer was a distinguished Ugandan who loved his country, served as a soldier, an engineer and a minister. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we will pause this motion here; we need to take a decision because we have two more motions coming up. Because of the circumstances as we agreed, this is how we needed to do it to hon. Awuzu.

I now put the question to the Motion for the Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Awuzu, former Member of Parliament for Vura County; that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda on the demise of hon. Awuzu; and that Parliament take congnisance of the services rendered and contributions made by the late hon. Awuzu Andruale to this county. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, just for the record, the issue of - as I explained earlier - why hon. Awuzu’s body is not here; it is not just him. There have been several others who were not able to be brought here - hon. Abola, who was a former minister and ambassador when he died his body was not brought here. 

However, there are circumstances that make it difficult for some things to happen. It is never in bad faith but just that the circumstances do not support it. Please let us take it in that spirit and move on. Thank you.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE WORLD TOURISM DAY CELEBRATIONS, 2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the circumstances, we have the Olympians and the Cranes people who are here and their pending motions. I think we will defer the statement by the minister to next week - the petition is a short one - we can receive it. And we can defer laying of papers - we need to conclude the motion on the Sustainable Development Goals before we deal with the two motions - there is a new motion on the winner of Paralympics and he is in the Gallery. We should give him the honour by having that motion presented so that we can do it when he is still here rather than do it another day and trouble him to come back.

Therefore, in the circumstances, I will alter the Order Paper to allow the motion in item No.8 to be presented now and after that, we will ask the minister to make some statement based on the ruling of the Speaker previously as we see how to conclude these motions. Minister of Tourism, you will have to do this next week. Thanks for your cooperation.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO MR DAVID EMONG FOR WINNING A SILVER MEDAL AT THE RIO 26 PARALYMPICS IN BRAZIL

4.40
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to move a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Mr David Emong for winning a Silver Medal at the Rio 2016 Paralympics in Brazil. This motion is moved under rules 46 and 221 of the Rules of Procedure.

The motion reads: 

“WHEREAS the 2016 Summer Paralympics, the Fifteenth Summer Paralympics games and major international multi-sport event of athletes with disabilities was held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil from 7 to 18 September 2016;

AND WHEREAS the opening ceremony of the 2016 Summer Paralympic took place on the evening of 7 September 2016 at the Maracana Stadium with the theme “Everybody has a heart”, the artistic portion of the ceremony featured sequences with themes around the culture of Brazil and inclusivity;

AWARE THAT in his opening speech, the International Paralympic Committee President, Phillip Craven invited viewers to see the true meaning of sports and the true definition of ability, explaining that Brazil, a country which has faced major challenges in the immediate past, paralympians will help them switch their focus from perceived limitation to a world full of possibility and endless opportunity. Paralympians will surprise you…” – (Interruption)- 

MS BETTY AOL: Procedure, Mr Speaker. While he is reading, we do not have copies of the motion for us to follow because most of still do not have iPads.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please can you give the honourable member a copy. There are copies and she has not got a copy. Give her my copy. Proceed.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The motion reads further: “…Paralympians will surprise, inspire and excite you but most of all they bring change. Said Craven;

AND AWARE THAT in total, 159 national Paralympic committees participated at the 2016 games with a total of 4,342 athletes taking part;

AND FURTHER AWARE THAT David Emong is the only Ugandan athlete who participated in the Paralympic Games in Brazil;

COGNISANT of the fact that David Emong, the lone athlete at the Paralympic Games, on the 17 September 2016 won a Silver Medal after coming second in the T46 men’s class of 1500 meter race in Rio. Emong came second with a time of 4:00:62 micro seconds while Algeria’s Nouioua Samir came first with 3:59:46 micro seconds, giving a difference of one second and 16 micro seconds. The 26 year old Emong who hails from Amolatar District, in Lango Sub Region emerged from fourth position to overtake Australia’s Roeger Michael who was in the second position;

FURTHER COGNISANT of the fact that this triumphant victory of Emong presents a rare and unique opportunity and platform for national unity, patriotism, national consensus for future development, and for the advancement and promotion of physical education and sports in Uganda for citizens’ wellbeing, health and productivity, with a specific focus on persons with disability;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that: 
1. 	Government supports the dream of David Emong of achieving a Gold Medal for the country in the 2020 Paralympic games scheduled to be in Tokyo;
2.	 Government recognizes Emong the same way Government did with previous athletes who brought medals to the country like Stephen Kiprotich, Dorcus Inzikuru and Moses Kipsiro among others;
    3. The President’s directive to support medallists with financial support should be regularly implemented;
    4. Government should take it up as a national programme to identify, nurture and promote persons with disability in sports.” 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is this motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the Minister of State for Sports, the Government Chief Whip, Minister of Local Government, hon. Kamateeka, hon. Nambooze, hon. Ssewanyana, hon. Akello and hon. Gutomoi. 

Would you like to speak to your motion but before you do that can we see the medallist David Emong rise? (Applause)

Honourable members, that is David Emong, the medallist displaying his medal in the VIP Gallery of this House. You are welcome.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, the hero of today’s motion, Mr David Emong, was born on the 10th day of September 1990 and today he is 26 years old. He was born in a village called Labongo Lworo in Akongo Mit Parish, Awelo Sub County in Amolatar District. 

In spite of his disability, his athletic skill was identified while he was in Primary Four, in Awelo Primary School in Amolatar District. 

Among the institutions that nurtured his talent were Awelo Secondary School, where he attended senior one, Akibua Secondary School, where he attended senior two and Gombe Secondary School, where he attended senior three up to senior six.

In 2010, under the great lakes championship that was held in Nyayo Stadium in Kenya, Emong made us proud, Mr Speaker, by bringing to Uganda a Bronze Medal in the 200-Metre race. In 2011 at All African Games in Mozambique, he again won a Bronze Medal in the 500 metre race. 

In 2015 at All African Games in Congo Brazzaville, Emong again further won a Silver Medal in the 1,500-metre race and on the 17 September 2016, just a few days ago at the Paralympics in Rio; he again made Uganda proud by bringing a Silver Medal in the 1,500-metres race in a record time of 4:00:62.

Mr Speaker, this is a progressive trend to be noted and to be proud of; that in all games that Emong participated, he brought at least a medal. He is therefore, our only hope for the Paralympics Games in 2020 and we are looking forward to a Gold Medal this time round.

Emong won the first medal ever for the country in the Paralympics. Let me hasten to add that this is an important achievement, which was not realised in a vacuum. For this reason, I wish to commend Government for the support rendered and which made it possible for David Emong to realise his outstanding accomplishment in the history of our country.

As Emong prepares for the next Commonwealth Championships, in London in 2019, All African Games in 2019 and Paralympics in Tokyo Japan in 2020, it is the wish and aspiration of Ugandans and indeed my wish and I believe of this August House too, that Government makes opportunities available to enable Emong win Gold and bring it to Uganda.

However, of interest to note, Mr Speaker, sportsmen and women in our societies come from deplorable life and Mr Emong is not an exception. When he left to perform on their individual merit, they take long to achieve, so we need to have these athletes nurtured in order for them to perform well and quickly.

We have produced, as a country, many sportsmen and women - we have the late John Akiibua who, in 1972, won a Gold medal from the Olympics; Justin Arop won Africa’s records on javelin. Unfortunately she died of poverty.
But we also have Davis Kamoga in the 1996 Olympics Bronze and 1997 Silver Medal world champion and of course, Dorcus Inzikuru who won a Gold medal in 2007. 

However, in 1994, a Member of this August House, hon. Julius Achon won a Gold Medal by borrowing running shoes from a Kenyan athlete in Portugal. Boniface Kiprop was twice in fourth place in 2004 and 2008 respectively, but he is now nowhere - some of these athletes die because of poverty after retiring.

Mr Speaker, we need to rise up and help sports in this country. In other countries, champions of Paralympics are recognised in a special way as they do with champions of Olympics and this is to give opportunity to persons with disability not to be discriminated against. 

As you are aware, Mr Speaker, sports bring unity, promote tourism and the economy of a country - Kenya, Ethiopia, Morocco and South Africa are known for sports among others and Uganda can do the same.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, may this motion be considered by this August House. I beg to move. (Applause)

4.52
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, I rise to second the motion moved by hon. Anthony Okello. Mr David Emong who we are talking about today is a young man whom I describe as self-motivated, obedient and dedicated to the talent God gave him. He comes from a humble background in a small village called Abongo Lworo. He comes from a small family and his father is just a humble church leader in that small village.

There are reasons why David Emong could not easily go to a good school until he had to struggle with the talent God gave him and that is why some of the well-wishers took him to study in various schools. Emong brags a lot about his education but most importantly he had to hold on the only gift God gave him as an athlete. 

Mr Speaker, Mr Emong that we are talking about is not a stranger to me because I grew up with him in the same sub county and parish before it was divided. I witnessed David Emong in trying to build up his career like running 39 kilometres to buy his mother a packet of salt, from his home village to Ochero Market, which is in Kaberamaido District on foot and back. 
 

That was one of the strategies he used to strengthen his ambition in order to become one of the greatest athletes in this country. I would really like to thank him for that. 

Persons with disability are looked at as people who cannot contribute much to this country. However, I have seen David Emong change that trend of thought. He has not only participated in the international and national athletics competitions but also within the district. He has been able to compete with the abled persons. That means he thrived above and over and disregarded people’s perspective that disabled persons cannot yield much. 

This has since given this august house reason to pay him tribute. From this great achievement, David Emong has restored pride in this country. He is the first of his kind in the history of Uganda to participate in Paralympic Games bringing to our country a silver medal. We are hopeful that in 2020 in Tokyo, he will be able to win a gold medal. 

It is against this background, Mr Speaker, that I second the motion to honour David Emong in this House and accord the same fare given to other medalists, who always bring pride to this country. He should be given what is befitting because in most cases, athletes need psychological and emotional comfort for them to perform better. I beg to move. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Mr David Emong for winning a silver medal at the 2016 Paralympic Games in Rio, Brazil; 

And that Government supports the dreams of David Emong of achieving a gold medal for the country in 2020 Paralympic Games scheduled in Tokyo; 

That Government recognises David Emong the same way it did with the previous athletes, who brought medals to this country; 

That the presidential directive to support medalists with financial support should be regularly implemented; and

Finally that Government should take it up as a national programme to identify, nurture and promote Persons with Disabilities in sports. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now. 

However, honourable members, as you know, there was a directive by the presiding officer, then Speaker of the House, Rt hon. Rebecca Kadaga, that matters of this nature should not be handled until the Minister of Education and Sports makes a statement on the issue that had previously been raised in the debate on our poor performance in the Olympics in Rio. 

This motion was moved by the Shadow Minister of Sports and Creative Arts, hon. Allan Ssewanyana, of Makindye West. I, therefore, pause debate on this motion similar to the one I made on the debate moved by hon. Hamson Obua on the Uganda Cranes and allow the minister now to make his reply to the statement previously made by the hon. Allan Ssewanyana. Thereafter, we shall see how to conclude the two debates on the two motions. Honourable minister, please proceed. Can you call the item and then we proceed properly? 

STATEMENT ON UGANDA’S POOR PERFORMANCE AT THE RIO OLYMPICS 2016: RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members - (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member - 

MR ALERO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The point I would like to raise is about item 9; it should also be included for the - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Honourable member, that is what I have just talked about; that is the motion by hon. Hamson Obua. Please proceed. 

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members, for giving me this opportunity to respond generally, as Government, on what was debated in my absence last week. I read the Hansard last night and I would like to appreciate the sympathy and contributions of some Members concerning the need for funding of sports in order for it to reach where it should be. 

Mr Speaker, in my response, briefly and quickly, I will show where we have come from, where we are and where we intend to go so that I can now tie together the Rio Olympics, the Uganda Cranes and the success of Mr David Emong in order for all of us to understand how the sports fraternity has been operating. If I do not do that, we shall continue talking a lot and claiming that the athletes are not funded. However, with the little resources, I think we need to know where we have come from. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to start from the budget of 2009/10 to date - the budget for the sports docket has greatly increased from Shs 3.14 billion, in 2010/2011 to Shs 4.03 billion; in 2011/2012 to Shs 4.26 billion; in 2012/2013 to Shs 5.2 billion; in 2013/2014 down to Shs 4.98 billion; in 2014/2015 up to Shs 6.97 billion; and 2015/2016 up to Shs 12.1 billion although my ministry requires about Shs 76 billion. 
Therefore, honourable members, with those meagre resources - (Interruption) 

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, it is on the Order Paper that the Minister of State for Sports should give us a statement. I do not know if I am still the only one without a copy of that statement. Otherwise, we do not have it, Mr Speaker. 
So, is it procedurally right for the minister to come without a statement and just read it from his head? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you submit this document for circulation to Members? Did you submit it to the Clerk’s office? 

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, the issue of disability was brought up today. After I had given my apology, there was discussion and debate on Wednesday in my absence though I got the Hansard last night and read it. 

According to the Order Paper, I am only giving Members a response and not a ministerial statement. I had also instructed my technical people to work on these responses so that I could give it to the Members but I thought it prudent to proceed, as they process the document for them. I am sure that within 20 to 30 minutes, the document will be here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a response to a statement that was already very well-articulated by the Shadow Minister of Sports and Creative Arts, hon. Allan Ssewanyana. There were sticky issues that the minister was asked to respond to. So should the minister respond by formal statement or should he respond to issues as they were raised in the course of the debate on the statement? 

Honourable members, this is to facilitate us to move. There are two motions that are tied up with this particular response. Can we allow the minister to respond to those issues for us to conclude the two important motions that are pending?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling; I will try to be quick. I would like to thank you, honourable members, for accepting me to present; I will give you the details. When my colleagues presented on the poor performance at Rio, Brazil - the reason why I have started with those figures is to show you where we have come from and what we have.

Mr Speaker, we spent more than Shs 600 million in the Olympic Games at Rio, Brazil. We have been getting medals in Commonwealth Games, in all African games and in World championships, but the uniqueness of the Olympic Games is that one cannot go there unless they have qualified to a level that is required for them to go there. That is why I congratulated even those who did not get any medal. Thanks very much for qualifying to represent Uganda in Brazil. (Applause) 

That is also the reason why we are saluting our brother, David Emong, for making it. Whereas others still say that they have not got anything, maybe for even these Olympic Games where Paralympics is part, we have got a silver medal.

In 1972 when we got a gold medal by the late Akibua, it was followed by another gold medal in 2012 and that was after 40 years. Since then, this is the third medal. The second medal was in 1986 in Atlanta Georgia, a bronze won by Davis Kamoga. The third one now, is by David Emongo. So, the statement that this particular year Uganda has performed poorly was not correct.

Secondly, when we talk about Uganda to have performed poorly, it was giving an impression that we were maybe the last – (Interjections) – no, I am getting to those, honourable members. In 10,000 metres, Uganda was number six; and in 5,000 metres; Joshua Sheptegeyi was in the eighth position. 
In marathon, Solomon Mutai, was eighth, in the whole world. (Applause) In 1,500 metres, Ronald Musagala was the 11th in the whole world and Stephen Kiprotich was in the 14th position.

This shows you - when they are giving medals, they take the first three positions, and those are for Gold, Silver and Bronze. 

Secondly, when we take a team - sports is unique from other activities – we don’t necessarily -  much as we all go to win gold medals, there is also the option of wanting to present our youngsters, so that they can also get exposed for them to win such medals next time. 

If you look at what Emong has done, progressively, he has been fighting for it and he has reached silver. We therefore need to salute our colleagues who represented us, first and foremost, for qualifying to go to Brazil. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, 130 countries did not get a single medal and Uganda is not among them, after getting this silver medal. (Laughter)

When it comes to Commonwealth games, we have won several medals. When it comes to African games and when it comes to world championships, we are there; I will be giving you that list. However, when I was reading the Hansard, all I got is that we have not been performing at all, this minister has done nothing and when you come to see all these medals of Commonwealth and African games - even these Gold medals were won during the period I was a minister although you keep saying I have not performed; we just need to be serious.

I would also like this to come out. As far as sports is concerned, with the meagre resources for which I was very happy when people said there is need for funding – by the way, we are talking about sports, which is a component of the Ministry of Education and Sports. I am the Vice President for Africa; Sports is an independent ministry and we are moving on. 

There are so many sports disciplines that have come on stage now. Disciplines like kick-boxing and wood-ball, where we were represented in the world cup, have all come on stage. In Netball Uganda has been represented at the world cup. So, members need to appreciate that there is effort that has been made; we just need to put in more resources.

If you look at the primary level competitions – I have decided to bring in this one very quickly, for the Members to at least appreciate. We have been holding primary school competitions in this country and secondary school competitions of East Africa in this country and the recent one being in Kenya. We came number two. 

The previous one was in Kigali and we were number one and the same applied when we competed in Lira East African games for six countries. But when I was reading the Hansard, the record is as if nothing takes place in secondary schools.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that when you are developing sports, you also have to look at the infrastructure. As we talk, the high altitude training centre at Terieti is progressively moving; we just need more support. Also as we talk, water has reached up, the school was relocated and we have built a new one, power has reached up and the road is being constructed. With availability of resources – because for the kick-start, we need Shs 25 billion and this financial year, they allocated us Shs 5.3 billion. 
The regional stadium – most of the study work has been completed. We cannot talk about developing sports without developing the infrastructure and all those rotate around money. We need to increase the budget so that at the end of the day, we can see how much we have performed.

On our current programme, I would like to inform the House that we are coordinating education institutions’ national champions for primary, tertiary and secondary schools. We prepare and facilitate teams for East African games, and we have not missed any opportunity. So far, the National Council of Sports has issued a Statutory Instrument of 2014, to bring sanity among the associates and it is already working for us to do accountability.

When I was reading the Hansard, the record says there is need for the law. Mr Speaker, there is a Bill, which is already with the first Parliamentary Counsel. We are pushing it to come here. This is going to address the entire problem and repeal the 1964 Act. 

Honourable members, the issue of tax exemption on sports equipment and money generated from games - we are already negotiating with the Ministry of Finance and we have already reached – in fact what delayed us on that issue was how we do it. We were asking ourselves whether any person who imports balls and the like should be exempted or not. We have to come up with a formula that should only go for those particular institutions that are promoting sports.

Again as I read the Hansard, it occurred to me that we only welcome these people but do nothing for them. Mr Speaker, it is on record that those athletes who have excelled - we do not only stop at welcoming them. We built a house for Ms Dorcus Inzikuru and UPDF construction unit did it. Even when she was still active, Inzikuru used to earn about Shs 3 million per month.

We built a house for Kipsiro. We gave him a vehicle and built a house for his parents. Kiprotich was not only promoted but was also given a vehicle and money.

As we talk now, we have got a list of members including our current David Emong who are being paid monthly. Now that he has won silver medal, his amount is going to increase from Shs 1 to Shs 3 million. Gold medallists, get Shs 5 million per month. That is the motivation that we have set. (Laughter) It is on record and not for argument’s sake. 

Mr Speaker, it is good for somebody to come on the Floor of Parliament to talk about some issue but with evidence. For instance, when I was listening here - and I am now giving a general picture that Government promised the Cranes $10,000 each and instead gave them $1,000. A Member of Parliament should come on the Floor with evidence. Government has never promised $10,000 and it has never given $1,000 to any of the Cranes players. Those were rumours - (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not intend to interrupt the hon. Minister for Sports. However, when we come to Parliament and present issues, we do it in good faith for the good of the people who sent us here. However, sitting there and looking at the demeanour and the tone of the minister, it is as if he is engaging in battle or a quarrel with the person who moved the motion.

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the hon. Bakabulindi, the Minister of State for Sports, to react as if the Shadow Minister for Sports committed an offence and in fact invited him for battle when he raised these important issues about the performance of our team in the Olympics? Is he procedurally moving well in that tone? Can’t he adopt a better and friendly way of addressing this matter? I beg for your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have known hon. Bakabulindi from the time he was a backbench Member of this House up to when he is a minister. I think he has done very well so far. Except I am also noticing that he is beginning to – so, honourable minister, please maintain the good character. (Laughter)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my colleague. Incidentally, my colleague, the Shadow Minister and I are friends and we compare notes. I thanked him by the way for bringing this motion because indirectly there is a way we have to be together in promoting and generating more money for sports and I salute him for that. Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, I think that is why I was not pushed into the Ministry of Gender – it was because I was a sportsman, a team manager and I believe that whenever I talk about sports, you should be energetic. I am man enough when it comes to that and she knows it. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker and honourable members, with our meagre resources, we have tried to motivate our athletes. As we talk - and that was a suggestion of the President that much as we have got unemployment, what do we do for them in order to sustain them?

Some of them have been absorbed by Police - about five, four by Wild Life Authority and one in Prisons - you know Kiprotich and many more will be given that opportunity. I think this is what we want in order to create jobs for them, as a way of motivating them so that we can move to motivate the young ones to come on board and achieve more. 

We continue to negotiate with private partners and we are encouraging - we even discussed it with the President that there is need to invite the private partners on board for them to invest more in sports within the country. I think we are moving towards that.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, when it comes to the Cranes - I was a footballer and a team manager  - I want to thank hon. Otto and the rest who have continued with the fire of maintaining the Parliamentary Football Club of which I am one of the founders for those who did not know.

When I was reading the Hansard, I came across a record where some member suggested that they should be putting some people who understand sports in that ministry but they had not read about my background.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And also remember that the Speaker was the goalkeeper in the first team.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Yes, and the Speaker, under my leadership by the way, the Chairman of the Parliamentary Football Team, he was my goalkeeper in Arusha and he made sure that we do not conceive a lot of goals. (Applause)

As I wind up, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank all the Members who contributed - when it comes to the Cranes, whom I salute so much because they did it for us, we have already booked Cranes members to have a luncheon organised by the State. You know whenever the State organises a luncheon; you know what is associated with it.

However, when I discussed with the FUFA leadership, they told me that it would not make any meaning when there are remaining only two players; the rest have left the country. So, together with FUFA, we have decided to have it in the first week of October when they have come back to prepare for the World Cup. We are mindful of what they did for this country. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, some people were saying that the Government has done nothing for the Cranes; that they have been suffering and did it themselves. Before the Comoros game, there was the Togo game. My ministry gave Shs 300 million to the Cranes. When it came to Comoros away game, His Excellency, the President, who is the head of Government, gave $210,000 to them. That was a motivation. 

By the way, because of that motivation, we won the two away matches and that made the journey quicker for us to win at home. I think we need to appreciate that to motivate the Government to put in more money. (Applause)

Honourable members, you remember there were problems of the coach. He has got a contract with FUFA but because he is doing wonders for us, I called him and he sat with us at the ministry. Later we agreed with FUFA that much as we were now going to look into his contract to find a way of adopting the coach, for the time being, we agreed to contribute something on his salary demand. And we have already prepared Shs 50 million for the coach so that he does not complain much as we wait for any bigger resources that will come.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I have tried my level best to answer what has not been clear. We know very well that the docket of education and sports is answerable to a Committee of Parliament. Should there be anything that is left out, the Committee of Parliament, at any time, will call my ministry to come and give you more information. I would like to thank you very much and please, continue supporting us.

Mr Speaker, as we talk, I  have already agreed with FUFA - we are going to sit down and forge a plan on the way to Gabon, which will include the buildup matches and how much is required so that we can all talk the same language.

I would like to also salute my colleagues who brought the motion but I think we need to give some contribution to the Cranes and also Emong David. We need to support David and thank him for what he has done by bringing that silver medal to us. It is not the first time. Some of you who have been here with me – I have been here for some good time - whenever our team wins in such a manner, we usually contribute something. Hon. Odonga-Otto knows that. 

Mr Speaker, therefore in the same spirit, we can continue supporting the team. I would like to support the motion moved by our colleague about David achieving the silver medal and – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is also a motion on the Cranes; there are two motions. 

MR BAKABULINDI: I would like to support the motion for the Cranes and the motion for David on achieving the 1,500 meters medal. As Government, we are going to sit and put down what the members have raised so that we can address them. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is how we need to proceed to see how to conclude this matter. We do not have very much time. There was a motion - the first motion that was moved by honourable member for Ajuri County and that is under item 9 – Motion for a resolution of Parliament congratulating the Uganda Cranes for qualifying for the Africa Cup of Nations. That motion was moved on Tuesday but it was not debated because of the statement that was required from the minister.

The second motion is the one that has been made by the hon. Anthony Okello, Kioga County, on the achievement of Mr David Emong. The two motions were stayed pending the responses from the minister. Now that the minister has responded, I propose that we make contributions to the two motions concurrently but then, we process the decisions separately within the time that is remaining. Therefore, if you want to contribute to both motions, it will be proper and then we now process the decision properly. We will start the debate now.

Honourable members, this matter is going to generate interest. Can we limit the time of our contributions so that as many Members as possible can contribute? Can we do the usual two minutes? Otherwise we will not finish because we still have another motion that we should have concluded yesterday but we did not. Please, bear with time and then we see how to conclude these two motions. Can we start with the honourable member for Kachumbala County?

5.29
MR PATRICK OPOLOT (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will start by thanking the Minister of State for Sports, for giving some light to Members for them to understand the difficulties they face in sports.

Mr Speaker, we need to understand that sports today is very scientific in terms of medical, nutrition and technical aspects. It also requires a lot of resources. However, with the meagre budget the Minister of State for Sports has it is not easy.

Furthermore, with the amalgamation of Sports with Ministry of Education, it is very difficult for the people running the sports sector to win the Gold medals in a row as expected. The mere fact that they are able to win positions like number six, or/and eight in the World compared to the Jamaicans, the British and the Americans who spend a million dollars in sports, is reason to applaud our sportsmen. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, before I forget, much as the Uganda Cranes have performed very well and this Parliament is being asked to support them, I believe Parliament is a very big arm when we rank the citizens of this country – whenever, Cranes matches take place at Namboole, the crowd which comes in there is very big that you find Members of Parliament squeezing with the ordinary people.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request the honourable minister to plan with FUFA to have Members of Parliament treated in quite a special way rather than squeezing and losing where to sit - I saw hon. Nambooze about to run back to Mukono.
We are not asking – (Member timed out.)

5.31
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko Municipality, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Sports. It was a very convincing presentation. He has made a very good case for more resources to be given to that sector so that our young sportsmen and women can excel. 

Mr Speaker, recent events and past performances have clearly indicated that this country has talents, right from the days of Akii-Bua or even before that - the Etolu’s from Teso who were great high jumpers. This country has talents.

However, in order for this to be enhanced, the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Government need to inject in more resources. I would like to, therefore, plead that sports is a major global business worth billions of dollars. The Premier League alone in UK is worth $70 billion each year and these African footballers who go to play there are bringing millions to their countries. It is a big business which we cannot ignore. In light of this therefore, I would like to appeal that Government considers sports as one of the priorities along with other sectors for funding; it brings fame. We all recall when Kiprotich won the gold medal, it was the last event of the Olympics and the whole world was watching. The whole world knew Uganda won a gold medal. So, it brings fame to the country and it brings fame to the participants.

I would like to congratulate this young man, Emong David who won us sliver in the Paralympics. Paralympics is parallel Olympics. It is parallel with the venues – (Member timed out.)

5.34
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Tororo County North, Tororo: Mr Speaker, I rise to support both motions. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Education for the elaborate presentation he has made to the House this evening.

Mr Speaker, also in the same vein, I would like to thank all the gallant sportsmen and sportswomen for their contribution. It is not easy to run. How many of us in this House can even run for 100 metres? There are very few. I have not seen any. That is why I would like to thank –(Interjections)– you are putting your hands up, but most of you will end up collapsing. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I would like to really emphasise this point that despite the fact that our sportsmen are struggling with limited resources, Government is also not doing much. Why am I saying so? You remember Kiprotich used to put his cries across to the Government to construct a high altitude centre. I think because Government did not do this on time, maybe, that is the reason Kiprotich gained a lot of weight and could not represent us well.

Mr Speaker, I have cried out and continue emphasising it that while we are having achievements like these - Uganda Cranes have made us smile once again, we have other sports that are being deliberately neglected and we need to put efforts in that direction.

Finally, I would like to say that there are other new categories of sports –(Member timed out.)

5.36
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The importance of sports cannot be over emphasised. We certainly congratulate our gallant Ugandans; the young men and women who have kept our flag shining across the globe.

Mr Speaker, listening to the Minister of Sports mentioning paying Shs 3 million and Shs 5 million to the silver and gold medallists respectively and Shs 50 million to the coach, I kept thinking what would happen if the minister did not push for this money. Why don’t we establish a formal instrument to ensure this money keeps coming according to the performance of each sportsman and sportswoman? Moving that way would ensure there is inspiration, motivation and certainty in what one would get so that in case it does not come, one knows what he or she should be looking forward to.

Mr Speaker, the minister mentioned that there was - he was not even specific whether there was anything given to the gallant Uganda Cranes team members - (Member timed out.)

5.38
MR ABACANON GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank and appreciate David Emong for giving Uganda that opportunity for which the minister was almost annoyed while discussing here. When we brought that motion of poor performance, we were praying to God and by that time, Emong had not yet got the medal. However, after that debate, God honoured Uganda by getting us the silver medal.

Mr Speaker, to me, the best tribute to David Emong is for Government to start a project to build a stadium in Amolatar. This is very important because Uganda was coming out empty handed if it were not by the graces of David Emong who did his practice in his own style and achieved this medal. We cannot look at this without paying tribute to the people of Amolatar and the people of Uganda. Honourable minister, take this project seriously. We shall support you.

Mr Speaker, another thing I want to suggest is to seek leave of Parliament to present a motion for honourable members of Parliament to contribute to our sports activities in this country. When we have regional tournaments in which the four regions can compete, we shall be able to realise potential gold medallists in this country.

I will bring this proposal and see how to go about it. We can start supporting sports right from the region. Honourable minister of Education and Sports, take this very seriously so that we see how we can best do it –(Member timed out.)

5.41
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank David Emong for his incredible achievement of winning a silver medal. I would like to focus on athletics because I used to be an athlete. I remember one time when we were running in Eldoret; I got injured because I was running barefooted and somebody offered me his shoes. 

We, Ugandans, should see sports as something very important.  In Uganda, we see athletics as leisure and yet, elsewhere, sports have been curved out as a sector and a fully paid professional industry. For example, in Kenya, the government has put a lot of money in camps. That is why you see Kenya shining all over the world. That also has impact on the country economically because when somebody wins a marathon, for example, he or she will earn $500,000. Imagine if the Uganda team wins that and brings the money home.

Secondly, I would like Government to pay more attention to sports the way they are paying attention to exploration of oil. Considering the way Government has treated the discovery of oil and the steps taken to explore and produce oil by attracting foreign investors, we should also do the same to athletics because it will also earn us foreign exchange. Thank you so much.

5.43
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the Uganda Cranes and Mr Emong for winning us a lot of praises. We have heard you are the only one that went up to the Paralympics. I believe this emphasises the need to resolve, as proposed in the motion, that Government identifies, nurtures and promotes persons with disabilities in sports.

This is really something we should all carry. I would like to encourage Mr Emong to continue and fight to get a gold medal. Do not relax in the glory of the silver and if possible, the government of Uganda should support you. 

The minister has not explained why our athletes get gold medals and never defend them. It will be good to find out why we win once and the next time, we get into other positions. 

Mr Speaker, there is something coming out that we need to reflect on at a national level. I here of names; Kiprotich, Akibua, Kipsiro, Inzikuru, Acom, Emong, Otto, Aza, Obua, Oulanyah; I never here of Magyezi – (Laughter) - Besigye, Kamateeka, Mbwatekamwa -(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you honourable member. I would like to inform you that we have an honourable Member of Parliament in this House who comes from that part of the country and she is called hon. Elizabeth Karungi. She is our star in the parliamentary netball team.

Last year, she won a gold medal in Rwanda and we presented it in the House – (Interjections) - what are you talking about? 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am informed by my neighbour that hon. Karungi has origins in the Elgon – (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, your time is up. Please let us share this. Honourable member from Ajuri, do not speak on your motion - speak on Emong.

5.46
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is also important for this Parliament to know that under the culture of the people of Lango where Mr Emong David comes from - I would like to bring forth the relationship between Mr David Emong and some of our great legends in the field of sports. David Emong’s mother comes or shares the same clan with the late Uganda’s Olympic gold medallist of 1972 John Akibua. Akibua culturally is the maternal uncle to David Emong under the culture of the people of Lango.

Secondly, Denis Obua Senior, Uganda’s left footed footballer in the history of Uganda also shares the same clan with the late John Akibua. Therefore, Akibua and Denis Obua Senior are all maternal uncles to David Emong.

Mr Speaker, this Parliament should also note that the Member of Parliament for Ajuri County who hails from that same clan called Atek Okwerowee under the culture of the people of Lango is also the maternal uncle of our medallist David Emong. I would like to state categorically that you cannot write the history of Uganda; the military history of Uganda and the political history of Uganda without the name of Alebtong District coming up –(Member timed out.)

5.48
MR FRED MUDUKOI (Independent, Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to join my colleagues to thank the Uganda Cranes and my brother David Emong for the wonderful job done. It is very unfortunate the training centres to improve the sports in Uganda are still lacking. The few that already exist like Namboole are also being ignored to the extent that the traders are encroaching on them.

While it is alright to improve or work on Tengei in Eastern Uganda, Sebei region, we should maintain the old ones, which we already have.

It is unfortunate that even the few that we have are almost ignored and I do not know how the Government is going to convince this august House that the Government is ready to improve sports in Uganda when we are ignoring the training centres; it becomes very difficult.

I would like to urge the Government that it is always important to identify the sportsmen or sportswomen at a tender age. We should not always leave people to struggle in their own villages and we see them after reaching at national level. It is always important to support them when they are still young and boost them to improve their sports talents –(Member timed out.)

MS KARUNGI: Mr Speaker, allow me - it is important. For purposes of the record, I would like to make it very clear because I do not know what may happen in the future; I do not have any origins from Mount Elgon. I am a true Mukiga from Kigezi region with everything from Kigezi; the character, the looks and everything is of Kigezi.

However, I would like to thank the Cranes for making us a name. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You know there is a saying that maternity is a matter of fact and paternity is a matter of opinion.

5.51
MS GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement. However, the minister is telling us that Government is doing the best to support sports. Previously, we used to have a position of sports officer at every district. As we talk, some districts no longer have that position; how can they say that they support sports?

A Government that supports sports has sold almost all the playgrounds and stadiums to the extent that even us, the Members of Parliament, when we are training, we only train for a few hours and you cannot even access Namboole with ease. It is more of a bus park now.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would have wished to hear from the minister. We are here cerebrating, but before our hero making it, what did you as a Government contribute? Why is it that you did not tell us that we sent A, B and C; and that before he went, we gave him this and that. Instead you are here cheering and chatting.

Honourable minister, you said that you are facilitating primary schools - post primary, but we are facilitating our schools, I was – (Member timed out.)

5.53
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand up to support the two motions and I would like to congratulate my brother David Emong upon the success. I would like to call the attention of this House to a forgotten heroin by the names of Judith Aya, who was the first Ugandan female to win for this country a gold medal in 100 metres. 

Unfortunately, this House is not aware of it. I am happy the minister stated that there is money to be given to medallists. This woman is gone but I am sure the family is there, can we do something for the family that brought us a lot of fame way back in 1968; the first gold medal in Commonwealth games. This is the information I wanted to give. I would also like to congratulate all the medallists in this country for doing us proud. I thank you.

5.55
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also congratulate our champions the Cranes for the stunning performance and achievements they brought to Uganda. My congratulatory message also goes to Ndungu David Emong, for the honour and pride that you brought to our country Uganda.

Mr Speaker, Bududa, though prone to disaster, is also now home for football champions: the captain of Cranes, Mr Geofrey Massa comes from Bududa and I would like to appreciate him in absentia and the other gallant sons who participated in bringing about national cohesion and unity.  

Bududa was ecstatic and we spent sleepless nights. Mr Speaker, there is a small nation in the Pacific called Fiji; ever since inception of Olympics; they got their first Olympic Gold medal in the recently concluded games. The Prime Minister, Mr Frank Bainimarama declared a national holiday and this was a motivational gift to that performance. 

As Ugandans, we should explore options of motivating our champions, for example, there are many delegations that go to State House and benefit from His Excellency’s magnanimous generosity for cash rewards. Equally, the Uganda Cranes should also go to State House and benefit from the huge sums of money that are being given to others.

In conclusion, it has taken the Cranes 38 years down the road - (Member timed out.)    

5.57
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Speaker. The Minister has talked about the achievements they have made in Uganda as far as sports are concerned. Therefore, I congratulate all the sports people mainly, Mr David Emong and the Cranes who are our recent heroes for achieving so much for this nation.
 
However, my problem is about the complaints of the ministries; our minister complained about lack of funding and it is not only the Minister of Sports, but all ministers are complaining about inadequate funding. Therefore, the question that comes to my mind is, where shall we get the money because each and every ministry wants more money including agencies and departments. 

Furthermore, let us own our nation - where shall we get the money when ministers keep asking for money? We do not have to sell part of our nation to get the money; think about the money we need when people misuse funds which we appropriate to ministries, agencies and departments – (Member timed out.)

5.59
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kassanda County South, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the two motions. We are very grateful for our beloved son David Emong for the wonderful job he has done for the country and the Uganda Cranes for having qualified for Africa Cup of nations.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, my humble request is that as Parliament; let us make a contribution to our footballers, sportsmen and women in this country. I suggest that each member of this House contributes Shs 1 million for the Cranes to enable them go to Gabon so as to morale boost them and also to be part of them. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.01
MR RICHARD OTIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate Mr Emong for his achievements and those before him. When you see a person like Emong winning a medal, you realize that he is an exceptional talent. We have many talented people in this country and our biggest problem in managing them is not necessarily money, but the people involved in management of sports in the country.

Mr Speaker, this country used to win medals from boxing; today, the gym which the boxers use for training has been turned into a shopping mall, they cannot train.

Secondly, there are a lot of dirty things happening in sports and once you speak about them, they remove you from the list, even if you are capable of winning a medal. One of our sportsmen Moses Kipsiro, has been tormented because he talked about the wrong things happening in the sports administration. 

When our girls were molested by a coach during training and Kipsiro talked about it, he was instead arrested.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that the challenge is not about money, but sports management in this country. I propose the committee in charge of education investigates the activities and problems of sports management in the country. It is only through this that the sportsmen will mention what they are going through. In some cases, even the prize money is not given to them all – (Member timed out.)

6.04
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do support both motions and I would like to congratulate my brother David Emong, whom I watched on television - he had a high spirit of winning a silver medal and I am sure in the next event he will participate in, he will win a gold medal, not silver.

Mr Speaker, a lot has been said by Members of Parliament in as far as support to the sports sector is concerned. A lot is definitely needed and we have also heard the minister’s plea. I wanted to inquire from him if he has a five year strategic plan. What do you have in that plan that would help this country nurture sportsmen and women, who are not within Kampala? This is because most sportsmen and women come from the outskirts of this country. 

We understand the ministry is facing the challenge of underfunding, but this is not the first time the minister has complained about this. However, we would have loved to see a very good five-year plan that would embrace everything in sports, especially giving support to the children in the countryside ranging from primary to secondary schools. 

We would like to see the minister going upcountry and visiting say, Agago on a sports day. I also want to see you in Kapchorwa. We want to see you- (Member timed out.) 

6.06
COL. FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating the Uganda Cranes for breaking this jinx of 38 years. Sports require a lot of discipline and sacrifice and we, in the forces, do appreciate what it means to sacrifice. We realise that many of these victorious heroes are from the security forces, so we are proud of what they have achieved for our country. 

I would like to propose that if it is right, in the wisdom of this House, instead of naming our streets after colonialists, why don’t we name them after these heroes who have scored victories for our country? I think it is high time we broke this neo-colonial yoke. For example, we have Speke Road and Burton Street. Why don’t we name it David Emong? I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

6.07
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank our gallant sportsmen and women of this country for making us proud. I have one or two issues that I want to bring forth. 

First, I want to thank the minister for the report. I know a lot has been done by the ministry but I still think a lot more needs to be done. For example, in my district, we do not have a games and sports ground, and yet there is a lot of talent. The youths want to play, but they do not have anywhere to play from. I want to urge the ministry to carry out an assessment in the rural areas and not focus only on the urban centres. 

Sometimes, I even wonder why we call it education and sports; while I was still at school, the outstanding sports girls and boys used to get bursaries from the Government, but I think it is no more.

In my opinion, that would be one of the ways in which we would motivate these sports girls and boys to perform well in schools. We usually focus on academic assessment and leave out the sports girls and boys, especially if they are not performing well academically. Alternatively, we could nurture and motivate them by assessing them in that line, other than focusing on academics alone. In the end, we leave out these talented youths in the villages. Therefore, I think it is high time we changed our mode of assessment to help these sports girls and boys in the rural areas and revise the mode of handing out bursaries.

As an appeal, like I said, my district does not have a sports ground; if you have done most of the sports, can you bring us on board so that we move with the rest of the country? 

6.09
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to congratulate Mr David Emong for the achievement. I know he is still aiming for greater heights in order to win for us a gold medal. I would also like to congratulate all medallists as well as the Cranes. 

Honourable Minister of Education and Sports, as a country, we are not nurturing the talents of our sportsmen and women. However, we only try to nurture the talents of the persistent individuals. Physical education is a great challenge for us and yet it is the basis for identifying the talented sports men and women. It is from there that we can nurture that talent from an earlier stage because not everyone is talented in sports. 

Honourable minister, I do not know the education policy right now on playgrounds; at least during my primary and secondary school days, it was important for a school to have a good playground for the children. We would go running 400 metres or even 100 metres and the students would play football. That is where talents would be identified. 

We have an education budget. I think the budget for this financial year is about Shs 2.7 trillion. It should be able to cater for the physical education and sports venture. It is important for us to address the problem at the foundation, not the apex. Honourable minister, you have disappointed us a lot. Do better please so that we can also budget for you. 

I would also like to amend the proposal of one million - if Members are very sympathetic with our friend, let them contribute something. Can I amend it to Shs 500,000? This is due to the fact that we also contribute a lot of money in our own constituencies - (Member timed out.)

6.12
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank David Emong for surprising us after we had forgotten about the 2016 Olympics. 

David Emong proved that disability is not inability by winning a silver medal in the Rio Paralympics. We were informed that Uganda sent only one participant and yet other countries sent quite a large number. This shows that we have not yet picked interest in these games and yet our people have potential, including those with disabilities, as proved by David Emong. 

Mr Speaker, there is need to promote sports in schools by increasing funding for co-curricular activities. We have heard Members saying some schools do not have playgrounds; others even do not have equipment. I think there is need to increase funding for sporting activities. 

We are mostly talking about people who have been in schools or those who are still in school. However, I think there is also need to encourage sports among people who have never gone to any classroom. 

Mr Speaker, I was watching the Rio Olympics and I observed those who were throwing the javelin; a Kenyan won a silver medal and I asked myself whether communities that use spears can fail to participate in this sport. Even the people of Amudat can qualify for that if they can encourage them. If we can nurture the skills in those people – (Member timed out.)

6.14
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in congratulating these gallant sons and daughters. I would like to thank the great Cranes for making us proud. We are really happy and we saw that all Ugandans raising their hands up.

I would like to thank David for winning, and I would like to encourage them to continue practicing so that they bring us more joy. I would like to talk about the big budget for education. We realise that everything that we need - we need budgeting and I would like to call upon colleagues and the honourable minister – because they are the ones who develop the budget.

We would like to increase this budget. Like what my colleague said, we can provide equipment at the primary level. I know that we shall have so many of these medals coming up. As the minister was presenting, I wanted to give this information about this stadium in Kapchorwa. We started on it and it is now four years down the road, we are still on preparations only. We have not yet embarked on the actual construction.

You heard what the minister was saying. He said that they have worked on preliminary; we are now talking about the water and the roads among other things. The road is still marram, not tarmac. So, I would like to urge the minister to add on - (Member timed out.)

6.16
MS MARGRET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to others and thank David and the Uganda Cranes for having made Ugandans proud in this year, 2016. 

However, I want to ask a simple question to the honourable minister. When he was reading from his papers, the budget that they normally allocate to sports, for instance, in schools - I stand here as a retired teacher; I retired in 2015. Surely, I have never seen any money coming to the district, not even to my school where I was a head teacher. Not even a single coin from the ministry for games and sports.

However, here, they are saying that they send money. This money is for flying, it is for Kampala and things of the sort. I have never seen it and I have worked in Gulu, Kitgum, and Karamoja. In all of these places, I have not seen any such money.

Two, let me first finish – (Interjections) - I more informed, you will inform me later - (Laughter). 

The type of games that they have introduced for the last three years, are funny games that I do not even see in Olympics. There is golf, there is twisting around; those are not the games that we used to have back in the day. 

Honourable minister, are we not killing the talent of Ugandans? This could be the first – (Member timed out.)

6.19
MS ALYEK JUDITH (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank David Emong and the Uganda Cranes for putting Uganda on the world map. This is what I have to say. If we had adequate resources, we would not be discussing this issue now on the Floor of Parliament. We would only be honouring the medallists, who bring us gold and silver medals.

Money must be availed. It must be adequate and instant so that, as we receive our medallists in the country, we only reward them, instead of bringing issues on the Floor of Parliament, for us to discuss.
This needs a lot of planning. I would like to request the honourable minister, who is amidst us here, that we need to plan ahead of time so that issues to do with sports are addressed without bringing them here. We need not discuss the issues of rewarding them when they are here. We should now be enjoying and honouring them by escorting them as they move out of Parliament, as we celebrate with them as a country.

My prayer is that we allocate some good money so that in future we just have to celebrate together with our people. David Emong – (Member timed out.)

6.21
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the two motions and to congratulate Emong David. We watched on TV as he was explaining to us that he was going for the gold until he was squeezed in a corner and by the time he disentangled himself, it was a bit late. But all the same, he went for the silver.

I saw a patriotic young man, determined to bring glory to his nation. So, congratulations, David. Indeed, he arose above his physical disabilities to bring us glory and he should be an inspiration to many young people, who even have degrees and are just seated down there at home, doing nothing. David should be an inspiration them.

I would like to congratulate the Uganda Cranes, our gallant sons, most especially after knowing that they are one or two teams that qualified for the Africa Cup of Nations out of East, Central and Southern Africa. There are two or three teams that are still in the qualifying matches for the World Cup. We congratulate them indeed. 

I would like to recognise the contribution of the Minister for Education, who is also the First Lady for that magical handshake on that golden Sunday afternoon. It did a lot. (Applause) 

Our players needed encouragement and support. They also need morale boosting and motivation. We are saddened to learn that the law that is operational now is the National Council of Sports of 1964. Honourable minister, you have said that – (Member timed out.)

6.23
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support this motion as regards to congratulating Emong and the Uganda Cranes. I would like to use this opportunity to congratulate Mr David Emong for winning the silver medal, and in the process ably representing us and doing this country proud.

Perhaps, our Government needs another perspective on sports and I would like to present this perspective by highlighting the role that sports could play in contributing to the development by highlighting these examples: Didier Drogba, helped to build a hospital for his country, because of his sports export. Yale Toure today earns in Ugandan shillings Shs 1.75 billion per month and that is Shs 70 billion per year in this sports export. Samuel Eto’o is worth over $100 million or Shs 350 billion. If we could invest in our sports people, we have this kind of talent and therefore wealth waiting to manifest itself in Uganda.

I would like to conclude by saying that sports is not only a source of unity and pride to this nation but is also an investment that could bring about great economic returns. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the time has come for us to take decisions on these motions and we have one more to take a decision on.

Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion that Parliament congratulates the Uganda Cranes for qualifying for Africa Cup of Nations, 2017. 

That Parliament pays glowing tribute to the Uganda Cranes for qualifying for the 2017 African Cup of Nations in Gabon.

That Government of Uganda continues increasing the annual budget allocation to the sports subsector to facilitate the development and sustainability of sports countrywide.

That a law be tabled in Parliament within six months to facilitate a regulatory framework for facilitating sports in this country.

Honourable members, I put the question to this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

I put a question to the motion for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Mr David Emong for winning a silver medal at the 2016 Paralympics in Brazil and particularly that Government supports the dream of David Emong of achieving a gold medal for this country in the year 2020 Paralympics scheduled to take place in Tokyo.

That Government recognises David Emong the same way Government did with the previous athletes who brought medals to the country.

That the Presidential directive to support medallists with financial support should be regularly implemented.

That Government should take it up as a national programme to identify, nurture and promote persons with disability in sports.

Honourable members, I put the question to this motion.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENT IN IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had debated this motion and put the question for the decision and had adopted paragraphs one and two of this motion. We were on paragraph three and I had asked for some consultations to be done and then we conclude. If we can do it in the next three minutes, I will be happy. 

Paragraph 3

I put the question that paragraph three stand part of the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Paragraph 4, agreed to.

Paragraph 5, agreed to.

Paragraph 6, agreed to.

Paragraph 7

6.28
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, on resolution 7, to establish a Parliamentary committee on SDG mandate to conduct specific oversight - there was general consensus during the debate on the Floor that because different committees of Parliament have different responsibilities within the goals, we task these committees to handle that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore we delete paragraph 7? I put the question to the deletion of paragraph 7

(Question put and agreed to.)

Paragraph 8

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that paragraph 8 stand part of the motion

(Question put and agreed to.)

I put the question to the total adoption of this motion as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE WORLD TOURISM DAY CELEBRATIONS, 2016

6.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (TOURISM) (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the 27 September 2016, Uganda will join the rest of the world in commemorating the World Tourism Day.

The day will be celebrated in Mbarara in Ankole tourism cluster. The theme of this year’s celebration is “Promoting Universal Accessibility in Tourism,” that is tourism for all. 

As a country, we also have our theme and it is, “Unlocking Uganda’s Tourism Potential.” That is the theme for the year. Therefore, whatever activity we are doing, we are under that theme.

Honourable members, the activities are going to begin tomorrow and we shall be launching our programme called Tulambule meaning “Let us tour Uganda.” By doing this programme, we want to encourage local tourism in the country. Ugandan tourists are going to be flagged off tomorrow at the CHOGM Square here at Parliament as we go to Mbarara.

The programme for the whole tourism day on this is as follows: On 26 September, in Mbarara, we shall tour the whole Ankole cluster; on Sunday, we shall hold inter-denominational prayers: Fika salaam prayer on the streets of Mbarara.

Honourable members, the programme to tour the rest of the country is attached on this statement. As a ministry, we came up with this attachment called, “Unlocking Uganda’s Tourism Potential.”

In September, we shall be in Ankole; October, we shall be in Busoga; in November, we shall be in Acholi and Lango and in December, we shall be in Buganda. In February, we shall be in Bugisu and Sebei; in March, we shall be in West Nile; in April, we shall be in Teso and Karamoja; in May, in Bunyoro; June, we shall be in Kigezi and we shall end with Rwenzori.

We are doing this because we should be the people to tell our story. Mr Speaker, I would like to call upon Members to come and join us as we unlock the tourism potential of our country and to come join the celebrations on 27 September in Mbarara. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. World Tourism Day is on Tuesday and that is why it was important for the minister to make this statement today even when we are fairly exhausted.

PRESENTATION OF PETITION ON THE DEPLORABLE STAFFING LEVEL OF BUGUNGU SECONDARY SCHOOL
 
6.33
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, The Humble Petition of the board of governors of Bugungu Secondary School about the deplorable staffing levels States 

THAT Bugungu secondary school, a mixed day school located in Buliisa Town Council was started as a community school in 1970 on a land that was donated by Church of Uganda and was grant aided in 1983;

Bugungu secondary school, the oldest secondary school in Buliisa District, currently has a total enrolment of 351 students, 213 of whom are males and 138 females;

Bugungu secondary school, is the only government aided secondary school in lower Buliisa and only has seven of its 16 teachers on the Government payroll;

Despite government financing of the rehabilitation of two accommodation blocks at the school, three other accommodation blocks initially built by the community to house five teachers were condemned by the Buliisa District Engineer leaving the school with only two blocks of staff quarters housing head teachers. Subsequently, the acute lack of accommodation has inhibited the retention of teachers at the school thereby adversely affecting the learning of the students at the school.

With a relatively poor catchment area, the parents can hardly afford to consistently meet fees expenses thereby limiting their contribution to the development of the school.

Much as Government has invested in the physical development of the school in form of buildings and equipment, the access of the requisite staffing levels has greatly hampered the delivery of teaching in schools. The physical location of this secondary school, in the rift valley poses a challenge of accessibilities and harsh climatic conditions yet the area is not classified as “hard-to-reach”. As such, staff are not entitled to “hard-to-reach” allowances thus adversely impacting on their motivation.

THEREFORE, your Petitioners pray that:
    1.  Affirmative action be extended to Bugungu Secondary School in appointments and posting of teachers;
    2. Bugungu Secondary School be classified as a hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay school as those in Kalangala and Karamoja;
    3.  That Bugungu Secondary School gets teachers specifically recruited for Bugungu Secondary School with specific considerations to those who are already teaching at the school and qualified but not on the Government payroll and others who are accustomed to the harsh environment;
    4.  That Government should construct at least three more blocks for staff houses to replace those which were condemned;
    5.  That support supervision and monitoring by the Ministry of Education and Sports be improved so as to continuously assess the realities on the ground.

And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.

Mr Speaker, it should be on record that Bugungu Secondary School last received a visiting minister from Ministry of Education and Sports in 1983 when Dr Mateke was the Minister of Education. Please find the attached names and signatures of the petitioners. I thank you very much and I beg to lay this on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full petition from the honourable member for Bullisa District. The particular petition stands referred to the Committee on Education and Sports to handle expeditiously within the framework of the rules and report to the House on the way forward.

Honourable members, all of you are invited to the official launch of the Parliamentary Forum on Public Finance Management, which is scheduled take place tomorrow at 8.30 a.m. ending at 12.00 noon. The venue is the Parliamentary Conference Hall and the Rt. Hon. Speaker, will preside over this function. You are accordingly invited tomorrow. 

Honourable members, I thank especially those of you who have sat with me up to this moment and for sure we have achieved a lot. We have finished all the business that was on the Order Paper. I thank you. 

I am also compiling my own list for medals for Members who sit with me up to the end of sittings. Maybe one day, you never know. (Laughter) This House is adjourned to Tuesday 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.39 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27 September 2016 at 2.00p.m) 
