Tuesday, 18 September 2012

Parliament met at 3.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE  SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I want to thank you for the work you have so far done on the Budget, and it is my sincere wish that we accomplish it during the course of this week. 

However, on a sad note, I would like to inform you about the death of two former Members of Parliament. First, Mr Alex Lobidra, who was a Member of the 5th Parliament. He died on Sunday in Koboko. On the same day, hon. Gertrude Byekwaso Lubega, former member of the greater Masaka; also former Minister of State for Women in Development; and Member of the NRC, also died in Belgium. The funeral arrangements will be communicated to you.

On behalf of Parliament we would like to send our heartfelt condolences to the families, relatives and friends and pray that the Almighty God gives them courage and strength to go through this bereavement. I want to invite you to observe a moment of silence in honour of Hon. Lobidra and Hon. Byekwaso.
 
(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware, the Parliament of Uganda is part of the International Parliamentary fraternity and is affiliated to various bodies and organisations such as the CPA, IPU and the United Nations Parliamentary Forum; and given the positions I hold as Speaker; Chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Leaders for Africa; Vice-Chairperson of the CWP International; and also as a Member of the IPU Executive Committee. I have since July this year attended three meetings, that is: The 43rd CPA Conference for Africa Region held in South Africa. The conference handled the proposals to convert the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association from a charity to a non-charitable organisation so that the people of Africa can benefit.

The CWP also considered strategic plans for the Africa region and laid strategies for benchmarking the increase in the percentage of women in leadership positions in the whole of the continent.

As CWP International Chairperson, I attended the 50th Canada CPA Conference in Quebec City, where I was asked to assess the progress of women representation in all the regions of the Commonwealth which are nine, and also discussed other issues related to women.

I was also the only African woman invited to speak at the 30th Anniversary on the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women in New York, in July, where we were taking stock of the Beijing Platform.

Last week, we were also in Sri Lanka with other Members of Parliament in the 58th CPA meeting under the theme: “Ensuring a relevant Commonwealth for the future”. The delegation that accompanied me will be presenting  a report to this House.

However, Members, today, we must have read in the newspapers, an article captioned, “Kenya blocks Uganda goods over new tax.” If the contents are valid, it is a very serious matter for the economy of the landlocked country; this move is bound to hurt the economy of Uganda and also affect other countries of the region.

We think that within the East African community, we ought to be observant and compliant with the convention on transit trade of landlocked states. We have the right of access to the sea, and we want to invite the Government to expeditiously look into this matter so that a solution can be found within the East African community, so that we in the landlocked countries are not adversely affected by the moves made by the Kenya Government. I need not stress the importance of reaching an understanding on this matter given that we are really a landlocked and blocking of Uganda in transit can be extremely severe. So, it is our appeal as Parliament that this be handled expeditiously. 

There was a matter which has been on the Order Paper for a bit of time as business to follow. I will adjust the Order Paper briefly to allow hon. Epetait to present a petition which has been on the Order Paper for some time, but that will be done during the course of the meeting.

3.09
MR PETER MUGEMA (NRM, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Madam Speaker, welcome back from where you had gone and I am proud of that name “Panadol”. I have an issue of national importance from my constituency. The problem is about how Muslim properties and assets are being stolen by people purporting to be from the Office of the President. Today, in Iganga, there was stampede and commotion because of a letter purportedly written by Haji Tezikuba, writing on behalf of the Office of the President, that the House in contention belongs to one Haji Mugolofa. This Haji Mugolofa has been a tenant for the last 11 years, and he is now claiming  ownership of the House.

Today morning, there was a lot of teargas in the town and it is believed that two children lost their lives. So, I wanted your office to intervene and Parliament to help. Otherwise, the Office of the President is taking almost everything.

3.10
MR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi East, Kanungu): Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I beg that I make my point while at the Table because I have papers to lay on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I want to welcome you back to the House. 

Last week on Tuesday, I raised an issue where Uganda Revenue Authority imposed a tax on contraceptives, including condoms and Mama kits. While I was giving my submission, the Minister of Finance in Charge of Planning, hon. Matia Kassaija, gave me information and he informed the House that it was not true that Government was taxing contraceptives. I promised that I would lay on Table documentation to prove the point that I was making, and he promised to bring a statement on Thursday, but I did not see him in the House, I hope he is now back.

The issue is that drugs, medicines, medical equipment and other related supplies have not be attracting taxes, but the Commissioner General URA, decided to extract contraceptives, Mama kits and other reproductive health commodities, and imposed both VAT and withholding tax. 

This has disorganised the partners and other stakeholders who support this country in the field of sexual and reproductive health. There have been attempts to persuade Government and URA to review this, but it has not been successful.

When I made this issue known to this House, I  said that on World Population Day, 11th July in Hoima, the partners informed the Prime Minister of Uganda, who was the chief guest representing the President, and raised this matter . A day later, newspapers quoted him to have said; “I am concerned that the URA still taxes contraceptives yet Government had declared a waiver on importation of medicines into the country. I am going to discuss the issue of taxing contraceptives to find out why it was imposed and weigh its impact on reproductive health and take appropriate action.” This was hon. Amama Mbabazi and he was quoted accurately. This is the New Vision of 12 July 2012. I want to lay this extract from the media on Table.

I also want to lay on Table a letter written by Dr Lukwago Asuman, the acting Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health, which he wrote on 7 February 2012 to the Commissioner General, URA and the issue was: “Classification of contraceptives and other reproductive health commodities for tax purposes.” He was raising the same complaint.

If I can extract one phrase, he said; “We refer to your communication dated 1 December 2011 that has been brought to my attention. We note that contraceptives have been classified under harmonised system code 3006.6000 of the EAC common external tariff thereby attracting 18 percent VAT and 6 percent withholding tax. 

We have also received a related complaint from other importers of contraceptives.” He gave a clarification; “This was the Ministry of Health requesting URA to review this imposition of the tax.” 

There is no evidence that URA responded to this letter. I would like to lay this letter by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health, on Table.

I also want to lay on Table another letter by the same Permanent Secretary, written on 7 August 2012. This time to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the classification of contraceptives and other reproductive health commodities for tax purposes. He is raising the same argument because the Commissioner General, URA had not responded to his letter which had been written in February; now this was August; the same Permanent Secretary, Dr Asuman Lukwago, explaining what contraceptives are, and justifying why they should not be taxed, and how they will harm maternal health programmes in this country. 
I want to lay on Table the same letter to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance. 

The Minister of Finance in charge of Planning said that it was not true that contraceptives were being taxed. I want to lay on Table, a letter written by the operations manager, Mr Geoffrey Ddungu of Universal Freight Limited, who are the clearing and forwarding agents for reproductive health Uganda.

This is a letter written on 29 June 2012, reference: “Taxes for contraceptives”. The letter reads as follows: “Reference is made to the above subject. Contraception drugs have been separated from other drugs and now attract tax in form of VAT and Withholding Tax as per assessment attached.” Please note that while importing further supplies, this cost should be taken into consideration.” 

This was a letter written to Reproductive Health Uganda, which I said last time that I was happy to be the chairperson of the board of this civil society organisation. Therefore, this is evidence that taxes are being charged, and attached are assessments from URA. The first consignment to the tune of Shs 13.3 million, has already been paid by Reproductive Health Uganda to ensure that there are contraceptives. There is an attachment of another assessment to the tune of Shs 30.8 million from URA. Also, invoices and other forms of documentation from URA are attached.

I also know many other organisations that are bringing in contraceptives and Mama kits, which are being charged by URA. Our concern, Madam Speaker, is that the recent demographic and health survey has indicated that in the last 5 years, maternal mortality has increased and, therefore, imposing a tax on some of these essential supplies like contraceptives, Mama kits and other reproductive health commodities will undermine our efforts to address the health of Ugandans, particularly maternal health and, therefore, I brought these documents to prove that what the minister told this House was not true and taxes are being imposed. Our prayer is that Government should review this situation and abolish these taxes which have not been there for a long time. I thank you very much Madam Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: Now, in the view of the evidence, what does the Minister of Finance say?

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Matia Kassaija): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to apologise that I was not here on Thursday, not by choice. I was summoned somewhere in Bushenyi and I had to go. I have received writings from URA, and I beg that tomorrow you give me time and I bring a full statement about this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Are you aware whether there is tax or not?

MR KASSAIJA: There is VAT; we talked about duty. There is a difference between duty and VAT. There are taxes, I agree; but there is  a difference. So, Madam Speaker, can you allow me to come tomorrow with a comprehensive statement on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: since the documents have been laid, Members can have access to them and we see whether it is only VAT and not duty. Let us discuss it tomorrow.

I want you to join me in welcoming three sets of children; first teachers and pupils of Busembatia Primary School in Bugweri represented by hon. Katuntu and hon. Kwagala. You are welcome. We also have pupils and teachers of Sheema Junior School represented by hon. Nyakikongoro and hon. Elioda Tumwesigye. The third group of children are pupils and teachers of Nampologoma Primary School from Butaleja District, represented by hon. Nebanda and hon. Dombo.  They are there. You are all welcome. (Applause)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, it is good that we have the pupils here; I do not want them to go back with what the minister has stated here that duty is not tax. In December they will be sitting for exams and this is how our pupils get picked up. VAT is a tax and, therefore, a duty. So, I wanted that to be corrected so that our pupils go back, knowing that Value-Added Tax (VAT) is a duty. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, it is a tax for value addition. (Laughter)

PERSONAL STATEMENT 

3.19
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this chance to make a brief personal statement on the events of the 12 September 2012, that led to my brutal treatment while at Usuk Sub-county, Katakwi District, as was reported in various media.

Following the nomination of candidates for the vacant Usuk county parliamentary seat, I was requested by my party, the FDC, to be part of the team to canvass and subsequently protect votes on the election day for our candidate, Mr Charles Okure. Accordingly, I went to Usuk to do a lawful and legitimate party function. I was duly accredited by the Electoral Commission to supervise and monitor the election on behalf of my party. The campaign was characterised by incidents of violence across the entire constituency with cases of persons harmed, in certain instances very badly.

On the morning of the election day I woke up to the unexpected shocking news of the destruction and vandalising of several vehicles belonging to my colleagues. My vehicle, Reg. No.UAK 292T too, had its tyres totally deflated and was damaged. This barbaric act happened while my aide and driver, Mr Michael Emorut, slept in the car for lack of any available alternative accommodation in the whole of Katakwi town that night. He clearly saw a one Julius Abwou, a resident of Atutur Township in Kumi District, deflating tyres of our vehicles and taking off in a saloon car, a Premio by make, Registration No.UAN 997Q.
 
This malicious and illegal act, however, did not deter me from obtaining alternative means to get to Usuk sub-county. I began to sense more trouble, when I got to Olela village to find a dark-grey Land Cruiser Prado vehicle, Registration No.UAK 034Y used by a one Justine Omeke, a campaign coordinator for hon. Charles Oleny, one of the candidates, smashed and abandoned by the roadside. Later, reports from Ongongoja sub-county indicated that hon. Fungaroo’s white Prado Registration No.UAQ 438D had been smashed. 

Madam Speaker, everything seemed to go well for me until about 1.00 p.m. when I noticed a one Richard Otim, an Electoral supervisor, trailing me on a motorcycle. Mr Otim, I was informed later, is a signaller with the Anti-Stock Theft Unit. At a certain point, Mr Otim made a telephone call alerting the person on the other side of the line, of my presence and the need for that person’s intervention in pursuing me. I got to the polling station at Usuk sub-county to check on our agents who included hon. Kevina Taaka, MP Busia Municipality; and as I walked towards the vehicle I was using, a Pajero, dirty-green in colour Registration No.UAE 793C with male occupants pulled up just outside the polling station. I was tipped by our local agents that the vehicle was being used to ferry voters from outside the electoral area to vote for the NRM candidate. I immediately questioned this action; an act that I knew contravenes the electoral laws and I attempted to record it using my telephone. It is at this point that the occupants of the Pajero, which I noticed were armed with pistols, pounced on me. I immediately identified Mr Walter Elakas who I know, as one of my assailants. The other persons were later identified to me as Gabriel Abuderi, Akabway, Angaar, Peter Okanya and a one Abdu. These people surrounded me and no amount of pleas from me would change their minds on attacking me. They went on to rough me up, hitting me on several parts of my body, twisting my arms and eventually subdued me and threw me to the ground. They forced out the contents of my pockets, which included my mobile phones and over Shs 500,000 meant for facilitation of our agents. In the process, they badly tore my trousers, leaving the lower parts of my body almost fully exposed. In fact, this was an involuntary and imposed kimansulo on me. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, having done what they intended to do on me, they abandoned me in a desolate mess and drove off in the direction of Katakwi. Ironically, while this drama was unfolding, there were security personnel at the polling station and a contingent of Anti-riot Police personnel positioned about 20 and 30 metres away, respectively. None of these security personnel responded to stop or question what was happening.

Madam Speaker, I experienced physical and mental harm, and was almost irreparably humiliated and still feel pain all over my body. My family and the people of Kumi county suffered shock and dejection. In fact, my ailing father collapsed upon receiving the news of my attack by uncivilised individuals. I have since registered a complaint to Katakwi Police Station and can only hope for justice for myself and all those physically injured under different circumstances in this by-election.

What needs to be told to this House and the entire world is that there were threats that were issued by the Minister of Education, hon. Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo, to the effect that the by-election in Usuk would be based on military and political science, and we have a recording of that. It has been played all over the radios in Teso. We should all by now have noticed the ugly face of increasing violence showing itself again in the politics of our country, and we should be concerned about this negative trend which should be condemned in the strongest possible terms. This Parliament should take interest in the events during the Usuk by-election and try to find out the following: 

i)	Who was responsible for the arming of civilians. 

ii)	Why there was a high presence of the military, and who was responsible for their deployment in the by-election? 

iii)	What part was played by the various political leaders from the Teso sub-region, notably, honourable members of this House: Gen. Jeje Odong, Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo, Christine Amongin Aporu and Susan Amero in fomenting violence in the Usuk by-elections?  And, lastly, 

iv)	Why despite the heavy deployment of the Police from across the region, they were reluctant to protect other parties through the by-election?

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I wish to thank all of you for the kind words of encouragement from both sides of the political divide that you sent me at my greatest time of need. This helps to reduce the pain and humiliation that was difficult to overcome. I wish to state that I hold no grudge against the people of Usuk, and have worked cordially with them, including all their former Members of Parliament, in my over 10 years as Members of Parliament. I also believe that the assault on me was not institutional - not by the NRM - but the work of individuals.

I know very well that bringing this statement to this august House may endanger my life, as the people I mentioned in it wield a lot of power; but I am prepared, with the grace of God, to pay the ultimate price for my pursuit of democracy and good governance. 

I thank the staff of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, particularly, consultant Surgeons Doctors Kirya and Opodoi for the medical attention they gave me, which has relieved me of some of the pains from injuries I suffered.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you very much for your kind attention.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. There is no debate on that matter. You know the rules very well. 

PETITION

3.34
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker for your indulgence to allow me present a petition under Rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure. 

This petition is from the people of Teso region over the irregular allocations of land in Kapelebyong, in Amuria District; the Agu Wetland in Ngora District; and the Amutur Wetland in Bukedea District for purposes of setting up a cattle ranch by His Excellency the President; sugarcane growing by an investor of unknown origin; and rice growing by Fairland Investment Limited, respectively. 

Madam Speaker, arising from your guidance and for want of time, I head straight to the prayers by your humble petitioners that:

One, Parliament urges Government to halt the planned change of ownership and land use for the land in Okungur sub-county in Kapelebyong; and the Agu Wetland between Ngora and Serere Districts; and the Amutur Communal land between Kolir and Malera sub-counties in Bukedea District. 

Two, wider consultations with the relevant traditional stakeholders and the local governments in the districts of Amuria, Ngora, Serere, Soroti, Kumi and Bukedea should be undertaken and consensus built before any change of ownership and land use can be effected. 

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray. 

The number of signatures which have been appended to this petition are well over 1,450 but because of the binding problems I just could not take more signatures. Otherwise, there are over 10,000 people who are aggrieved over this. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that this petition be handled expeditiously in order to avert the likely tensions that are already brewing in the Teso sub-region over the irregular land allocation.  

I beg to lay the petition on Table.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the petition is sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to handle expeditiously and report back.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, at the close of the last sitting, the Government undertook to take certain measures, and the Prime Minister is reporting on them before we proceed with the motion.

3.37
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, as you rightly stated, this august House deliberated on the report of the Budget Committee last Thursday, 13 September 2012. The issue that remained outstanding for which I pledged to go back and consult was the proposed budget cuts from a number of votes to raise Shs 39.2 billion to finance additional recruitment for health workers and support operational funds for health facilities countrywide. 

I am pleased to report that I have since consulted within Government and wish to report back to this august House as follows:

One, Government recognises the plight of the health sector and the need for additional funding. 

Two, while recognising the tremendous achievements made in addressing infant and child mortality - as hon. Chris Baryomunsi had said a while ago - the figures we have which have been published are that infant mortality rate has reduced from 120  in 1986, to 54, which is obviously a major stride forward. While recognising that achievement, there was need to put strategic focus on identifying and tackling the major challenges of maternal mortality. The most recent publication of the UBoS report was that maternal mortality had risen from 435 per 100,000 women giving birth that die to 438. 

Three, Government will consequently expedite recruitment of additional midwives. We have identified the actual cause of the stagnation or even this slight rise in maternal mortality as being that, our mothers who deliver life, are not adequately attended to at the health centre III where they deliver children, because of lack of adequate staffing, and especially the midwives.

So, the recruitment of additional midwives should be done through consultations with Ministry of Health, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Local Government and Local Government Finance Commission.

I have been consulting with the Ministry of Public Service that if there was a ceiling on recruitment of midwives, it should be lifted.

In agreeing with the committee recommendations, Government will expedite the recruitment of 1000 midwives as an immediate remedial measure to address maternal health concerns. 

In order for us to pass a balanced budget without distorting sectoral allocations and work plans which as honourable members are aware were arrived at after extensive discussions in Government and Parliament, and in line with the law and our own Rules of Procedure, the initial cost of this measure will be arrived at through inter-sectoral re-allocations within the Ministry of Health headquarters budget.

In order not to disadvantage the health sector headquarter operations, Government will come back to this august House for the requisite funding through supplementary funding.

Government has also agreed that as we deal with this stop gap measure, the Ministry of Health should immediately prepare a comprehensive paper on how to address the challenges in the sector, paying attention to the need for operational efficiency within the sector. This approach will ensure that we tackle the challenges facing the sector in a holistic and well-planned manner, instead of a piece-meal approach.

Madam Speaker, as I stated in this august House on Thursday, the proposed areas of cuts by the Budget Committee attached to their report should not be approved by this House for the following reasons:

•	The proposed cut on the budget of Ministry of Defence of Shs 15 billion will jeopardise national security. -(Interjections)- I want to assure you about it because I know it.

•	The cut on the statutory vote of the Electoral Commission as well as the statutory expenditure of Uganda Bureau of Statistics is against the law.

•	Let me also clarify on the concerns raised by the honourable members on the item of special meals. This item caters for special meals and drinks necessitated by exceptional working conditions and meals provided to servicemen and women, for example, military during combat operations or others in active duty. “Special meals” is also an item in the health sector which caters for special nutritional needs such as food supplements for malnourished children, and sick people in Butabika with special nutritional recommendations.

Madam Speaker, I believe with this commitment which has been pledged by Government, I pray that this august House approves the Budget Committee report with this amendment. Accordingly, the schedule regarding the re-allocations be dropped from the committee report.

With the above amendments, I appeal to this august House to approve the budget for financial year 2012/2013 and proceed to supply as presented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

I wish, Madam Speaker, to add a statement which unfortunately is not written, about the Judiciary. The government obviously recognises the need and necessity to also attend to the plight of the Judiciary, particularly regarding their remuneration. I, therefore, want to state the commitment by the government in the course of this financial year to do precisely that, and when we are ready, we will come and report to the House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Where is the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget? 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Last week, when we adjourned, we debated the budget and we left this House with a very clear commitment from Government. The commitment was that we had agreed on all the issues, but the government position was that they were going to look for Shs 39.2 billion and the agreement was on where to pick the money. (Applause)

Therefore, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has made a statement, but this statement falls far short of the commitment the government had made. In fact, most of the issues in the statement are a reinstatement of the issues that were disagreed upon, like issues of the law and technicalities, which were debated and we took a decision against those issues. 

The point of procedure I am, therefore, raising is, is it procedurally right for Government to ask for two days - because that is what they said - in order to look for money from some other sources, then they  return with a statement that reflects a lot of insensitivity, a lot of insincerity and changing of goal-posts? Is it procedurally right? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Can the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget update us. What was the agreement made at the end of the meeting last Thursday?

3.50
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Thursday last week, we made our report as Budget Committee, and the report was debated extensively. At the end, the Prime Minister requested that, given the fact that they did not agree with the areas where we were going to get the money, they would go and look at the budget and come back as they have come back today -(Interjections)- look for other areas, yes.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I stood here, and I made a categorical statement that Government was not in disagreement with the popular view in this House that the plight of the health sector needed attention. I said that if what the committee was proposing to cut was done, it would cause greater harm to Government generally. 

I also said that some of the proposals were unlawful, and we talked about this extensively. So, I said, since we were in agreement about the plight of the health sector, Government would go back, carry out consultations, and if we identified within the budget the money which we need to attend to some of these issues, we would come back. What I have reported today is that we have carried out that consultation and focused on one clear area which needs immediate attention as I have proposed; the recruitment of 1,000 midwives and the provision for that in the course of this financial year. (Interjections) That is what I said.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I have practised medicine for more than 12 years in a Ugandan hospital. I have seen it all. I have treated mothers; they have come to me and I have seen them dying. When I talk, I am talking with a passion; and I am telling you it is very painful when I see my own Government which I cherish mostly, becoming insensitive on the issue of mothers who have produced me and you, including the Prime Minister.

Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is; a lot of money was given to the Prime Minister’s Office and it ended up in people’s accounts. (Interjections) This money was a lot. It was more than billions and people put the money on personal accounts. Another thing, the mothers who die, die because of complications. These are mothers who end up having either post-partum haemorrhage. These are mothers who have got obstructed labour where you must inevitably do a C-section or use vacuum extraction. Recruiting only 1,000 midwives without doctors at health centres IV becomes a bit of a problem now.
 
The clarification I was trying to seek from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister –honestly, I want you to clarify to us; why don’t you say you are going to go back and cut maybe from your office plus other offices for the sake of these mothers, so that people can know that we have a commitment which is very obvious and is being handled expeditiously; because waiting is not good. Something about human life; once you die, you start undergoing a condition known as apoptosis. (Laughter) Life is not reversible. Once you have died, you have died. (Interjections) This is a matter of urgency, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Kindly, my uncle, I can kneel before you here, to plead that you give us the money. Can you surely clarify whether you can  respond expeditiously, so that we handle this issue today or tomorrow, because it is an emergency? I thank you. 

3.56
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Katuntu comes, I just want to introduce guests in the distinguished strangers’ gallery. We have a delegation from the National Assembly of Malawi. They are led by Dr Chaponda, the head of the delegation. We welcome hon. Njobvuyalema, hon. Yahya, Mr Mwenyeheri, Principal Clerk Assistant, and Mr Frederick Kamwani, Committee Clerk. They are from the Business Committee. You are welcome.
     
3.56
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Speaker for this statement. However, I wish to point out a few inaccuracies, if I may try to be polite.

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is talking about the issue of special meals, and this is what he says: “Let me also clarify on the concerns raised by the honourable members on the item of special meals. This item caters for special meals and drinks necessitated by exceptional working conditions and meals provided to servicemen, for example, military during combat operations or others in active duty. “Special meals” is also an item in the health sector which caters for special nutritional needs such as food supplements for malnourished children, sick people in Butabika with special nutritional recommendations.”

I wish to draw his attention -(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, it is not every day that one is served by a Prime Minister. So, I am very grateful to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

I think when you look at the proposals made by the Budget Committee where it is proposing to have a 30 percent cut, the sector of Defence does not appear. Actually, issues of special meals are only in the following sectors: Agriculture; Works and Transport; NPA - except for Cancer Institute, maybe I will appreciate; Electoral Commission; MUBS  - the vice chancellors need special meals; maybe that is what the Prime Minister is talking about. So, it is not correct that the Budget Committee has proposed to have cuts in the Ministry of Defence or even in health institutions. That is not correct, and the money being saved under that item alone comes to Shs 244 million without touching the money which the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is talking about. So, that is not factually correct, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

I know the Constitutional protection of these statutory bodies like the Electoral Commission. But at the end of the day, the function to appropriate is a function of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. Can anybody justify how and why the Electoral Commission would need Shs 236 million for welfare and entertainment? And this is 30 percent. The proposal is that this particular department should not have this funding, but only 30 percent. Welfare and entertainment - Shs 236 million is what we are requiring from the Electoral Commission. 

Let us look at this wasteful expenditure Madam Speaker and Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Travel inland is Shs 1.3 billion, but they go ahead and ask for fuel, oil and lubricants of Shs 665 million. That is also 30 percent of what they are seeking to appropriate for them. Then on vehicle maintenance, another Shs 450 million. It is just wasteful. 

When we talk about health - and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and members of the Executive, I can see today you have been properly mobilised. It is very rare that we have a full bench; and we want to talk to you directly. The people dying are the people you were running all over asking for votes that you are going to protect. (Applause) Dr Ondoa, you know very well you have a responsibility for the health portfolio in this country. How can you come up and say you are mobilising against providing money for the health sector such that you give money to entertainment? (Applause) It does not even make common sense.

I want you to go and explain to the people you represent down there in Nakasongola and tell them, “Yes, I know we do not have medicine and health personnel in this health centre, but because of legalities, money has gone to a constitutional body, the Electoral Commission, to be entertained.” Just go and explain. Can we sober up?

These are our mothers and daughters and sisters dying; and this House has been crying about this. How on earth is it possible that even in this era, mothers while giving birth are attended to by traditional birth attendants and you come here to ask for money for entertainment? And you are saying we cannot touch this money because it is for entertaining electoral commissioners; that it is for welfare and special meals? 

Madam Speaker, I do not agree with what the Prime Minister is saying that the initial cost of this measure will be arrived at through inter-sectoral re-allocation within the Ministry of Health Headquarters budget. That means, they are looking for money within the health sector. Almost everything in the health sector is a priority. Where are you going to cut from? Will you cut from Malaria which still kills almost 300 people daily? Are you going to cut from Tuberculosis? Are you going to cut from Cancer? Please explain to me. Some of you went to medical schools? Dr Malinga, you cannot support this sort of thing. You have an oath to protect lives. Dr Malinga, you have an oath as Ministry of Health to protect life. And what you are saying is that we keep quiet; people die; and we continue passing money for public relations. 

Madam Speaker, let me quote the figures for public relations. When you see what was being proposed by the Budget Committee, we have Shs 1.56 billion for advertising and public relations; to tell people that you are good and that you are working. You want to spend that money in advertisements and talk shows, while your people are dying of diseases that should not even ordinarily kill Ugandans. 

Travel abroad; the budget is Shs 6.9 billion. And we have said that of the Shs 6.9 billion, can we save Shs 2.3 billion towards this health budget? And you are saying, no; for us we want to jump on planes and travel First Class. The budget for travel inland is Shs 22 billion; and we have said that of the Shs 22 billion, can we have Shs 7.2 billion; and from which department –(Interjection)- UBoS -  for the Census, maybe that one – but we are looking at the entire budget; you do not have all the money which is required for the Census. 

But when we come to others, like Ministry of Finance, wants Shs 230 million; Ministry of Education, Hon. Alupo and Company Limited, they want Shs 370 million –(Laughter)– Ministry of Energy, Hon. Muloni, she wants Shs 220 – and this is just 30 percent of what we want. 

So, it looks like our colleagues on the front bench are the beneficiaries of some of these votes. (Applause) And some of us are saying, that we will not allow you; our people cannot continue dying because you want to travel first class. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, with due respect to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is my humble prayer that this country is tired of burying people who would not be ordinarily dying under such circumstances. So, this statement be rejected –(Applause)– the monies clearly identified should be found to save our people from dying from small diseases. (Applause) Thank you Madam Speaker. 

4.08
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Prime Minister for his statement. Honourable colleagues, the matter we are discussing is a matter of common good; it is a bipartisan matter, and I think it is wrong and improper for anybody to play around with the welfare of our people. (Applause)

Health is wealth; you cannot have a good economy with sick people. I am standing on the side of NRM, which has a social contract of five years with the people for service delivery. In the previous two financial years, we have had problems of getting money to carry out a census to plan for this country. Last week, I was with the chairman NPA; he was lamenting; Ministry of Finance is budgeting outside NDP. Last year, Parliament was begging the Executive for money for teachers; but this year, we are begging for money for midwives and our health sector. 

However, in those two financial years, Basajjabalaba took Shs 160 billion. (Laughter) The Office of the Prime Minister - he has inherited a lot of losses. Then pension, our senior citizens who served this country for so many years, lost Shs 60 billion of their pension money. So, our seniors on the front bench, can you make the Ninth Parliament relevant to the citizens who voted you into this House? How can we stand here to speak against the population – actually, this mobilisation is against the population. I expected us to caucus in the direction of tightening our belts, right from State House and President’s Office; let us find money from there. 

I am aware that when we wanted money for CHOGM, we found it; when we wanted money for jets, we got it; what is wrong with finding money for the welfare of our people. (Applause) As for my senior, the Prime Minister – 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. Order! Order! Members. Order! Please.

MR MUKITALE: I want to make one plea to our seniors; can you stop blackmailing Parliament; stop putting us at ransom. (Applause) Do not bring legalise when we are discussing the welfare of our people [HON. MEMBERS: “No caucusing.”] The mandate of Parliament in appropriation is to put a check – if Government brings a wrongly skewed budget, you go back and restructure the budget, but do not tell Parliament that you are now going into illegalities. That is wrong; please, if we address our priorities –(Member timed out.)

4.13
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Three minutes.

DR BARYOMUNSI: On page 2, the Prime Minister says that the proposed cut on the budget of Ministry of Defence of Shs 15 billion will jeopardise national security. I also want to inform him that the poor health of Ugandans will jeopardise national security. (Applause)

We had an extensive debate last week and the Prime Minister assured us that his discomfort was on the areas where money was being cut, but he was going back to find the Shs 39.2 billion from different areas. I am surprised that he has come and brought a different message. I, therefore, want to respectfully say that this is a very good example of a very bad statement brought by the Prime Minister. (Laughter)

I have six patients from Kanungu in my house and two of them are from the Prime Minister’s constituency because they cannot get service in Kanungu.

Last week we said that the health sector is on oxygen and the issues which the health and budget committees pointed out to this House was that the health sector needs emergency resuscitation in terms of recruiting health workers. I did say on this Floor that in Kanungu, staffing levels are currently at 32 percent, but I have since cross-checked and it is 29 percent. In other words, we do not have health workers. We do appreciate that the recruitment of midwives is extremely important, but I think it needs to go beyond this, because Kambuga Hospital in the Prime Minister’s district, which has a provision for seven doctors, there is only one medical doctor serving the whole of Kanungu. So, we appreciate the recruitment of midwives, but it should go beyond that. 

Like Dr Bitekyerezo said, technically, women who are pregnant at any one time, up to 15 percent of them will get complications whether there is an efficient health system or not. The test of any system is whether you are able to handle those women who get complications, where you deliver them either by caesarian section or by other specialised means of handling the women. Therefore, we are talking about skilled healthcare workers, including midwives, medical officers and other health workers –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, just conclude in half a minute.

DR BARYOMUNSI: The statement by the Prime Minister falls short of what we expected him to report to the House today, and he is probably telling us that as the Executive, they have failed to make adjustments and, therefore, we should do our work as Parliament to appropriate and supply the figures which we feel will help the health sector in terms of addressing the acute needs that have been presented by the health and budget committees. 

Parliament should remain firm, do its work, and support the health sector so that Ugandans can get fair and better health services in this country. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, before hon. Nebanda comes, I do not know, but Prime Minister, I have been here for some time and do remember that at some point, when it became necessary to fund the war in the North, the Government directed that every ministry surrenders some money and I passed the vote – and we all did, and found the money. (Applause) I do not know; because we were able to do that when we had less money; so, why can’t we do it now? Think about it. Hon. Nebanda.
 
4.18
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): I thank you so much -
  
4.18
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, we debated this matter two times last week. On the first day, the Prime Minister went to consult with the Committee on Budget, but that happened after many hours of debate here. 

On Thursday, we again exhaustively debated this matter. The Prime Minister again said that he needed more time to go and consult. We are actually repeating ourselves; just emphasising what we have already said. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am moving that this matter be put to a vote. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what we are going to vote on. Hon. Nebanda – let me just allow a few more Members say something.

MS NEBANDA: I thank you so much. During the weekend, I was in Butaleja District, and the people there are so concerned about the health sector because our human resource is at 18 percent, and most of these people are nursing assistants. When I come here, I am disappointed to see that my Government prefers sausages to the lives of human beings. 

How can a Prime Minister stand there and say that they prefer eating sausages and chicken to protecting the lives of the people who voted for us to come here. (Laughter) What is the priority of this Government? (Laughter) They should let us know whether it is eating sausages, because what are “special meals” like chicken, sausage and meat to the lives of the people who voted for us to be here?

I want to call upon my colleagues to be firm. These members here on the front bench do not know what is happening down there. When they even have a slight headache, they are flown outside for treatment and that is why they do not want you to reduce on the money for travel abroad because that is where they gain from. I wish they could go down on the ground and see what people go through – we had a tour of the Eastern region and the whole Kibuku District does not even have a doctor. [HON. MEMBER: “Tell them.”] When you go to Tororo, it is even worse. People told us that hospitals of long ago were few, but were well equipped. 

When we went to State House yesterday, and we had to wash our hands because of Ebola. People fear to die. Why do you fear to die and yet you want others to die? (Laughter) (Applause) Why? This Government should be serious, and I am calling upon my colleagues not to be intimidated because today you are here, but our brothers and sisters are down there dying.   

According to what we debated yesterday, I expected the minister to come here with figures. Let them go and cut across all the ministries and then bring a supplementary and not –(Laughter) (Member timed out.)

4.22
DR MICHAEL LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker of Parliament. When we debated this matter last week, it was all about Parliament providing an alternative because Government did not have any. This was provided through the 30 per cent cut reflected in the report of a committee of Parliament, which was accepted by this House.

The issue of Government, through the Prime Minister, going back to find money did not even arise because Parliament was exercising its mandate to vary and do appropriation. I know that the Executive is at pains to accept that Parliament has got the powers to vary figures and appropriate accordingly. That is how the standoff came about before the House was adjourned. 

The way this statement has come in gives an impression that the Prime Minister had been given an assignment by this Parliament to go and find money. That is not true; the money had already been identified by Parliament. We knew where it would come from. The issue of statutory bodies and statutory expenditures was explained by the Deputy Speaker even when the Deputy Attorney-General was present. After legal consultations within Parliament, we got to realise that the moment this matter came to Parliament, the House had powers within its mandate to consider and appropriate as it would deem right. 

However, while in Parliament, the situation is being worsened. First of all, when the Prime Minister said last week that Government had accepted the situation at hand and that they were going to identify the Shs 39.2 billion, we said “fine”, but actually Parliament had already found that money. So, when someone comes here to say that they are going to do this and that without commitment, it is actually a sign of attaching no value to this Parliament. We cannot accept that. 

I believe the Minister of Health, who is here, should be the one to jubilate first. Madam Speaker, do you recall when she one time came here and gave very big lamentations about the healthcare system under her docket? She said there were no doctors nor did she have medical assistants, that the structures were just white elephants with people finding no healthcare within our healthcare delivery system. Now – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Your three minutes are up. Okay, just conclude.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me more time. In conclusion, I would like to say that this statement was, first of all, not called for. In the circumstances, I would like to move that Parliament rejects it or the Prime Minister withdraws it so that we just consider what was proposed by the Budget Committee. I thank you.

4.26
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to welcome you back. As a mother in this country, I am at pains because of the unfolding reactions from Government over the health of our mothers. However, my concern is: should women die while giving birth to life? I think the absolute answer is a no; mothers should have life while bringing life into the world.

Some time back, I travelled with Dr Mallinga, when he was still Minister of Health, to my constituency. While there, he saw for himself a mother having delivered without the help of a midwife. The people there even had a spoilt weighing scale, which they could not repair. When we got to Palabyek, we found a pregnant mother being received by the Askari because there was no midwife to help her. It is so sad that out there; the problem is huge. So, for continuity, we are the only people to help the mothers in this country.
 
When the Prime Minister said that there is need for supplementary nutritious food, I was set aback. Last year, members representing areas with children suffering from the nodding disease got to realise that one of the causes of this disease is malnourishment. We laboured in this House to have Government declare this place a disaster area so that help in form of nutritious food would come in but our efforts were defeated. What we see in this statement by the Prime Minister is that the nutritious food – (Member timed out).

THE SPEAKER: Okay, just wind up.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was only asking whether some of the food he said was supplied to the children with nodding disease was different from what the media exposed - I mean that rotten posho, which the media said had been given to these children? We do not want to be blindfolded. We want – (Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to misinform the House on the issue regarding the nutritious food for the children with nodding syndrome? In the newspaper story of last Friday, which she is talking about, there was a photograph of food, and there was no single maggot in that food -(Laughter) - I looked at it carefully. 

Madam Speaker, this food originated from the stores here, in good condition, and was delivered to the destination in that good condition. It was the storage - and I have a letter from the RDC confirming that the food was spoilt at the storage place. You are not in order, – (Laughter) – I am sorry; is the honourable member in order to impute that the Office of the Prime Minister delivered rotten food to the nodding syndrome children when the food was actually spoilt at the destination due to poor storage?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately I do not have the history of the movement of the food from Kampala to its destination. I do not know where it was stored thereafter. So, it is difficult to make a ruling on that matter. Please conclude.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling and guidance. I was concluding on the issue of the nutritious value of the food given to our children in this country. I would love the honourable Prime Minister to go back with his statement and get committed to what he had promised in this House so that we proceed. The caucus that – (Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the honourable member is from the Manifesto of NRM 2011/2016 under the theme, “Prosperity for All: better service delivery and job creation”. Chapter four commits the NRM to providing health workers with decent housing, improving remuneration, paying other allowances to staff working in hard-to-reach areas, reducing maternal mortality through obstetric care and to introducing a health insurance scheme among others. (Applause)

I am trying to reaffirm and to appreciate that the other side is reminding us of the commitments, which we are supposed to follow up. For the honourable members this side of the House, remember that 2016 is coming and the people are watching. We must live by the promises; I do not see why we cannot adjust this budget. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that passionate submission. As I conclude, I propose that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister withdraws his statement and comes back with a commitment that money has been got and allocated to save the mothers of this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter has been debated back and forth for three or four days; can I ask the Prime Minister to give us the final commitment on this issue? 

MS KAYAGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 3, I have seen the signature and what is written there is “Office of the Prime Minister”. Is it the clerk who works in the Prime Minister’s Office who signed? Who owns the report? I need to be clarified. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us find out from the Prime Minister who owns this statement.

4.35
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, if I may begin with that procedural point. I refer the honourable member to the heading of that statement, “Statement by the Prime Minister”. I would like to inform you that I, the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, come from the Office of the Prime Minister. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Can we get your response to the debate?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am very grateful for the contributions I have heard from all the members. Of course you are right, Madam Speaker, in saying that there is nothing that is being said that has not been said before. Every point that is being made this afternoon is a repetition of what has been said in this debate in the last few days. There is absolutely nothing new. 

Let me re-state what I said last week and what I said even today. This Government is very conscious of the plight of the health workers under the Ministry of Health. As one of the members clearly stated, the minister herself was at pains when she appeared before the committee to explain this. Last week, I stated very clearly that we were not at variance in any way from the position of members who represent constituencies in this House, including hon. Baryomunsi who speaks for my constituency sometimes, about the state of health in our areas. It is true, and we have said this so many times. What we are saying in this statement - (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister brought a statement and to my recollection, hon. Abdu Katuntu moved a motion that the statement be rejected or withdrawn by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Unfortunately, I see the Rt Hon. Prime Minister trying to re-state the same statements made in writing. Can we therefore be guided as to whether he is withdrawing or we vote on rejecting it as Members of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Let him reply and then we shall decide what to do.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Let me respond to something that I think came up today, which I could consider something that we all know but is coming up here in this debate - the question of money stolen in Government, including money stolen in the Office of the Prime Minister. 

Madam Speaker, you know as much as I do that when stealing occurs, it is done by thieves. (Laughter) The question of stealing money is actually a question of the Police. To the best of my knowledge, the Office of the Prime Minister has had problems which are under investigation. Secondly, some of these matters are actually before court. Some people have been accused -(Interjections)- it was before me and that is true, but thieves are thieves whatever the time. 

I would like to state, in response to your point, that Government did indeed cut across board 23 per cent of the budgets in order to support the war in the North. I was Minister of Defence then and I know that is true. That is why, therefore, Government has informed this House and the country at large today that we commit ourselves to finding money to give to the health sector as a priority. That is what we are going to do. So, what we have done now is – (Interjections) - not 100 midwives, as someone was saying, but 1,000 midwives for now. 

On the question of money, the figure will come once we adopt this report. Once we adopt the report, then the committee and the ministry must balance their figures. Once they have balanced, then we will supply and appropriate. At that stage, figures will come up. We are simply telling you now that having done consultations and having looked through the budget, we have come up with a solution.

It is not true that it is wasteful for Government to provide for inland travel for soldiers, because that is what they do – it is their job. It is not true that Government is being wasteful to provide money to UBOS for inland travel, because that is what they do. It is a statutory requirement - it is by law, passed by this House, that UBOS must produce annual reports. If you give them that command by law, you must provide for them. 

Madam Speaker, I want to tell you - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the committee and this august House have proposed the reallocation of Shs 39.2 billion from the areas that are listed on this paper to be moved to the Ministry of Health. Now the Prime Minister is telling us that if we do this, it will cause an imbalance. What the committee has proposed here is just reallocation, not increasing the budget. So, is the Prime Minister in order to come and mislead the House that we will cause an imbalance yet it is just a matter of re-allocation as proposed by the committee within the budget?

THE SPEAKER: No, the Prime Minister has also proposed the same thing of reallocation, so it is in order. What we are doing is in order because he has also proposed it. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I should actually state it so that it is on record; what I am proposing, Madam Speaker, is that first of all, any motion for alteration of the estimates either by way of addition – (Interjections) – I am sorry, let me conclude – if we do it when we are in harmony, there is no problem but when there is disharmony and the Executive is not in agreement with the Legislature, then you know what we should follow.

Lastly, I heard my brothers, hon. Mukitale and hon. Katuntu, saying that we should not be legalistic. I want to say - obviously, as Parliament we have heard this before and I want us to hear it again - that Parliament is the custodian of the Constitution and of the laws of Uganda. You are the ones who make the laws. So if we make laws, surely we must follow them. We cannot make laws and flout them at the same time and say, “Do not bring legalese here.” Obviously, we must act within the law. So, what I am proposing today is within the votes and is different from proposing cutting from one vote to supply to another vote – that variation. I, therefore, propose that we support this amendment, adopt the committee report so that we are able to supply and provide money for running Government business. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, from the debate on the Floor, it is clear that there is no agreement on what we are discussing. So, I suggest and advise that Government goes back together with the Budget Committee to review this situation and report back tomorrow. (Applause) So, give us a report tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, I am not in any way trying to challenge your ruling and that is why I am rising to seek guidance. We have had the committee disagreeing with the Prime Minister - we have actually twice disagreed on this matter and this is the third time. The committee chairperson actually reported today that at the time we broke off last week, the Prime Minister had gone to see where he can do the cutting. Now the Prime Minister comes here and says he has moved very far away from where we were. Even the undertaking he made, of looking for where to cut some money from, he cannot see it. 

Madam Speaker, the guidance I am seeking is whether the Prime Minister, by his own statement which he has re-stated, gives any hope or whether we are not actually postponing a matter that we should have concluded last week. This is because the Prime Minister has insisted that it is a matter of security and he cannot discuss it with anyone and that Parliament is trying to jeopardise national security. That is the spirit under which, Madam Speaker, you are sending him to our chairperson of the Budget Committee.

THE SPEAKER: The position of the House is that we still expect the government to raise the funds we adopted in this report. That is our position. (Applause)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter, which you have already ruled on. With hindsight, if you are to look at paragraph 4 - I will read it: “In order not to disadvantage the health sector headquarters operations, Government will come back to this august House for the requisite funding through supplementary funding.” 

I would urge the Leader of Government Business – It seems now we are going into the question of which comes first between the egg and the chicken. In this matter, why aren’t funds found for the health sector and at an appropriate time, we can still get back to the supplementary requisition for others that have been cut? 
So, we are really on the same page only that maybe some ego here and there is blinding us from moving forward. 
We can still proceed, since there is acceptance for supplementary funding. It can even at that particular point in time be evoked and brought to the House and we all move. We are on the same page but we are just being blinded by who comes first and who comes second. Otherwise, it should not be a matter that you cannot manage. We can easily manage this matter and we proceed.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to know, when the Minister of Finance was reading her budget, she said we were going to cut down on advertising, workshops and seminars; I do not know why this money is being provided for. Maybe some matters will come tomorrow. Let us go to the next item –(Interjections) - That is what she said in the Budget Speech - no money for seminars, no advertising but I see it here. This is money we could use for the health sector.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

(Debate continued)

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last week when we were having the debate on the adoption of the report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the Petroleum Bill, the Speaker ruled that they should read the report on the Petroleum Bill to do with refining so that we debate at once since members were raising issues that were meant for both reports. So, I suggest that the chairperson of the committee reads the report so that debate continues.

THE SPEAKER: No, but the Bill belongs to the Minister of Energy. She should move us for the second reading before the report comes. The Bill belongs to the minister, not to the committee. They want us to go to the third Bill? Is that what you agreed upon, to debate the second one on refining, gas processing and conversion? So justify the second reading and we get the report.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (REFINING, GAS PROCESSING AND CONVERSION, TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE) BILL, 2012

4.56
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill, 2012” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Just justify and then the report will come. 

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, this Bill seeks to give effect to Article 244 of the Constitution, to regulate the midstream petroleum activities that involve petroleum refining, gas processing and conversions, transportation and storage of petroleum. 

It also seeks to promote policy formulation, coordination and management of the midstream activities to provide for third-party access to infrastructure and provide for open, transparent and competitive processes of licensing by the minister responsible for petroleum. It also seeks to provide for health, safety and the environment. The Bill seeks to provide for the cessation of petroleum activities and decommissioning of petroleum facilities and infrastructure and also to provide for related matters.

Madam Speaker, the existing legal framework governing the operations of the petroleum industry is inadequate, given the emerging developments after the discovery of commercial petroleum resources in Uganda which require efficient and sustainable development with emphasis on value addition. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

4.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the parliamentary Committee on Natural Resources on the Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill, 2012. Before I proceed, I beg to lay a copy of the report on the Table. I wish also to lay on the Table the minutes pertaining to the proceedings of the committee while considering the Bill. I beg to lay.

The Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill, 2012 was read for the first time in February 2012. The Bill was referred to the committee in accordance with rules 117, 118 and 177 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

Paragraph two refers to the methodology. I think I will just skip that one. A lot of consultations were made with various stakeholders. I will straightaway proceed to page 5, paragraph three: 

Objectives of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to give effect to Article 244 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, to regulate petroleum refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation and storage, and to promote policy formulation, coordination and management of petroleum refining, gas processing and conversion and storage. 

Defects in the Existing Law 

The legal framework that currently governs the activities of the petroleum industry includes: the Petroleum Exploration and Production Act 1985, Cap 150, and the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003. The Petroleum Exploration and Production Act, Cap. 150, spans a period of more than two decades and is therefore now obsolete. It does not cover the midstream petroleum operations, environmental protection and conservation and the new emerging challenges created by the discovery of commercial petroleum resources in Uganda. (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. We have moved to another item, the Bill regarding petroleum refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation and storage. Just a while ago, the Front Bench was covered and full but now as we come to such a critical matter of national importance, the Frontbenchers are disappearing. Without your intervention, Madam Speaker, you might find we have no members on the Front Bench. 

Are we procedurally right to be selective in matters of national importance? On one Bill, members flood the Front Bench, on another they disappear to deny us quorum and to deny us the due attention that such matters deserve. Are we procedurally right to go on when members of the Front Bench are declining to attend Parliament on such matters?

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the members of the Front Bench who are seated in front of me to come here. Come and fill the benches, and they are many. Please come.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, paragraph five is about the need for the new legislation. The defects in the existing legislation, the Oil and Gas Policy of Uganda 2008, and the need to give full effect to Article 244 of the Constitution -(Interruption)

MS KABASHARIRA: Madam Speaker, the chairman is reading paragraph five while some of us do not have reports and yet we want to understand this important document and Bill. Is it procedurally right, therefore, for the chairman to continue reading when some members do not have the report?

THE SPEAKER: How many do not have the report?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence and that of members. Since the chairman has a very big report, the printery could be working on availing more copies as we share, because the report is big. Let us allow the chairman to make a presentation and I would even want to request, if possible, that we go and sleep over it and we debate tomorrow. 

MS KABASHARIRA: It was in this House one time when I asked why we are not provided - We have now generally in the whole world gone electronic. It is only this Parliament of Uganda where we carry big volumes of paper and we are even spending a lot of money. Why don’t we think of getting these reports using software? If you could buy us either laptops or iPads, it could even save a lot of time and money.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Parliamentary Commission is in the process of acquiring those items for you, and I think I reported that when we were opening the session – (Interjections) - Yes, it is an assurance and the Parliamentary Commission has already taken a decision. It is just the process of procurement and so on that is ongoing, but we have taken that decision that you must have them to ease your work. 

Can we receive the report; we shall not debate. Can we just receive the report today and then we debate tomorrow. The Clerk should make efforts to send more copies. Please, listen for now. We shall not debate; let us just listen.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A while ago, you invited our ministers, the members of the Front Bench, to come and occupy these seats but I still see three honourable ministers who have refused to honour your invitation? Is it in order, Madam Speaker, for you to invite members of the Front Bench to occupy their seats and they continue sitting behind when it is well known that we follow the Commonwealth practice where members of Cabinet sit on the Front Bench? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Can the ministers who are hanging somewhere please come and sit here where you can be seen. Let us proceed. Someone can come and sit next to the Third Deputy Prime Minister. (Laughter)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker and honourable members, we go to paragraph 5. 

Need for the New Legislation 

The defects in the existing legislation, the Oil and Gas Policy of Uganda 2008, and the need to give full effect to Article 244 of the Constitution require new legislation to regulate the midstream petroleum operations.

Observations and Recommendations
The committee observations are systematically structured around the core areas of transparency and accountability, environmental concerns, local content, equity and participation, macro-economic implications of petroleum, institutional arrangements and legislative oversight.

Transparency and Accountability
The committee is cognisant of the centrality of openness, transparency and accountability in enhancing the efficacy of institutions tasked with governing Uganda’s petroleum sector. 

In the same vein, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, the Access to Information Act, 2005 and the National Oil and Gas Policy of Uganda, 2008 all recognise and seek to safeguard openness and access to information.

To reinforce the efficacy of transparency and accountability, the committee adopted a comparative analysis of Uganda and Ghana, a fellow emerging democracy on the African Continent. Ghana is one of Africa’s leading democracies, with high freedom and anti-corruption rankings. Ghana has publicly released its PSAs and is a leader in complying with the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative not only in Africa but globally. With transparency and accountability, institutions are strengthened and good governance becomes a reality. 

In pursuit of transparency and accountability, the committee further notes that much as the Access to Information Act, 2005 sets the parameters of accessing information in the possession of Government, the Official Secrets Act of 1964, which provides for secrecy in matters such as security and defence, was not repealed by the Access to Information Act. This Act creates barriers to citizen’s access to a broad range of Government held information, and its vague and broad formulation inevitably perpetuates the culture of secrecy and confidentiality. 

There is need, therefore, for this law which we are enacting to cascade openness and transparency, provide sufficient checks and balances and mitigate abuse of office and corruption. 

The Economic Implications of Petroleum 

As Uganda transits into the oil age, it goes without saying that revenues and other economic benefits accruing from petroleum activities have the potential to hasten her growth and development depending on how it is managed. Experts have predicted that oil is poised to double Government revenues from Shs US$ 2.261 billion once full production is under way. This implies that with oil revenues, chronic budget deficits will be mitigated and an increase in receipts from exports due to petroleum exports will spur macro-economic growth. However, if such hopes are to materialise, there is need for prudent and sustainable management of oil revenues.

Given the finite nature of the petroleum resource that Uganda has been gifted with, there is need for a deliberate and sustained effort to desist from over reliance on oil revenues and instead use and distribute the benefits accruing from petroleum equitably and sustainably to enhance national unity and cohesion while nurturing and developing strong national institutions that will transcend the era of petroleum. Further still, it is imperative to align the expenditure of petroleum revenues to local needs to enable natives bolster their capability to effectively participate in the oil and gas sector. Considering that the revenue management dimension of the oil and gas sector is enshrined in the Public Finance Bill, 2012, the committee hopes that those scrutinising the Bill bear this in mind.

Environmental Management

Uganda’s oil discoveries have occurred in the ecologically sensitive Albertine and Murchison Falls areas of the River Nile. This calls for adequate safeguards to protect the delicate ecological balance. 

In addition, the committee notes that waste management and disposal is already a challenge yet production is yet to commence. Currently, the waste from exploration activities is being stored in temporary locations such as bitumen containers and polythene. Actual disposal awaits the requisite waste management regulations from NEMA. This, therefore, calls for rigorous, timely and sustainable interventions as far as waste disposal and management is concerned. The committee also notes the need for institutional safeguards for people affected by oil exploration, production, and related activities yet such people are not directly employed in the industry.

The committee recommends that the National Environmental Management Authority, Uganda Wildlife Authority, the Water Resources Management Directorate and other state organs mandated to manage different aspects of the environment need their capability enhanced and their operations adequately resourced if they are to efficiently and effectively monitor and regulate petroleum exploration and production activities and their ramifications on the environment. This may inevitably require an amendment to the Acts which establish the mandate and govern the operations of the respective agencies that superintend over the various aspects of the environment since it enhances their capacity to handle expanded mandates. In addition NEMA, in consultation with other relevant government agencies, should efficiently and effectively devise modalities for waste management and disposal.

Local Content and Participation

In the recent past, there has been an upsurge in demands by locals in the Albertine Graben and other areas across the country where oil resources are found. I move to recommendations on page 11.

It is in this vein that the committee recommends the establishment of a requisite and appropriate institutional framework to enhance the capability of local Ugandans to harness the demographic and economic changes that accrue from oil exploration and production activities.

The government should also strictly monitor and enforce local content provisions in all Production Sharing Agreements (PSAs), especially in areas such as labour, training, and local goods and services provision, and generally facilitate Ugandan natives and local businesses to effectively participate in the oil and gas sector. This needs to be provided for in the law and this Bill provides an opportune moment. In addition, the capability of the state needs to be bolstered as far as monitoring and enforcing local content provisions is concerned.

Institutional Arrangements

The institutional framework in the Bill is based on a tripartite model separating government bodies into policy, regulatory and commercial functions. I will now move to the recommendation on page 12.

There is, therefore, need to clearly spell out the various roles, powers and obligations of the various institutions being established by the law. The next sentence has a lot of ambiguities and I pray that we expunge that from this report.

The National Oil Company 

The National Oil Company as envisaged in the law will be the main commercial arm for state participation in the oil and gas industry. The National Oil Company is usually premised on local expertise, nationalistic favour or a myriad of other factors and as a company, it usually develops along several different lines. I will move on to the middle of the page.

However, over the years, the rigours of the industry in terms of volume, cost of investment and adaptability to rapid technological changes have impacted on the nature of national oil companies. There has been a realisation that national oil companies should not only embrace suitable private sector tendencies but also radically shed off some, if not all, of their pervasive, bureaucratic tendencies synonymous with many parastatals. This explains why national oil companies today have been modified to suit this trend and to be able to attract private capital and ease technological transfer. Furthermore, the challenge of limited resources in emerging oil economies like Uganda implies that the state alone cannot adequately meet the resource needs of the National Oil Company, hence posing a threat to the capability, growth and sustainability of the National Oil Company. 

This challenge can be mitigated by setting up the National Oil Company in a manner which makes it efficient and effective and suitable to attract private capital. In the case of Uganda, the Companies Act has provisions which can permit the creation of such a national oil company.

Land Rights and Compensation
The committee notes the need to entrench the categorical principle of compensation prior to acquisition, drawing on the guarantee of the customary and other rights to land laid down in the Constitution of Uganda. I will now go to the recommendations:

a) 	In handling compensation, the resettlement action plan conforms to the principles of fairness, adequacy, promptness and quick settlement. This compensation should transcend land per se and cover aspects such as heritage and other livelihoods as well.

b) 	There is need to define guidelines for prior and informed consent to land acquisition, including the guarantee of an open and transparent public hearing. During these hearings, it is imperative to provide full information in the applicable local languages on the proposed development, its potential benefits and its potential impact at the local, regional and national levels as well as the proposed settlement and compensation measures for affected people. Special emphasis should be put on the involvement of women residents in public hearings and the incorporation of their perspectives on the resettlements and compensation measures.
 
c) 	Further, it is important to urgently devise a policy of compensation that upholds the constitutional guarantees and protects the land rights of persons living in current and prospective oil-rich areas, so as to ameliorate the potential ramifications of unfair land alienation and malpractices accruing from oil and gas activities. This is particularly critical since land is not just a primary source of livelihood but also defines the way of life for many rural Ugandans. 

A comparative analysis of the other resource-rich nations, especially in developing countries, reveals that issues of access to land and related resources and forced displacement are a major source of conflict. By providing for just and equitable practices around land, Uganda can avert similar problems. 

The consideration of land acquisition and compensation in the oil producing areas should take cognisance of the range of customary land ownership patterns and the land rights of the people - recognised by the 1995 Constitution - which exist in the affected areas. This should further be translated into physical land surveys on the part of the government and awarding of land titles to people. This is a process that remains prohibitive in terms of financial, legal, and social resources and, therefore, cannot be undertaken by the common Ugandan. It is a significant barrier in protecting the common Ugandan from exploitation and land alienation and is something which the Government of Uganda needs to seriously address. 

Let me go straight to page 15. The committee appreciates that the Albertine Graben has been declared a special planning area, but further notes the need to expeditiously effect this plan and accordingly bridge the information gap about it. 

Health and Safety

There is need to develop the requisite health and safety capabilities across the various stakeholders operating in the industry. In addition, the policy and regulatory framework should address matters of health and safety appropriately. 

The committee recommends that the Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill, 2012 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to report.  (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated, we were only receiving the report today. I want to report that it has the necessary minimum signatures. So, I want to ask members to study the report, study the proposed amendments and also review the first report so that we can do the committee stage probably later this week. 

I just wanted to let you know that in the gallery we have some residents from Mukono Municipality who had come to present some issues, but their petition will be presented tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow. Clerk, please distribute sufficient copies. 

(The House rose at 5.25 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 19 September 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 











