Tuesday, 1 September 2015

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, over a week ago, we adjourned Parliament but immediately thereafter, it occurred that there was urgent business to be handled and we needed to call you back. So, instead of having a full recess, we have had to call you back and start the second meeting of this Parliament.

I apologise for messages that were contradictory in the course of calling back Parliament. There was a message that asked you to come today; there was another that said you should not come and then a third one that said you should come. I apologise for that; that was because of some errors in the communication systems that we had but they were corrected. So, it will be fine and let us go with these things now that we are already here.

Part of the business that we have to handle requires quorum that is exceptional to the ordinary one third we have always had. Under the Constitution, we are required to do some of the decisions that we are supposed to make by a majority of members of this House and that means 50 percent plus of all Members of Parliament; and that complicates our quorum. I call upon the whips to do whatever they can to make sure that we have these numbers by the end of business today so that we can take those decisions that remained outstanding before we went on recess.

It is the responsibility of this House to make laws and that authority is granted to it by the Constitution. That same Constitution gives power to this House to delegate some of its responsibilities so that we do not handle even the little details of operational procedures; details of regulations – we pass those details onto the ministers and responsible authorities to handle. When we handled the Uganda Communications Act sometime back in 2013, there was a debate that arose on Section 93 – if I recall well – where the committee proposed that all statutory instruments to be signed off by the minister must have prior approval of Parliament. (Applause) When that happened – and it was passed that way - but that was not what was drafted. What was drafted was in the usual way of handling statutory instruments – that you give ministers authority and powers to do certain delegated functions. 

So, we ended up passing two provisions that are contradictory; we passed in 93(1) that “The minister may, after consultation with the Commission and with the approval of Parliament, by statutory instrument make regulations for better carrying into effect of the provisions of this Act.”

Last week, the Uganda Communications Commission brought 17 big regulations to my office that would amount to work, which is about 15 or 20 times bigger than the Act we worked on and passed. That should have been work the commission should have been doing in its ordinary operations but because we passed the law the way we did, now it has to have prior approval of Parliament; we do not even know the procedure anymore – should it be gazetted first or should they bring them as draft regulations for the approval of Parliament? Can Parliament discuss draft regulations? That is the debate we had here and the guidance from the chair at the time was that it would not have been proper for us to have passed the provision this way but the then minister was okay with it so we passed it that way. But there might be time required of us to look at it again because it is simply unworkable. There would be no time even if this Parliament was in its first year; there is no way it can study 17 regulations from an Act of Parliament, go through them one by one and then come back to the House and this House pronounces itself on each of the regulations. It would simply be impairing the work of the commission, which we assigned some mandate to handle that sector.

Therefore, my guidance to the minister is to the effect that that law should be brought back and that particular clause reviewed so that it is like any other law – statutory instruments, the ones that we have claw-backs on; the ones that we say, “These ones we must look at” are specific and they are not many. But the rest of them should just come to Parliament for information. So, I have briefed the minister and I hope that the Minister will heed this so that we clear out this thing and let the Uganda Communications Commission operate normally like any other institution of Government – making instruments that can guide its operations and activities. Thank you, honourable members.

2.20
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of procedure. We were called back from recess and as you are aware, a major party, which is a leading Opposition political party, Forum for Democratic Change, had looked at our calendar and organised its retreat, which starts tomorrow. It is a party with the Leader of the Opposition, our Chief Whip and most of the frontbench are members from that party. 

There is a precedent from this Parliament; when the ruling party went for a retreat in Kyankwanzi – and even when it has gone to the caucus, Parliament has been delayed and sometimes adjourned. And I am aware that the Leader of the Opposition wrote to your good office requesting that they only have Wednesday and Thursday – especially Wednesday –for them to sort out their business and be here in the House.

So, the procedural matter I am raising is that for all intents and purposes, we strive for equity and we want fairness. All that I am begging your good office as we proceed is that you take consideration of the interests of our fellow Members and we proceed in such a manner like we have done before with the NRM – that we give ourselves Wednesday. It is a humble request so that on Thursday they will be back in the House and making a full contribution. I have looked at the Order Paper; there are issues where they have grave concern and they would like to be around. 

So, I rise on a point of procedure to beg for your indulgence by asking you as you usually do with the ruling party, to accord our mother party that one day and we meet because it is not their making. They had hoped and prayed that we would be in recess and organised themselves that way. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have discussed this matter with the Opposition Chief Whip and I was wondering when you were going to stop so that I would let the House proceed and  then, we see how to adjourn the House today to a date that is convenient. We have had this discussion with the Opposition Whip and so, it is okay because we will be handling this. 

2.22
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance regarding the establishment of village urban councils in Makindye Division. 

This matter is not new. It was brought to the attention of the people of Makindye West and they were not satisfied with it. They went to court and court issued a consent order in that regard, where it was stated old administrative units that were declared illegal by court in suit No. 245 and 13 of 2010 be expunged from the official record of the Electoral Commission and the Kampala Capital City Authority.

It added that all various persons who have been holding offices in the illegal administrative units should henceforth cease from holding and operating in their respective capacities and that the Attorney-General had reserved his consent pending consultation with the concerned Government agencies. 

Mr Speaker, I look at this new development as contempt of court. I would like the minister to inform me why he has come back with the same villages, which were declared illegal in the past? I thank you.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any response from Government? The creation of urban councils in the villages was stopped by court in certain villages and there is a communication to the effect that those villages that were stopped by court will come into effect. Does that amount to contempt of court and what does the minister say about that?  That is the concern from the member.

2.24
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will need assistance from the Attorney-General and I beg that I am given the opportunity of consulting for a legal interpretation from the Attorney-General. That is the assistance I am talking about. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that you need to follow this up with the Government people so that at whatever time we come back, we are clear about what has happened and what is not going to happen so that the people are not affected by such things. 

2.24
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance regarding what was recently reported in the Daily Monitor of 27 August 2015. The news published in that paper on that day was so alarming and shocking that the House should deserve the opportunity to be briefed about what was alarming.

It was reported that the Democratic Republic of Congo is demanding from Uganda a sum of Shs 88.83 trillion, which is equivalent to $ 23.5 billion. The DRC is demanding for this money from the Uganda for the plundering of its natural resources by Uganda and committing atrocities on its soil during the 1998 to 2003 war.

In 2005, the International Court of Justice held that the armed atrocities that Uganda committed in the DRC amounted to aggression and the use of force as well as violation of international human rights and international humanitarian rights in addition to depleting the natural resources of DRC.

Mr Speaker, in international law, Uganda is about to be mortgaged because that money is so astronomical that none of us can imagine how we can pay it because we are classified internationally as one of the poorest countries in the world.

The Government of Uganda should, therefore, answer the following concerns: How do we avoid being mortgaged and how are we going to pay that money? 

Lastly – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you using the word mortgage as a person studying law or you are using it in an ordinary way?   


MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am using it in very serious terms of law. (Laughter) Finally, Mr Speaker, we would like, as representatives of the people of Uganda, to know the people implicated in that atrocity that is causing us a fortune cost. It cannot simply go. Government should also tell us how this money is going to be paid or else we could as well say that we are about to wind up our business. We need an explanation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any minister?

2.28
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, Uganda as a sovereign country has a system of facing challenges like the one hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is putting on Table. This issue was also brought to the Public Accounts Committee where hon. Kwizera is a member.

I would like to assure him that this country will not be mortgaged and that there are systems - we do have alternative dispute resolution systems between the two countries but if he needs detailed information, the relevant minister can provide it. 

I would like to assure Ugandans that the country is safe and that it is not about to be mortgaged like hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi has said.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, the information I can give is that this information was picked from the Public Accounts Committee when we assessed the level of indebtedness. However, $ 23 billion has not yet been ascertained because at The Hague, Uganda also placed a counter claim and therefore, they are still in negotiations to ascertain who pays what and to what extent the payment shall be made. I thank you. (Member rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we finish with these issues of the members? 

MR NZOGHU: I thank you, Mr Speaker. You will recall that before we went for recess, the Minister for Internal Affairs, Gen. Aronda Nyakairima had promised to furnish this House with two statements. The first was about the death of the Muslim clerics and the second is about the illegal training of militias by Kakooza Mutale and his accomplice.

So, aware that we are actually going into a critical period of elections and electioneering, it would be proper for the minister to clarify to Ugandans and this Parliament about those two issues and also aware that death is very painful to especially by the relatives of the various Muslims who have been killed. 

It would, therefore, be fair and also in the interest of this country to have these clarified here so that people can know the direction, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I raised the same issue with the minister and I was informed that there is something that has to be cleared by Cabinet tomorrow before it comes to the House. Hopefully, we will have it on Thursday.

2.31
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. I remember on 11th April, the Minister of State for Health made a statement to the effect that Hepatitis B is spreading at a faster rate than HIV and that raises a lot of concern to us, who are leaders in this country. As a result, as a member of the Budget Committee, I lobbied the committee and the Ministry of Finance to ensure that the budget of the Ministry of Health would increase from Shs 5 billion to Shs 10 billion for vaccination of Hepatitis B. 

This matter was discussed at length and it was agreed that we should not only talk about starting with 11 districts as had earlier on been proposed because the disease is spreading at a very fast rate. As I talk, within the last one week, I buried three young people who died as result of Hepatitis B. I believe other members here could be experiencing the same. I would like to know from the Government, specifically from the Ministry of Health, what is being done?

It was my hope that having the budget increased from Shs 5 billion to Shs 10 billion was to ensure that the entire Northern and Eastern regions would start vaccination immediately and concurrently. However as I speak, the district of Gulu which was supposed to benefit from this is not being vaccinated. In my own district Dokolo, there is no vaccination going on and I have tried to check with West Nile there is no vaccination going on.

I would therefore like to know from the Ministry of Health what exactly you are doing with the money that we gave you for nationwide vaccination against Hepatitis B, which is spreading at a faster rate than HIV. What is the ministry doing with the money that has been approved and budgeted for? The people of Uganda are waiting for your reaction.

2.35
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My condolences to the bereaved families who have lost their dear ones because of Hepatitis B. The information I have is that money has already been given to the National Medical Stores and that they are making arrangements to procure testing kits and other relevant equipment. I have been told that they are going to begin vaccination towards the end of this month of September. They will begin with the most hit districts. This is the information I have; money is with the National Medical Stores.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, what is of concern to me is the statement which has been made by the Government Chief Whip. It was the decision of the committee that the budget for vaccination be doubled so that vaccination is done nationwide but concentrating in the Northern region and Eastern region. I am now being told that we are starting from the most hit. How do we know the most hit? I just told you within one week I personally buried three people and there are more people who died in my district that I did not burry.

We want nationwide vaccination but concentrating in the East and the North like it was requested. May we know why you are starting from just a few districts when our people are dying?

2.36
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the chairperson on the Committee on Health and when we were looking for money to vaccinate every Ugandan, we needed more than Shs 50 billion. However, because the resource envelope was not enough, we opted to squeeze the budget by setting about Shs 10 billion specifically for Hepatitis B. We agreed that instead of leaving – because the Ministry of Health had said it was an unfunded priority. I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for standing with us to make sure this money was given. I join you in feeling the pain for Ugandans. 

However, we said that we are going to first give the most hit areas of this country, namely the West Nile, Eastern Uganda, Northern and some parts of Western Uganda and that is Kiruhura plus Kampala because the biggest prevalence is in the West Nile, North and Eastern Uganda.

I think the Chief Whip should be protected because what she is giving is scientific and I am very glad the vaccines and the test kits have been procured and I think that if we get these vaccines, we should begin with the most hit places as we come down to other places. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is clear.

DR EPETAIT: I would like to give supplementary information in regard to control of Hepatitis B. It is a viral disease; you do not give mass vaccination of everybody before testing. It is important, as the Government Chief Whip has stated, that individuals must first be tested and those who are found negative are therefore vaccinated. It would not be helpful to proceed with vaccination of those who are found positive, thereby adding a problem to an already existing problem.
Those would probably have to be monitored for their viral load and those who are found at a risky viral load would have to be put on treatment. There is need first to have the testing kits available, those who are found negative are the ones to receive the vaccine.

MR MUBITO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have been in the field and while there, I received a message asking us to come to handle crucial business within three days and then we go back to the field. I want to secure my constituency; I want to come back to Parliament but when we came, it is not what I expected.

2.40
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me chance to raise a matter of national importance. When I was in Mbarara just three days ago, I received a very painful phone call from a retired lecturer of Kyambogo University and former headmaster of Ntare School, called Mzee Gumisiriza. He is a pensioner who told me all pensioners in Mbarara have not received their pension for the months of July and August.

These are retired citizens of this country that have served for years and years and they are in their old age. Some of them have disease conditions that need drugs to be taken on a daily basis. Once drugs are stopped, people are going to start dying. I would like to give some disease conditions that can kill somebody if they are not given drugs; hypertension in these retired people will kill them if they are not given drugs. People with diabetes mellitus must be given treatment. If you do not treat, somebody will die. All carcinomas and cancers need treatment almost on a daily basis and these men and women have not received the money. 

Mr Speaker, I got information that when the pensioners tried to look for answers from the Ministry of Finance, they were referred to the Ministry of Public Service. When they tried to ring some officials in the Ministry of Public Service, they became very dodgy; nobody was committal on who is sitting on the money for these pensioners. 

What I want from Government – the Chief Whip and the Minister of Finance is also here – is where is the money for pensioners bearing in mind that you have very many pensioners in your own constituencies?

Secondly –(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, hon. Bitekyerezo, for giving me way. The issue of pensioners is becoming a crisis. I have been traversing my constituency and pension is a big question that they are asking me. These are people who are vulnerable as he has said. Some of them are being told that because of the restructuring of some sub-counties, they now belong to the other sub-county or division and that is why their money is not being paid. We need a clear explanation to these pensioners so that they know what is happening to their money.  That is the information I wanted to give you.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I am bringing it because some old men are in prison because of eating pensioners’ money in Uganda. The names are very clear. Every day, they are in papers. I am very sure that these fellows who were eating money in the Ministry of Public Service left there some trained people in stealing pension.

The Ministry of Public Service has two very serious ministers – Rt Hon. Prime Minister Henry Kajura and hon. Sezi Mbaguta.  These are very powerful Ugandans and I believe that if they say, “we want you to tell us something”, it can be done. What we want is an assurance from the Ministry of Public Service. Where is the money for pensioners? If you have people who are not working in your ministry, what have you done to them? When we do not get money we do not become very happy; what about somebody who has served the country for more than 60 years and is there at home helpless? 

Are you aware that the ministers who are refusing to look for money for the pensioners are almost also retiring like we are all going to retire? How will you feel when you are not given your pension? If you have a heart, can you get money for the pensioners now or explain to us where the money is? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister?

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you hon. Bitekyerezo for raising this issue once again. Two-and-a-half weeks ago, this issue was raised on the Floor of the House and we came back and gave information on the progress we were making. We stated here – and that is still the position – that money was transferred to different votes. 

If you are a pensioner and you used to work with the Ministry of Agriculture, the money for you is in the Ministry of Agriculture and vice versa. Because of that transfer, there was a delay. We have been working on this delay. I would like to inform you that July – (Interruption)

MS BAKO ABIA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. There are two issues on which I would like to seek clarification from you. The first one is, what is it that you discovered with the old system that was not helping the pensioners? 

Secondly, two weeks ago, you made the same statement. Are you suggesting to this House and Ugandans out there that for two weeks Government has been non-existent? Finally, you are an economist and you know the time value of money, are you going to pay the pensioners with some interest knowing very well that you have fixed this money somewhere and you are just not being honest about it?

MR BAHATI: Thank you. Two things were wrong with the old system; it was very inefficient and full of “ghosts”. That is what we have been working on. There are some votes, which have been paying. At least by last week there was a good number. 

Mr Speaker, to be fair to this House, I pledge that tomorrow I will bring an update on how many votes have paid and how many are remaining as well as the way forward.  Thank you.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure regarding lack of seriousness in Government -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under what rule? (Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on procedure under what rule?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am standing on a point of procedure. Recently, the Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs made a promise before you that within seven days, he would report to us on the fate of 27 Ugandans now languishing in jails in Abu Dhabi where we have an embassy – somewhere in the United Arab Emirates.

Up to now, we are waiting and there is no such response. Ugandans are suffering. They are being tortured, beaten up and starved. Is this Government serious? I would like to know whether we are procedurally moving correctly under circumstances of deceit by the Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are proceeding on the Order Paper. Therefore, we are proceeding properly. 

2.48
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In February, I brought here a motion regarding Nonve Forest. After the select committee had been appointed, you gave them a task to come and present in April. We are now in September. As I traversed around other forests, they are really being destroyed at a very fast rate.

Mr Speaker, when can we get this select committee’s report published so that we see what to do with other forests that are disappearing very fast?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a member of the select committee on Nonve Forest here? How far have you gone?

2.48
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, we have drafted the report. We are waiting to be put on the Order Paper to present it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The only time you come on the Order Paper is when you are ready and have submitted a copy. That is when we put you on the Order Paper. If it is ready, please submit it to the Clerk and the Speaker’s office and we proceed with that. It will be done, honourable member.

2.49
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. About three weeks ago, minister Bahati promised us that the Students’ Loan Scheme deadline would be extended. As far as I am concerned, there are students who are stranded. They have gone to the banks and have been turned away. The question I have is, has the deadline been extended or not? What should we communicate to these students who are stranded?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister?

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I will have to give the full report tomorrow because as Government, we received the concern of the Member and we actually requested the Minister of Education to communicate that. The circumstances were that students could not be left out because of the strike of non-teaching staff. I will give the updates tomorrow, Mr Speaker.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT REPORTS ON INVESTIGATIONS INTO ALLEGED MISMANAGEMENT AND CORRUPTION AT KYAMBOGO UNIVERSITY


2.51
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to lay on Table, the Inspectorate of Government report on investigation into alleged mismanagement and corruption at Kyambogo University:
Volume 1 – Procurement
Volume 11 – Human resource
Volume 111 – Finance and other resources
Volume 1V – Financial and other resources
Volume V – Governance
I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this is not the bi-annual reports from the Inspectorate of Government as required under the Constitution, but a special report that relates to a sector. This particular report, therefore, stands referred to the Committee on Education and Sports, which is in charge of the sector. Kyambogo University falls in that sector, so, let the committee look at it and then they will come and advise the House if there are issues that Parliament should take over and handle.

THE PEACE, RECOVERY AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN THREE (PRDP 3) FOR NORTHERN UGANDA

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Rebecca Amuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to lay the Peace Recovery and Development Plan 3 for Northern Uganda: July 2015- June 2021. The certificate of financial implications is attached and it is already in the MTEF. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. Honourable members, the certificate indicates that the first phase of the next one year is captured in the budget that we have already appropriated but the other ones will be handled appropriately when it comes. Therefore, let the records capture that and it should be handled appropriately.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, PRDP is a very important programme, which is intended to rehabilitate areas affected by the Lords Resistance Army. The procedural matter I would like to raise is that I am wondering why the minister should be dressed in a yellow gomesi when this is a national programme. (Laughter) Is it procedurally right for a minister serving in the Government of Uganda to present a very important programme to rehabilitate Northern and Eastern Uganda dressed fully in yellow? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not within my authority to give information that is to my knowledge but for the sake of this discussion that has come up, I met the honourable member in a place, which required her to be in that kind of dress. I think she did not have opportunity to go back and change to come to the House and why would she change anyway? Let us proceed. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 179(1) (B) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA FOR THE CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was for vote and as we are now, we will not be able to put the question to that matter.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2016

MR MATTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I raise the procedural matter, I would like to say this. Jesus Christ, son of the Almighty God, save the people of Bugendera and give us a district status. (Laughter) President Yoweri Museveni, son of Kaguta, save the people of Bugendera and give us a district status. 

Parliament of Uganda, the supreme law-making institution of the country, save the people of Bugendera and give us a district status. (Laughter)

On 5 July 2014 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can we come to that when we come back to that item. We have gone to the next item because we were not able to discuss that issue. I will pick you when that matter comes up. (Laughter) 

Honourable members, we will be handling the issue of the districts as soon as the number is appropriate to take the vote but for now, let us handle this business.

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I rise on a point of procedure. I am a member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and our chairperson has to be on the front bench to take care of the interest of the committee. We are supposed to be represented to move amendments but I see no one from our committee on the front bench and I do not know how we are proceeding.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would you like to take this seat and proceed? (Laughter) The amendments are in writing. Would you like to help the House to proceed? You have done this before, hon. Muwuma.  Clause 3 is interpretation; maybe we come back to clause 3 later.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: I am also a member of the committee but the committee report is detailed to the extent that even where we had already passed sections like the long title, the committee had made recommendations. Therefore, our procedural issue is that we revise even clauses 1 and 2 we had passed and then we go to 3. Now that the chairperson is around, we will ask to recommit the long title so that they conform to the committee recommendation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The long title is not a clause. We have not handled the long title. I thought the long title is that long paragraph. 

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have not handled that. We will handle it at the end. We are on clause 3; can we defer it, it has interpretation and come back to it? Or we are conclusive on the issue of interpretation? If not, the new deferred clause 3, so that we come back to it when we have looked at the whole thing. Thank you.

Clause 4

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 4, objectives of the Act; the committee proposes to amend clause 4 by re-arranging the objectives to provide as follows and the objectives are two:

One, (a) establish an administrative and regulatory framework within which organisations can conduct their affairs;
(b) From what and require organisations to maintain high standards of governance, transparency and accountability;
(c) Promote a spirit of cooperation, mutual partnership and shared responsibility between the organisation’s sector, the ministries, departments and agencies of Government and other stake holders dealing with organisations; 
(d) Provide the development of strong organisations and to facilitate the formation and effective function of organisations for public benefit purposes;
(e) Promote and strengthen the capacity of the organisation’s sector that is sustainable and able to deliver services professionally;
(f) Promote the development of self-regulation among organisations;
(g) Provide an enabling environment for the organisation sector;
(h) Strengthen the capacity of the bureau, promote and develop a charity culture that is voluntary and nonpartisan and relevant to need an association of the people of Uganda.

The justification is to be systematic in stating the objectives by stating the most core objects first.

GEN. ARONDA- NYAKAIRIMA: Mr Chairman, I concede

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, there is consensus from the minister. Can I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee? The committee is proposing to delete the existing clause 4 and substitute it with what the Chairperson has just read. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to amend clause 5 by (i); in the sub-title of part 2 by substituting the word “Board” with the word “Bureau”
(ii) In the head note, substitute the word “Board “with the word “Bureau”
(iii) Substitute for the word “Board” wherever it occurs in the clause with the word “bureau.”

The justification is that it is pertinent that an autonomous body is set up under this Act to handle NGO matters and those matters that are enormous for a department or a section in the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

This body should be called Bureau rather than Board since the current body in existence is a Board. It might, therefore, be difficult to differentiate the two.

GEN. ARONDA-NYAKAIRIMA: I concede, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, can I put the question to this amendment? I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the Chairperson of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MS NAMUGWANYA: The committee proposes to amend clause 6 by: 
    (i) Substituting the word “Board” wherever it appears with the word “Bureau”
    (ii) In paragraph (d) 
    i) by substituting for the word “regional” with the word “branch”  
    ii) deleting the word “DNMCs” and SNMCs.

The justification is that there may not be a clear way of demarcating regional offices in the country; besides, this is an administrative function that should be left to the Bureau to decide, basing on the load of work and budgetary implications for the different parts of the country.
    iii) Merging paragraphs b and c to read as: “to formulate, develop and issue policy guidelines for DNMCs and SMNCs, for effective and efficient monitoring of the operations of the organisations.”
    iv) In paragraph (h), by substituting the following paragraph and re-numbering accordingly; 
    (i) to establish and maintain a register of organisations. 
    (ii) to consider applications for issuance and removal of permit.
    v) Deleting paragraph (i). The justification is to avoid duplication of roles since the responsibility to incorporate legal persons is the preserve of the registrar of companies and Uganda Registration Services Bureau. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is proposal from the committee.

GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA: Mr Chairperson, I concede on 1, 2(i), 3 and 4 and wish to maintain, as stated in the Bill on 2(ii) and 5. The justification is that on 2(ii), the Bureau will have to establish the DNMCs and SNMCs at the districts. There may not be a clear way of demarcating the regional offices in the country. Besides, it is an administrative function that should be left to the bureau to decide, basing on the workload and budgetary implications for different parts of the country. B and c should be merged and re-numbered accordingly: formulate, develop and issue policy guidelines by DNMCs and CNMCs for respective and efficient monitoring of operations of the organisation.

In paragraph (h), substitute in the following paragraph and re-number accordingly “to establish and maintain a register of organisations, consider applications for issuance and renewal of the permits. Delete (i) and the justification is to avoid duplication of roles since the responsibility to incorporate legal persons is the preserve of the registrar of companies and Uganda Registration Services Bureau. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I have not clearly understood the difference between what was proposed by the Chairperson and what you are now proposing because you have not separated the two.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Deputy Chairperson, the Minister was agreeable to the rest of the proposals. The point of departure was on incorporation of NGOs, where the committee report indicates that it should be left to the URSB to incorporate NGOs. After incorporation, they just present the certificate to the NGO board or bureau.

The minister’s proposal is that incorporation should be left to the NGO board or the bureau to do it. That is our point of departure. I do not know whether I am very clear. 

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank the Chairperson. I think the committee should be supported in this because the Registration Services Bureau was established by an Act of Parliament and their mandate is to handle all registrations in the country, unless the minister presents a serious mischief in leaving this responsibility with URSB. So far, I am speaking from the experience of a committee member supervising the Bureau. It is demonstrated effectiveness.

GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA: Mr Chairman, this is a product of thorough consultation, bench marking, creating a one stop centre, a product of wanting to make an efficient working body by giving it a function of not only registering but incorporating those NGOs, which are going to be given to a certificate of operators NGOs and not companies as the mandate is given to the URSB. This is a function that has been well studied. We do not intend to have registration centre and then an incorporation centre. This was in harmony with URSB and it was a product of consultation.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, the powers envisaged by the minister will be too much because the bureau being set up is purely a regulatory body. It is being given powers, later on in the Bill, to even have powers to revoke a license. Now, to have the same Bureau, to prosecute and also have the same Bureau with powers to incorporate would be to give this Bureau too much power. 

The position of the committee is that this body – there is also an issue where by you can choose to cease to be an NGO but continue to operate under the Company’s Act as a company.

The work we would like to give – that is a position of the committee; is for purposes of regulating NGO’s, not incorporating them by issuing permits and licenses. That suffices in the opinion of the committee.

Therefore, we humbly beg the minister that, there is consensus on this provision not to make it partisan and also that we are making a very good law for the benefit of all stakeholders. He was part of the committee, we interacted and arrived at a consensus position; to humbly beg him to concede and we move smoothly. I beg his indulgence.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I know that you can register a company under a company limited by guarantee. My clarification here is; if I chose to register a company limited by guarantee, will I be compelled by the ministry, body, Bureau to go and register with them? Because a company limited by guarantee almost plays similar roles like an NGO. It is not a profit making entity. 

I think if we mix up the two, that will complicate the situation and the speed at which to make business. I think the committee made a good recommendation. (Applause) 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also would like to request the minister to concede on this. Recently, we removed one of the functions; that is registration of persons from the URSB and took it somewhere. We gave it to an authority.

If we again withdraw this other function of incorporating organisations and bring it to the bureau, we shall be either killing indirectly the Bureau. We would like to appeal to him – when we were interacting, we gave him the pros and cons; for consensus, we should ask him to concede and we proceed.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: The matters are serious –(Laughter)– it is not - –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: They always are.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: It is not a consensus matter. Again, as I said it was a consultation. The registrar of companies, URSB, under Companies Act has the mandate we know - to incorporate only companies. Any other entity under the Act of Parliament can incorporate an organisation. For instance, the trustees Incorporation Act, incorporates trustees. Therefore, the Bureau should not be stopped from registering NGO’s that are non-profit, non-commercial but humanitarian and all those that support communities by making this Bureau very effective, to give it the mandate to register and then incorporates them so that there is efficiency in the Bureau and also the NGO’s.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How would you handle the issue raised by member for Fort Portal Municipality; of companies limited by guarantee also known as charities, non-profit organisations but registered under the company’s law? How do you regulate them?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: The NGO’s that will be a subject of this Bill, later on to be law, once they are registered, in order to make sure that their work is made efficient; it is planned that they are incorporated under this same arrangement. However, the others, which are under the other arrangement are purely a preserve of URSB.

MR SSEGGONA: Honourable minister was asked, what serious mischief do you envisaged in leaving this responsibility with URSB? I have not heard an answer on that.

Secondly, honourable minister, you are aware that we have banks in this country and banks must be registered company but URSB does not regulate them. We also have insurances in this country that are registered as companies but are regulated by the Insurance Regulatory Authority and so many other examples; what mischief are we likely to experience if this remains?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: I think the mischief is misplaced. There is no mischief. These are times of doing smart business and smart registration. You do not want to get an NGO moving up and down registering here, getting incorporated there and wasting time. We would like to enable these NGO’s with this law; one stop centre register, go out and support our communities other than creating two entities handling the same business.

I beg that we allow them to register, give a certificate and incorporate them and have a very effective organisation to help these NGO’s work efficiently. I beg to submit.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairperson, the minister is talking about having a one stop centre and the bureau would be more efficient in doing more than one function and for which some of us feel that it will not give some NGO’s or companies the leverage in their operations. 

When you look at the functions which the Minister is talking about, in my view, you cannot have Parliament appropriate the budget and also be the same organ to implement the budget.

We are saying, can we have them do a function that in one way will have also another organ that will also check them – yes we check them. That should be another organ to check them. Otherwise, if you tell them to do the registration and also again do the check out, I think it will not give any efficiency which the minister is talking about.

In my view, it is going to temper with the independence of companies and independence of organisations because it would mean that when and whenever they want, they can issue a certificate and at the same time in the evening withdraw that certificate from you. That is what we are saying.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have listened to the submissions from the committee and from the minister. For purposes of management and not losing track of records, for NGOs to be under control of the Ministry of Internal Affairs rather than to be registered in the other, there is a problem of losing track record, and to be supervised by the mother ministry. 

When you look at the policy we have, Ministry of Internal Affairs of the national NGO policy is for strengthening partnerships for development (Interruption) the policy is here, we have it.

It means that if the mother ministry does lose a track record to supervise these NGOs, it becomes very difficult for efficiency and management. If you registered with UFB under ministry of Justice, it is a different matter. (Interjection)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, I would like to thank my colleague for accepting. (1) How does the bureau lose track of the NGO it has been allowed to monitor and register.

I would like us to get the distinction and you will help get it, if I do not understand the distinction between incorporation and registration.

From our submission and that of the committee, we would like to leave incorporation with URSB, then registration and operation or monitoring of operations with the bureau.

How does the bureau lose track of the operations of an NGO that is has registered, (2) whose operations it is monitoring including licensing at different levels, both national and regional or district. How would it lose track of its operations. 

MR KAKOOZA: I think the minister was saying they need a one stop gap centre. That is why he said efficiency and management. 

His reason is that all these NGOs within the ministry of internal affairs. He transferred to be registering another centre; he finds it very difficult-

In management and supervision, the mother ministry of these NGOs is the ministry of Internal Affairs. That is why I would like to support what the minister is saying that if it is under me, supervising properly.


I register these people; I know what they are doing. It enables him to be cost effective.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I have asked hon. Kakooza to clarify one simple point. How does the bureau lose track of an NGO it has registered and therefore has a record?

Two, it is monitoring, licencing, probably annually. For example, has Bank of Uganda ever lost sight or record of banks and forex bureaus because they are incorporated by URSB?

Is he therefore in order in meandering and refusing to answer the question?

MR KAKOOZA: No

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Answer the question.

MR KAKOOZA: The answer is; the Bill is not under ministry of Internal Affairs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, the question is, do you want a double process for these organisations. If you want a double process, can it be done by one institution?

When does an institution or an organisation become an NGO? Is it upon registration or upon certification, to operate as an NGO?

If there are two processes, then you are going to have to think about it properly. Is it by mere existence of registering as an NGO? 

Then you will be coming to operate as an NGO, or there is another process that you envisage in this law for regulatory purposes.

MR OBOTH: Thank you Mr Chairman. The principle of the Bill is to create a regulatory mechanism. I am looking at a situation whereby the Uganda Registration of Services Bureau, and the Bill on NGOs is created independently and one has to rely on the registration and input of the other.

Whether that would be a one stop centre for the other, one is dealing with business. I think the distinction is here. This is an area that I think I am well-schooled in.

I have been a law to NGOs most times, both in this house and outside. (Interruption) There are some in front of me here. (Laughter)

Mr Chairman, it is very easy for any other NGO to go and register with the registrar of companies then and that is what used to be the position. Register as a company limited by guarantee and exist as a company limited by guarantee.

In my understanding, unless the two ministers help me, the Ambassador and the General. Do they want to achieve regulation?

You cannot regulate a person you have not registered. Registration is an element of regulation, unless we want to be both registration from regulation.

We are all here regulated because we are registered members of this House. Do you want to regulate a person you have not registered? You can but how effectively? I think that is what has been going on. 
That the ministry of internal affairs has been grappling with this. Trying to regulate those they do not know more about. (Interruption)

Mr Chairman, if we can only harmonise the two issues. The issue of registration in my own understanding is a regulatory matter. You cannot effectively do that without registration.

They are all bodies in this country that a requirement must be, you must be registered with that body in order to be regulated. [Hon. Muwanga: Information] If you are going to give to help me in this matter, I yield.

MR MUWANGA: Mr Chairman, hon. Oboth is somehow not comprehending the entire spirit of this Bill, the thing is as you asked.

Before you become an NGO, you will be incorporated. You cannot become an NGO until you have applied and have been registered with a bureau; that is when you can be called an NGO. This will have a timeframe of about five years and once that licence expires, you cease to be an NGO.

Therefore, the information I would like to give is that the question of registration of being an NGO is a subject of registration. You will apply to the bureau and ask to be registered as an NGO and before you do so, you must be incorporated. I may choose to be incorporated and not apply to be NGO and I may also choose to cease being an NGO and continue to be incorporated. What you do not want under this Bill is to confuse the two. The powers of the bureau should be purely to regulate entities that are registered as NGOs.

MR OBOTH: Thank you for the information; whether it has been useful or not – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I have immense respect for my brother for the many years we have been together. I have however been schooled in this Parliament that civility requires decency in treatment of colleagues. Is hon. Oboth therefore in order to disparage another member who has given him information by using such derogatory language? Does it promote our decorum? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I wish you had allowed the member to finish because he said, “whether it is useful or not” and you interrupted him. I would have been guided as to whether it was going negative or positive.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for that brilliant ruling. I would like to conclude by – you know, the few lawyers who are in this House, we have to help ourselves to know that the registration and incorporation here is one thing in relation to NGOs. The incorporation that we have in our minds as this company incorporated under Cap.110 in the Laws of Uganda for business, most NGOs do not have the corporate legal status of a person and now this law is trying to create that when you register, you obtain that legal status for incorporation purposes.

Now whether you can be incorporated and not registered, I would not think so; that was the earlier position. This law is about registering in order to have the legal status of a legal person. Therefore, the legal argument, Mr Chairman, is to look at the issue of registration. The incorporation is only coming into this because of the word “the creation of legal personality of these NGOs” and that is exactly my understanding –(Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you. Mr Chairman, I had earlier asked for clarity. Are we going to totally ban the registration bureau from registering companies limited by guarantee? If that is the case, then I need an answer.

Secondly, if we leave companies to register as companies limited by guarantee and they are not registered as NGOs and in the long run, a company chooses to become an NGO; will they be stopped to apply because they are registered by the bureau? What are we trying to cure? I do not understand it.

MR OBOTH: I do not know whether I can give what we are trying to cure; I believe the minister and the Bill - the principle. However, definitely this law cannot stop other incorporations of companies limited by guarantee because there are other associations like the lottery that may not be literally an NGO but it is operating as an association. Therefore that may not fall under this; that is what I think, in my limited understanding.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is only one question that we need to deal with. How do you come to the National Bureau for NGOs? Do you come as a bunch of individuals expressing an interest to be registered as an NGO or do you come as a legal entity applying for a certificate to be an NGO? Those are the two issues and that is the area of debate. 

Do you come as individuals expressing an interest to be registered by the National Bureau for NGOs into an entity that can now become an NGO or do you come as a body corporate already and apply using your objectives and then the bureau will say that these objectives can make you operate as an NGO? Those are the two issues. Are we okay? Let us guide ourselves on that and we conclude.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you, Mr Chairman. If you read paragraphs (IV) and (V) together with the Bill, the committee seems to hold to view and to propose to this House that to be registered as an NGO, you must have been incorporated by the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. Therefore, you must be a legal person; a juridical person before you approach the bureau that deals with non-governmental organisations. –(Interjection)– Can I just go through this?

The committee then proposes that: 
    i) The bureau for NGOs retains the function of establishing and maintaining a register of organisation.
    ii) To consider application for the issuance and renewal of permits, which I think is sufficient legal regulatory framework for assuring that NGOs are regulated by this bureau. 

I therefore do not see any harm in deleting (i). The only proposal they make is that we delete from the Bill section 6(i) to issue certificates of incorporation. If we let the Uganda Registration Services Bureau issue certificates of incorporation, which is its legal function anyway, and we leave the NGO bureau with the function of regulating Non-governmental Organisations, we do not do any harm at all. (Interruption)

MR TANNA: I thank the honourable colleague for yielding the Floor. Mr Chairman and honourable colleagues, I would like to give information. When one goes to the Bank of Uganda to start a forex bureau, you must go to the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, register memorandum and article of association but specifically for trade in forex, likewise for banks. You then go to Bank of Uganda and fulfil their criteria and they issue you a license that lasts for a year. On expiry, then you are reviewed afresh basing on what you have submitted. 

If you look at companies that manufacture medicine, it is a similar process. You go to the URSB and get yourself registered for the purpose of manufacture of drugs but you must go to NDA and then NDA comes to regulates. Likewise, for production of any food product, the procedure is the same.

It would be unfortunate for example for me to go and register with URSB a company called TAN guaranteed by partners and somebody else goes and registers with the ministry an NGO called TAN. That would be double registration using the same name. It would be smarter for us if we allow the first registration legal incorporate body be registered at URSB then somebody applies and the new board that we are trying to create sets conditions for licensing what we are now calling “issuance of a work permit”, there shall be a criteria issued. 

Like you rightly said, Mr Chairman, you cannot just receive a group of fellows who say, we want and we are expressing interest. It would be smarter for them to first go and register and then come and seek for license to operate as an NGO and that is the information I would like to give. The good practise has been there and the examples are several in legal practise today in Uganda.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I thank hon. Tanna for the information that has been very useful. I thank you.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I am not sure whether the member was still holding the Floor. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Proceed. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: The member seems to create an impression that by allowing the ministry to register, is creating a one-stop centre. In effect it is not because when we talk about registration and incorporation, the one-stop centre must be the URSB; that is a centre for all registration and incorporation. What we are talking about at the ministry is the operational license or certificate; that having registered a legal entity, then you can proceed to apply for a license to provide health services and another license to provide educational services and that is where regulation comes in –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: I would like to provide information to my honourable colleague and I would like to thank you, hon. Amos Lugolobi. Not every incorporation goes through the URSB. The Trustees Incorporation Act and Acts of this Parliament - there is a distinction between - we are mixing the two independent - I do not think there would be any NGO that would say they do not want to register and have the legal status. You are making their work so difficult to go again to the company’s registration. It has been an issue where you have to do the reservation of names, if your NGO behaves and acts as an NGO under one umbrella. Therefore, there is the Trustees Incorporation Act and also an Act of Parliament. You can also have the NGO Act which is an Act of Parliament to do specifically registration of NGOs leave alone the others; we have sufficient legislation on them. That is the information and I hope you will find it useful.

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank the honourable member for accepting the information and I have just two or three pieces of information. The first is to notify my colleague that Cap. 110 has since repealed by this Parliament and in the new regime of the Companies Act, the scope of operation of companies is no longer limited to the articles and memorandum of Association.

The second point that we also need to take cognisance of is that going by the minister’s proposal, you want to give powers to the bureau to create, regulate and kill and we are saying no, we cannot give you powers to incorporate an NGO which you are going to discipline by prosecuting and dissolving. It could be doing so many other activities, as the honourable colleague from Kabarole stated earlier. I may have a company limited by guarantee that is doing some other charity work and I decide to register an NGO out of it. Now if you give these concentrated powers to the bureau, the next thing you are going to witness is withdrawal of the permit, and dissolution and therefore killing the whole thing. 

The information to hon. Lugoloobi - I had started debating but now I realise I rose to give information - is that the incorporation must be kept as a separate process. Registration is another process such that in licensing, we have given enough powers to the bureau to register, monitor, license and even withdraw the license which is dissolution of the NGO but not the entity.

I think we also need to take serious note of what the Chairman guided; who is going to apply to the bureau? Are you going to bring a tribe of men and women and say we want to register as an NGO or do you want somebody who is already incorporated to come and say we are applying to register as an NGO? My understanding is that this thing is very simple.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It has been our procedure that on matters largely of a technical nature, the Attorney-General normally comes out to guide legally the Frontbench and at times also this House. Would it not procedurally right, in our normal practise, since he knows the legal implication to speak and address this matter and save this House sometime?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That would not be a purely procedural issue –(Laughter)– because the matter of the opinion of the Attorney-General, when required, is always sought. However, when he volunteers information, he always rises and he is recognised. He has not risen, so he is still enjoying the debate.

MR LUGOLOBI: Mr Chairman, I would like to submit that we should separate these two powers - the power to create and regulate. Even God created us but when we came on earth, we started regulating ourselves. We have to separate these two things. I worked with the Uganda Investment Authority and we were doing the work of licensing - issuing investment licenses to companies that come in Uganda but the work of incorporating these companies that were investing in Uganda was left to the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, whether a foreign or local company. Therefore, the issue of creating an entity should be left to the URSB. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I get guidance from the minister on how to proceed?                 

MR JAMES BABA: I am not conceding, Mr Chairman. If we can go fast-forward to clause 31, which deals both with registration and incorporation of organisation with the bureau – now that is going to be the bureau – I would like to support what hon. Oboth said; what we are really targeting at is both the legal entity of this process as well as incorporation to take care of multiple registration. At the moment we have over 10,000 NGOs operating in this country. When we start this process, we want clear identification of each NGO operating through this registration and incorporation process. Therefore, even in Cap. 119 in the old law, we operated both registration and incorporation in form 1(b). There is nothing new in this thing – there is nothing new with one organisation doing both registration and incorporation as far as I know.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you need to guide the Chair as to which clarification you are getting.

MR TANNA: I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving way. I would like clarification, Mr Chairman. During my submission, I did raise the issue of registration using the same name. The reason we have one registration bureau is in order to avoid multiple-registration of companies using the same name. How does the ministry intend to avoid the use of the same name in the NGO Registration Bureau and the Registrar of Companies? Are we going to wire them up? For example, if we conceded on your proposal, how would you avoid double registration using the same name? I would like to seek that clarification.

MR JAMES BABA: If you look at clause 31, which is fast-forwarded, you will notice that under sub-clause (2), you will be given 60 days of reservation of that name while the NGO Registration Bureau checks whether that is double registration or not. That 60-day allowance is given there.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, may the minister, therefore, tell us how the reservation of a name with the bureau will impact on the reservation of the same name with the Uganda Registration Services Bureau? Secondly, you said you have over 10,000 NGOs registered; how has the incorporation by the bureau impacted on or impeded your supervisory or regulatory function over NGOs? Have you failed to regulate them because they were incorporated by URSB? And how many do you want in the country anyway?

MR BABA: Yes, some of them have been jumping up and down as companies, deviating from their role as NGOs. We now want to be strict that they are registered and incorporated as NGOS instead of running around operating as companies; that is why this thing is coming in and that is the clarification I would like to give you.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was shocked that the minister had to rise to inform us that he is not yielding on this matter and I found that troubling because there is no one to defeat on this matter. I think the minister sees somebody to defeat and he must win. I would like to assure the minister that the URSB is a government entity and you have not furnished me with adequate reasons as to why you need a parallel body to do the same job. Unless you are saying that you do not trust them. 

This is because you are quoting clause 31 as a remedy to the issue raised by hon. Tanna over registering a company and then appearing as an NGO at the same time. I do not find a solution in you quoting sub-clause (2) because within the 60 days, you are saying that no other entity can register in the same name but remember, you are saying that this is a parallel body and the same name is being registered at the URSB because in two days, one can register a company.

Honourable minister, I think we just have to be reasonable; there is nobody to defeat on this matter. It is a question of seeing reason that we can move forward by having this job done by one entity and we stop wasting time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, even with human beings, you do not regulate them; you regulate their activities and conduct. It is the same with the institutions; you do not regulate them but you regulate their activities.

Now, what is the activity we seek to regulate? It is the operation of an organisation in an area that is NGO–like; non-governmental. That is the activity we seek to regulate. We are not seeking to regulate organisations. We are seeking to regulate the activities of organisations that want to operate as NGOs. Therefore, let us regulate what we want to regulate. 

MR AYENA: Mr Chairman, from what I have heard from the minister, it would appear that there are two things that he wants to avoid. One is having organisations “jump up and down” and secondly, he wants to avoid multiplicity and duplicity. Mr Chairman, I would like to assure him that what he is proposing is exactly what he is going to do; things are going to “jump and down” and never across and at the same time, you are going to create both duplicity and multiplicity. 

The simple thing that you have got to consider, honourable minister, is that there are now going to be two organs; the URSB deals with creating a body – what I have been observing over a period of time is that you need to do is to avoid turncoats coming every so often to disturb those who are coming to sponsor NGOs. The argument is that you want to create somebody who is easily identifiable and that is the function, which is given under the Companies Act. The Companies Act is established to create artificial persons. It is this artificial person that you can limit; you can easily identify and if it “jumps up and down” it is also covered under the Companies Act, so it is controlled to that extent. When they come, the “jumping up and down” is now the question of controlling the activities that the chairman is talking about – (Laughter).  Mr Chairman, I want the Minister to – (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, hon. Ayena for giving way. The information I am giving you is that the “jumping up and down” that the minister has talked about, in my opinion, is the way Government perceives the activities of some of the Non-Governmental Organisations. Government is interested in stifling civic engagement and the emergence of a very strong civil society in this country and that is why they are closely moving in to say that instead of registering here, come here. We do not want to regulate you but we want to regulate your activities. If you are regulating my activities, are you not regulating me? You are doing so. What is the scare, honourable minister?

I think that instead of dilly dallying and saying that we are trying to do this or that, just accept that you are not interested in the emergence of a very strong civil society and civic community. By so doing, we will know that the dictatorship reigns other than wasting so many hours here trying to determine as to who will register what. Why are you scared? You have assured us that you have the guns and so, what is this jumping up and down when you have the guns anyway? That is the information that I wanted to give.

MR AYENA: Mr Chairperson, unfortunately that information did not come to me and I think it was meant for the minister - (Laughter). However, since it is buttressing my argument, I still want to assure the diplomat and dear brother, the minister, that what we want to do is actually to assist you to control them so that when you have an organisation, it is easier to deal with an organisation which is a legal personality than individuals or simple associations which are not registered under the URSB and therefore not easily definable.

It is my strong conviction that upon this well-guided opinion, the minister with whom I have never disagreed - but this time, I would like him to agree with me as well and be persuaded; we are doing this in the best interest of the ministry and our society to make sure that we do not allow turncoats and busy bodies to clog your ministry with a lot of work so that when they jump up and down and sometimes very high, you cannot control them. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon, we have Mr Jacobson, a consular from the Danish Embassy. He has come to observe our proceedings. Please join me in welcoming him. (Applause)

We also have a delegation from the Uganda National NGO Forum. They have come to listen to the discussion and debate on the Non-Governmental Organisations Bill, 2015. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have a delegation from the Democratic Governance Facility (DGF) that has also come to observe today’s business. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, the way this debate is going looks like the issue as to whether the whole issue of incorporation and licensing or registration for NGOs to operate be conducted by a board under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. It looks like it is a fundamental policy issue that has been taken by Cabinet and that is why I see this hesitation in changing.

The discussion seems to suggest and the committee has also suggested strongly that they would like the issue of incorporation - giving rights to an organisation to be done by the Uganda Registration Services Bureau and then the one for authorising that organisation to operate as an NGO be left to the bureau in charge of NGO activities. That seems to be an area where we do not seem to be developing any consensus - there is no consensus. 

From where I am seated, there is no consensus and I am going to advise as follows so that we do not spend time on this. Are we together in this? 

Learned Attorney-General, do you want to say something at this stage before I say what I would like to say? We have spent quite some time on this issue and we are not moving and when it is not moving, that means that there is an invisible host with a rider and a sword – but it is stopping the movement forward. Therefore, let us see how we handle this. The learned Attorney-General – (Laughter) - do you want to say something at this stage?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, did I hear the Minister for Internal Affairs saying that the matters had become a bit serious? (Laughter)

To me, given your understanding of the audience on whether there is consensus or not and given the fact that reflecting on this particular provision that we are considering, if we are to take a different route then we will have to affect many other provisions in the Bill, I would propose, with the consent of the minister, that we stand this matter over and we consult so that we are in harmony with each other. We can consult both sides and see if we can generate some level of understanding and consensus. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, on these matters that deal with a sector that is not represented directly in this House – I think most of the NGOs do not have direct representation in the House and so we need to go when we are all together so that all the issues are taken care of. That is my attitude towards how we should process this matter. You cannot force a vote on certain things, unfortunately. (Mr Oboth rose_) Are you raising a procedural matter?

MR OBOTH: I thank you, Mr Chairman. You are privileged in a way that you sit, watch and listen to us all. When you provide procedural guidance, we cannot take it lightly. If the committee – (Interjections) - Mr Chairman, protect me from the hecklers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We do not have them in the House and therefore, I cannot protect you from people who do not exist in the House. 

MR OBOTH: I thank you. I will now name those specifically shouting on this microphone – those behaving like hecklers.

Whereas I agree with the Attorney-General and the government position – but to go forward, each side has to move one step and I think that since we make laws that are amendable, what would be the risk of Government conceding with the committee and then we see how it works so that if it is not working well, then this law can be amended other than holding that at that level. 

Although I strongly believe that the concern is genuine on both sides, can we have some concession that we move forward - and the minister is a General; Generals sometimes concede when they know that they have been disarmed –(Laughter)– but would only use words like, “We are tactically withdrawing” but that is what I am painfully trying to bring out, in view of what the Attorney-General has said.

I have known the Attorney-General for over 10 years. Probably he has said many things but can Government concede so that this law could be looked at when they are implementing it. Will it be possible? That incorporation with both sides not harmonised, I have had my position, which I still standby but for purposes of moving forward, can the General say something?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Government will concede to what the Attorney- General has said, Mr Chairman and colleagues, that we should sleep over this so that we don’t touch it and then it fatally affects other clauses and dilute the entire Bill. I concede that we sleep over it with the Attorney-General and then we will reach out to both sides of the House and proceed when we have consulted once again.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have heard what the Attorney-General has proposed and I am impressed with the smart way hon. Oboth has conceded, like a very good lawyer. I thought the minister would concede as a matter of strategy but he hasn’t.

Mr Chairman, I have a concern in regard to how we will concede. I am very conscious that the provision we are dealing with articulates almost the rest of the life of the Bill we are considering. First in my submission at the start, I said that this is too much power to a bureau. I am now very concerned that the same Government has an entity called the Uganda Registration Services Bureau whose mandate the government is very aware and would effectively be amended if we enacted this provision. I am concerned whether we would be proceeding rightly if we say we stay over this, which is like the nerve of this Bill.  We sleep over this and then we do what? That means we are not going to proceed from this point. 

Is it okay that the consideration is stopped, Mr Chairman, rather than to say that we sleep over this and consider something ahead of us - the subsequent clauses which are much related to this? We cannot make a decision on this. Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay that the consideration is adjourned?

MR KARUHANGA: About sleeping over this matter, Mr Chairman, I think that it is largely derailing us because this line of thinking or the idea that the minister and what the majority of this House are proposing including the committee seem to be so clear cut that however much you sleep over it, you will wake up to the same exact position. There is no way of going around it; it is either the URSB incorporating entities or it is the NGO Board or body that you are trying to create to do the incorporation, the registration, the licensing, the prosecution and everything as you may want to package it.

The procedural matter I am raising is, isn’t it imperative that we agree from this point to have one position known and then we move ahead since, like other colleagues have said, this is the heart of this Bill?

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Mr Chairman, this Bill has 51 clauses. We went through it with the minister many times as a committee; he even took us for a retreat. From committee rooms to retreats and we told him – because we are a 30-members committee - that his proposal is untenable.

Mr Chairman, if everywhere we have a disagreement and we haven’t even moved an inch, the Attorney-General must propose sleeping, that we go and sleep over this matter –(Laughter)– We are dealing with a Bill of 51 clauses. It is also becoming a habit that when ministers are about to lose voting then they must suggest consultations, sleeping and so on and so forth.

This Bill was presented here for the first reading and referred to the committee of Parliament for scrutiny. The committee met various stakeholders including the minister and the committee, on behalf of Parliament, proposes that to improve this legislation this is what we should do. The minister says that he is not moved. Is it procedurally right for us now to begin delaying when we have to deal with 51 clauses? We have almost spent two hours on one clause. Is it procedurally right for this Parliament not to take a decision and then agree to the proposal to go and sleep instead of doing its work when we have just been summoned from the recess?

MR AYENA: Mr Chairman, if my memory serves me right, the procedural issue that was raised by hon. Oboth was that he seeks the minister to concede on the issue that is on the table. That the Uganda Registration Services Bureau deals with the creation of the person and then the NGO bureau deals with the issue of regulation and monitoring of those activities.

The minister on the other hand stood up and dealt with the matter of the confession of the minister. Is it procedurally right for the minister, having been asked to deal with the concession proposed by hon. Oboth, to rise and deal with the procedural issue handled by the minister? He has not answered the issue raised by hon. Oboth. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, by the time the honourable minister rose, there were two issues. There was the issue from hon. Oboth and then also the issue from the Attorney- General. He chose one of them. Did he proceed correctly? Yes, he did. 

On the general issues that have been raised and procedural matters, I need to satisfy myself as a presiding officer that where we have reached is irreconcilable except by vote. I haven’t reached there, that is why I am saying that we need to look at it properly and if the matter is irreconcilable and can only be reconciled by vote, then we can do the voting. However, the way the discussion is going, I see a give-and-take situation and that is why I do not want to go there. Maybe at this time I should hear from the Shadow Attorney-General.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have nothing to do with the submission of my learned friend, the Attorney-General, about “sleeping”; it was a light moment. Having said that, it takes time and public resources to train capacity and create a workforce. For the last 14 years, I have been a member of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs committee and the sort of resources we have spent to build the capacity of the URSB is a lot. Training; why do we undermine our own institutions we have created but more importantly, why waste money? 

Gen. Aronda, it is billions that we have sunk and some of it is actually donor money – to train and create that capacity which we have at the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. What is it supposed to do? It is to do exactly some of the issues which are arising now. 

For us to say that we need to create another institution and give them the same duties and functions and start the process of training is wasting money. What is the problem? Do we have that luxury of wastage of resources? Do we have that luxury of duplication of duties? Unless there is a problem - I have been listening to be convinced by the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs. Actually at the appropriate time, I would like to seek clarification whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs is the right one to regulate these particular institutions because these are socio-economic organisations. Why are we housing them in the Ministry of Internal Affairs? Anyway, I am going to raise that at an appropriate time. I need to put you on notice.

My view is – (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, hon. Katuntu, for giving way. The information I would like to give to this House is that under clause 31(b), an NGO cannot operate unless it has been licensed by the NGO Board. If that is the effect of the decision of the board – to operationalise – then whatever we are delving in actually only amounts to wasting Parliament’s time. Thank you.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, hon. Katuntu. You raised a critical question: why engage in wastage of resources? However, it is not only that. It seems we are also being pushed to a stage of contradiction. Look at what the minister brought to this Parliament under the Registration of Persons law. He convinced us on two key objectives. The first one was to remove duplication from the processes and the laws relating to registration of persons. However, duplication is exactly what he now wants us to engage in.

The second objective was to establish a central registration body for the registration of all persons in Uganda. I believe that in his proposal once he certifies it, the NGO becomes a legal person. Therefore, honourable minister, why do you want to engage Parliament in a cycle of contradiction? What has now gone wrong? Have you found that the registration bureau is incompetent? Do you want to go back on your own principle objective when you brought the other law?

Hon. Abdu Katuntu, this is a serious point. I think the minister should concede. Why do you want us to go to sleep on a matter when we are wide awake?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you for the information. Mr Chairperson, I think we have some consensus as a House. The reservations by Cabinet do not seem to be reflected to the entire House. I would like to request the minister to save us the agony of trying to vote against him and to save the Speaker from evoking his powers and putting this matter to vote.

I do not think this House is convinced by the argument the minister has advanced. My view is that he concedes and we proceed. We have been called from recess to come and sort this thing out. Sleeping over some of these issues is really not necessary; maybe we have slept enough. Therefore, I would implore the minister to concede and we proceed.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just would like to beg that it has been a habit here that whenever I start speaking there are floods of “order” to disturb me. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are always heard in silence.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Therefore, let me give myself order [MR SSEMUJJU: “Point of order”] – (Laughter). That is what I am saying, Mr Chairman. “Order” has already started. I would like colleagues to give me chance to say what I want to say.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is protected to the extent that he does not say things that will provoke “points of orders”. (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) ALI: I will try not to provoke “points of order”. What I would like to say is that we should not lose sight of where we have come from and where we are going. We can easily go back if we lose sight of where we have come from. What I am trying to say is that the number of NGOs we have in the country is a sign of peace, stability and a conducive atmosphere. It has not fallen from heaven. 

It has cost this country lives and money. We can get money from donors but we cannot get lives from overseas. We lost lives for the stability of this country, which everybody is enjoying. We are grateful and it should continue. Therefore, I need time to advise Cabinet on this Bill. 

A small example is that in the village, when the youth are dancing in front of the girl they are running after, one is at his best so that the girl sees that he is the best. (Interjections) - This is information only and it does not need order, I believe.

Therefore, I am very happy today this debate is proving that we are dancing; there are many girls here we are trying to woo. I beg for more time, Mr Chairman.

MR KIVUMBI: Procedure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On what matter? Honourable members, I think we need to find a way of -

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, we are disagreeing on the function of the board. When you are not clear on the function, literally, you cannot move an inch. That is my understanding. Therefore, we cannot proceed with the Bill if we disagree on the function.

The procedural matter I would like to raise is that - remember this report was laid a few weeks ago. Cabinet has been aware of the committee’s position all along and I have looked at a statement circulated by the minister which clearly stated his objection to the committee report.

Mr Chairman, as a committee, we had four meetings with the Minister of Internal Affairs and his technical team including the members of the NGOs and we agreed that this matter is so critical to separate. I do not think this is a matter to be impoverished for heaven sake and there is no middle ground. You are either going to have this or that. I have interacted with my counterpart on this issue and we agreed that this is not a very contentious issue. He should humbly enable Parliament to process this law and we go back to recess. Members of Parliament are under pressure. We have duties that we would like to pursue. This is campaign time especially for members who are facing party primaries. 

Therefore, now that they have heard this position, can you adjourn Parliament for a few minutes to allow Gen. Moses Ali, the minister and the Attorney-General consult and then come back here and then we proceed? Just suspend the House and allow the Frontbench to consult on this matter and then we reconvene. Otherwise, we are time bad on this issue.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I need to know that we have the capacity to handle this so that I can suspend the House as requested. If I do so, we would only come back at the top of the hour. Would 25 minutes be enough for you to talk among yourselves?

Honourable members, it is true we need to move together on this Bill. It is very important that we move together and therefore be able to make those decisions when the House is properly constituted.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.36
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.37
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Non-Governmental Organisations Bill, 2015” and passed it with amendments -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not passed it yet. 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: No, stood over clause 3.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We passed clauses 1, 2, 4 and 5 with amendments but stood over clause 3. Would you like to report properly, honourable minister?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Non-Governmental Organisations Bill, 2015” and passed clauses 1, 2, 4 and 5 but stood over Clause 3 and left Clause 6 for further consultations.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.39
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen Aronda Nyakairima): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we agreed at the committee stage that there is need for us to reflect briefly on clause 6, which seems to be the pivot of this law so that when we deal with it, we come back and possibly be able to finish it. Therefore, this House is going to be suspended.

Let me just read this announcement: “The National Organising Committee would like to announce the upcoming National Prayer Breakfast, 2015 to be held on 8 October 2015 starting at 7.00 a.m. The theme will be ‘The Joy of Having Others.’ The venue will be Hotel Africana. The Chief Guest will be His Excellency the President, Yoweri Museveni Kaguta. Guest speakers will be His Excellency William Ruto; the Deputy President of the Republic of Kenya and the Chief testifier will be Dr Monica Musenero.

All members of Parliament are invited and the invitation cards will be soon delivered to them. There will also be a women’s forum as part of the series of events that will take place immediately after the prayer breakfast and all female Members of Parliament are invited. The invitation cards for this event will also be delivered.”

Honourable members, this House is suspended up to 5 O’clock.

 (The House was suspended at 4.41 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.59 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I call the Members who are in the lobby to please come into the Chambers? We need to proceed. Honourable members, are we ready to proceed? Honourable minister, are we ready to proceed?

THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, colleagues, for following the debate. I think that in the interest of the progress of this Parliament, we will concede on clause 6. Later on, there will be regulations to cater for what we would have catered for under this clause.

MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, I think the spirit under which the minister is conceding is that of belligerence - that if you do not agree with it, wait because I am going to bring regulations to achieve the same.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, we cannot legislate in anticipation. We are considering clause 6 and the minister has conceded. Let us wait; everything will be considered on its merit. I beg to move.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2015

Clause 6

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In clause 6, there was a proposal from the committee and there were objections from the minister on a particular provision. I think we have identified all those issues and zeroed down on them. I would like to now hear what the status is. Do we go with the committee’s amendment, in which case what had been proposed by the minister would be abandoned and we adopt the committee’s proposal that the registrations would be done by the Registration Services Bureau and all those other things? Would that be the way to go? Hon. Kakooza, were you part of this consultation? If you were not, please sit down. Let me hear from the minister.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Mr Chairman and colleagues, we conceded that we leave the matter of incorporation with URSB and then the NGO Bureau would handle the certification for the operations of the NGOs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, going along with the spirit that was proposed by the committee, can I now consider the position that was proposed by the minister withdrawn? In which case, I will now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are there further amendments on clause 6? Why was this not part of the consultation?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I beg to propose the deletion of paragraph (e) because it is redundant. Further justification is that by merging paragraphs (b) and (c) as proposed by the committee, in effect paragraph (e) was also merged to the same amendment. I therefore find it redundant. I have another amendment; maybe we should first deal with this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, paragraph (e).

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, maybe the chairman has not understood me properly. The amendments of the committee in point No. iii in effect also merge paragraph (e) of the Bill. Therefore, I propose the deletion of paragraph (e) because it is catered for in the formulated amendment of the committee. I do not know whether the chairman of the committee has seen that.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, when we looked at these functions as a committee, we saw that the functions in (b) and (c) are almost similar and we recommended that we merge them. The proposal reads, “To formulate, develop and issue policy guidelines for District Non-Governmental Organisations Monitoring Committee (DNMCs) and Sub County Non-Governmental Organisations Committee (SNMCs) for the effective and efficient monitoring of the operations of the organisations.”

Mr Chairman, the honourable colleague is proposing that we delete (e). Actually, when you look at (e), it is covered in the proposal of the committee because (e) says, “to formulate and develop policy guidelines for DNMCs, SNMCs and CBOs”. Our formulation is, “To formulate, develop and issue policy guidelines on DNMCs and SNMCs.” Therefore, it is a repetition.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What of the CBOs?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, unfortunately we did not handle clause 3, the interpretation clause, because when you look at it, the CBOs are considered under the interpretation of an organisation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that paragraph (e) of clause 6 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: I have a supplementary amendment.  On paragraph (h), there are a number of issues that were proposed in the Bill: registration, issuance of permits, revocation of permits and renewal of permits. However, the committee proposes to substitute (h) to provide for establishment and maintenance of a register of organisations and in (ii), to consider applications for issuance and renewal of permits. There is no mention of revocation and yet I think we need to empower the bureau to control errant organisations, as had been proposed earlier in the Bill.

Therefore, I would like to propose that we add another function under point No. (iv) to read as follows: “(iii) To revoke permits of organisations found in breach of this Act in accordance with section 33 of the Act.” When we go further, section 33 provides for procedures that the bureau may use to revoke a permit. However, in the proposed amendments of the committee there is no mention of such powers or functions of the bureau.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the honourable member needs to address his mind to the provisions of 6 (h) of the Bill, which is not touched in the report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is touched: “In paragraph (h) by substituting the following paragraphs and re-numbering accordingly…” Therefore, paragraph (h) is actually amended substantially.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, this amendment was premised on the amendment that we have just developed consensus on, of incorporation. After the committee recommended that incorporation be done by URSB, we separated this to make it clearer. We redrafted the functions and indicated, “to establish and maintain a register of organisations” because the other one was “registration of organisations”. We therefore said that the bureau will maintain a register of organisations. 

Two, we said, “to consider applications for issuance and renewal of permits.” When it came to revocation of permits, we thought it was covered under clause 33 and that this would be sufficient. However, the fact that this is a function of the board, which we are realising here -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, clause 33 is not a function.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You cannot make provisions for a procedure you have not given powers on. An amendment is proposed by the member for Ngora that the issue of revocation also be catered for.

MR SSEGGONA: I actually have a problem with that, Mr Chairman. There can be power to revoke but you cannot provide for revocation as a function of the bureau. Look at the objects of your Bill; revocation is not a function although I concede that it is a power in a different provision, as the chairman said - (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Sseggona, for giving way. I would like to seek clarification from you. If it is not my function or mandate, where do I get the power to do it? - (Interjection) - Can I give you more of what I want you to answer? 

MR SSEGGONA: I have understood the question; I am in a position to answer.

MR OBOTH: Why do you have a problem for it to be provided as a function when it is a power envisaged? Why can’t we have it as a function? Why can’t we say that revoking is actually a function but it can also be a power given as a mandate? Can you clarify, if you may?

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, my brother. I think he has given me an opportunity to explain more. 

When you look at the principles of the Bill and specifically, when you look at the objects, you will find that the objects are to prescribe not to proscribe. When you look at clause 33 of the same Bill, - grounds for revocation - the power is already provided for: “The board may revoke the permit of an organisation if…” and the conditions are there.

My objection to having revocation as a function is that you are making a statute that is more to do with proscribing yet it is intended to prescribe and as the wording is, to provide an enabling environment. It may come to the same effect but why would you start with intimidating language in a statute even when the power is granted to revoke in 33?

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Chairman, the proposal of the committee under (ii) is: to consider applications for issuance and renewal of permits. If the application for the renewal of permits is denied, in that way then the permit is revoked.

I think that to provide in law an objective of revocation directly sounds a bit negative to me and yet it can be achieved under (ii). This is because (ii) is not saying, “to approve”. They are saying “to consider application for renewal”. If the bureau refuses the application, in that way they are actually doing what hon. Epetait is talking about.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, they may want to revoke in the middle of the licence, before it has expired. Honourable members, the next clause deals with the powers of the board. Do you want to consider it under suspension or something like that and add it there? I am talking about the next clause - powers of the board.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I would agree to put it under the powers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, because there is already power to suspend a permit. We could as well go for revocation.

MR KATUNTU: Without being repetitive, functions are supposed to be related to objectives. You cannot have a revocation as part of your objective. You cannot say that you wake up every day, as an institution, and say, “how do we revoke and what do we revoke?”

As the chairman rightly guides, I think that revocation is as a result of non-compliance. Therefore, you use the powers vested in you under clause 7 to revoke; you invoke those powers to revoke. However, it cannot be a function, like you wake up every day and say, “our objective as a board is to revoke licences”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are we agreeable on clause 6 with the amendments that have been approved already? I now put the question that clause 6, as amended, stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to amend clause 7 by-
(i) 	Substituting any reference to “board” wherever it appears in the clause with the word “bureau”.

(ii) 	Substituting paragraph (1) (b) with the following: “(b) summon and discipline organisations.”

(iii) 	Deleting the entire sub clause (2). The justification is that sub clause (2) is provided for in the appeals section. Also, it is not good practice to enumerate the disciplinary action; the list may not be exhaustive. Thank you.

If I am not clear on this, sub clause (1) (b) is about disciplinary action and it reads in the original Bill, “summon and discipline organisations, and the disciplinary action may include…” and it goes ahead to enumerate. The committee thinks that we should stop at “summon and discipline organisations.” We should not go ahead to enumerate because we cannot be exhaustive by giving those examples. That was our thinking. For sub clause (2), it is provided for in the appeals section. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would that be the proper way to go?

MR KATUNTU: I have a background in criminal law and I know that offenses must always be clearly spelt out and defined together with the sanctions so that any person who does an act knows very well that if I commit this act, these are the consequences. You cannot leave a sanction vague such that even the institutions, which are going to be disciplined, do not know what sort of punishment they would get. My view is that we cannot leave it general. We need to be specific and I can see that it had already come out - “warning, suspension, exposure or blacklisting”. (Interruption) 

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank you, hon. Katuntu, for yielding the Floor. In support of what hon. Katuntu is saying, I think Article 28 (12) of the Constitution enjoins us to do what hon. Katuntu is saying; it is very clear: “Except for contempt of court, no person shall be convicted of a criminal offence unless the offence is defined and the penalty for it prescribed by law.” Therefore, I think that it is a constitutional command.

MR KATUNTU: I was just relating it to criminal law because the other one is criminal and it is a little bit different here but I thought they are related. I hope my learned colleagues agree with me. 

Mr Chairman, my worry is for these particular institutions or organisations not to know what sort of sanctions they may face for breaching the law. I think it should be clear. What you would add on this list is maybe fines because I do not see any fines here. However, to say “any other disciplinary action that the board may deem fit”, sort of attracts the issue as to whether that sanction or action was lawful or unlawful. This is because the board would take an action in its own discretion and then the institution or the organisation will start contesting it, if there is a contest, and they would ask, “Was that action lawful or unlawful?” and you end up into litigation.

My honest view, and I do not know what the learned Attorney-General thinks, is that we need to have specific sanctions provided for by the law. If it is out of what is provided for by the law, we leave it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You had said something about revocation and powers –

MR KATUNTU: Yes, revocation can come under this clause. I thought the chairperson would have raised it as a consequential amendment after removing it from clause 6 such that it is included in clause 7.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I entirely agree with the submission of the shadow Attorney-General and that of hon. Otada. It is certainly the principle of criminal responsibility that offences must be certain and clear. My only challenge is that in this particular clause, we are not providing for offences. Offences are provided for somewhere else in the Bill. Here we are only providing for the measures you can take when a person commits an offence. 

What this particular provision is saying is that these are the powers given to this board with certain measures, which are not exhaustive. I really do not think that we should even limit the extent of the disciplinary measures that may be given in respect of any offence for as long as the offences are clear – (Interruption) 

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank the Attorney-General for giving way. Mr Chairman, we are looking at two different scenarios. The first scenario is where you are dealing with the commission of an offence and the sanctions are certainly meant to be different. However, we are also dealing with the civil aspects, for example if you are talking about warning etc. The offences are already provided for by the committee making certain recommendations from page 26 of the report but that one is dealing with offences. 

My concern here is with respect to the sanctions where the bureau has summoned and the disciplinary aspect is civil in nature. They can warn you, they can suspend the permit etc. Now, when you add this aspect of saying, “any other disciplinary action the board may deem fit”, that is susceptible to abuse. You either exhaust them or you do not provide for them.

The other option could be borrowing an example of the Employment Act, which enumerates disciplinary actions. There, the minister is given the power to enlarge, which is not the case here. My fear is abuse. However, let us also reflect; other than these ones provided for, what other disciplinary actions would you envisage that the bureau would inflict? I see none. 

MR MAGYEZI: Honourable, I am seeking some clarification on whether at this material time, under this clause, it is acceptable to provide sanctions without offences. The question would become: at this level, how do you say that they have the power to provide a warning? Under what circumstances should they suspend the permit, including revoking it; under what offence? 

At this material time, why don’t we restrict ourselves to what the committee is saying, that the power is to summon and discipline? If later we would like to provide the detail of the sanction then it must be related to particular offences. However, if at this material time we bring it up, are we not risking giving laxity to abuse of these powers?

MR SSEGGONA: I think our point of convergence is that laxity in latitude, which may be susceptible to abuse. My understanding here is that not every noncompliance is criminal in nature. There are certain non-compliances that simply require one to observe this regulation and if the NGO does not observe, the bureau may warn. If you repeat the noncompliance, there could be a sanction, which could be a fine. If you repeat it for the second or third time, the sanction could be suspension. I hope I have answered your question, my brother. 

MS NAMUGWANYA: The information I would like to give you is that when you look at clause 7, which is creating powers of the board, I do not think that when you create powers, you instantly provide for offences. The committee realised that the original Bill was not creating offences and when you look at our report on page 26, we inserted a new clause 37, which is “Offences and penalties”. Maybe when we come to that level, we shall improve that but the committee realised that the original Bill had not created offences and we did it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, clause 7 is dealing with powers of the board: “The board shall have power to co-opt technical officers, summon and discipline organisations, - and the disciplinary action may include warning, suspension, fines, revocation, exposure, blacklisting etc. - charge fees.” Two, “the board shall not, before taking any decision, do the following…” Aren’t these powers of the board? 

Are you saying that the powers of the board should not be stated or that they should be stated in a very general form that actually amounts to basically saying nothing? I would like to be educated on what is very wrong with the formulation in the Bill as it is.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seem to go along with the guidance you are giving because the words, “may include” could have biased the mind of the committee that it is limiting. “May include”, and it is further enumerated, is just purely in the context of giving examples but it is not limited to what is listed there. That is my understanding, which is not wrong at all. 

I would have gone for the position in the original Bill because the argument that this is limiting – It is not actually limiting. You are giving notice to the other side that this board has this power and they can do this and that. “May include”, as I rightly said, does not mean that these are the only areas that they can exercise powers. It is just giving examples of areas where they can exercise their powers.

I thought that the chairperson would concede in retaining what was in the original Bill. That really stops the provision. It also guides the board to know that they cannot go overboard. If it is about warning or giving other sanctions, I think we are talking about powers. Just before that, hon. Sseggona, the argument was about powers and sanctions. If you give a general power, you have not given any power at all.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. While I agree with the existing provisions in the Bill, I have problems with (1) (b) (iv), blacklisting. I find it so demeaning and racist. Maybe the legal minds here can help me to understand what this blacklisting is. What is wrong with this black colour? Why not white or yellow? Is this legal jargon? It really comes in bad taste. I do not like it as it sounds racist.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Lugoloobi. Blacklisting would not only be appearing in this law for the first time; it is well known. Africa is referred to as a dark continent and we are proud of being a dark continent. Somebody – (Interjections) - Let me conclude what I am saying. (Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Chairman, as a strong Pan Africanist, and of course looking at my colour, and as a person who promotes my colour in a strong way, I am perturbed by my brother, hon. Oboth, who is equally dark. Given his legal prowess and understanding, his credentials are now subject to scrutiny. 

Is our brother in order, in this century and the modern era, to stand on the Floor of this august House where we fought hard for independence and we want our status as African people to be respected and dignified, and come and say that we are referred to by another group as a dark continent and to be proud of it? Is our brother in order to demean himself and the people he represents and the whole continent? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The honourable member has the right to even commit suicide. (Laughter) 

MR OBOTH: Thank you. As I conclude, the information I would like to give is that somebody else in Africa said that he does not mind to be referred to as black as long as he can use white toilet paper when he goes to the washrooms. What we associate black with –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, to blacklist is a word in English and this House is enjoined to use the English language or Swahili. Therefore, if it is an English word, what is the problem with it? If you went to the PPDA Act, “blacklisting” is all over the book. Please, let us not spend time on issues that are not issues.

BRIG. PHINEHAS KATIRIMA: Mr Chairman, I am a member of the committee and the committee addressed itself to the controversies, which have appeared on the Floor this evening. We had a lot of discussions with the honourable minister about this sub clause (1) (b). 

Mr Chairman, you will notice that (1) (b) says “summon and discipline organisations”, and it goes into details on how they are going to discipline organisations without going into details on how they are going to summon them. To avoid all that, we wanted to cut it short by saying, “summon and discipline organisations” as a power of the board and we leave it there. The minister had no objection to this and it should not waste our time; we should just move on. The details can be provided later on in the regulations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, when a matter is before the House, it is not the same as when it is before the committee. Now we are making the law; we are not making recommendations. That is part of why, in my communication earlier, I said we are going to have to bring an Act of Parliament back to remove some of the provisions that were recommended by a committee and have turned out to be disastrous. Please, let this House have its latitude to determine matters the best way it can because it is the final authority to do this.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, we are talking about sanctions. Anybody who is supposed to appear before this board or a tribunal should have an idea as to what sort of punishment or sanctions are provided. The sanctity of law is actually its predictability and certainty and obviously, enforceability. This is such that any person or institution would know that should they breach this law, this is the sort of problem it would face; it should be certain. 

As lawmakers, we would be absconding from our responsibility to say, “Let the minister go and make the rules and provide.” You are now giving the minister substantive powers of legislation, which is very dangerous. The minister, under the regulations, is supposed to facilitate what we have provided for but have not put in detail –(Interruption)

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Mr Chairman, it is not a new phenomenon in the law making process. Actually, when you look at the Public Service Act, if you go for disciplinary action before the disciplinary committee, they will give a series of sanctions, which will include a reprimand, a warning, a caution, a suspension, a dismissal and all these are embedded in the law. Therefore, we should not abdicate our responsibility in this case since it is our duty and cardinal role enshrined in Article 79. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, these laws are made to regulate the conduct of a human being. Even where it is written, we still make errors. I remember a case where an LC I committee sentenced a person to death. (Laughter) This is real, and they reported to the Police for execution and yet the law and the Constitution are very clear. Therefore, you need to make people know what they can do and what they cannot do.

MR KATUNTU: Certainly, it was in Wakiso. Mr Chairman, I really do not know if the committee may be convinced. What I object to is actually (b) (v), which sort of relates to what the Chairman has just said. If you tell this institution that they may have any other disciplinary action that they may deem fit, they may come up and say, “This is what we deemed fit” and it could be outrageous or illegal but to them, that is what they deemed fit.

However, if a law is providing the parameters within which people must operate, the members of this institution would know what to do and they would be guided before they take action. May I, therefore, propose that we delete (b) (v) but I will include another one on fines, or maybe not; I do not know what you think but let us delete (v) first? I so move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is a proposal to delete (b) (v). Is it by agreement that we delete? I put the question to that deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I beg to object to the proposal of the committee to delete sub clause (2) and I move that we retain sub clause (2) as it is. My justification is that before any action is taken by the board, in the spirit of natural justice, this organisation should be heard. They should be given the opportunity to be heard because they may clear the air and no sanction may be taken against them. I move that we retain sub clause (2).

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, on that one, while I agree with my colleague, the MP for Ngora, I wish to suggest that we instead say, “an opportunity to be heard” and we leave it at that. (Interjection) Yes, an opportunity to be heard is certainly a fair hearing because an opportunity to show cause shifts the burden. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, can we deal with the issue of the right to be heard or to be presented in favour of the organisation rather than shifting the burden? Can I put the question to that? 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, we recommended that we delete it because we provided an elaborate appeals procedure under 45. There were already appeals there and we made that one clearer and we thought it would cater for the rest.

DR EPETAIT: Why must the organisation be subjected to a lengthy appeals process even before it is heard? Moreover, this appeal is to the minister. To meet the minister to hear your appeal may take months. I think that we should follow the process. If the organisation has been heard and the board still continues with disciplinary action, that is when clause 45 would apply.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, I concede. I think that we were in some kind of a hurry here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, so the phrasing will be in the terms proposed by – Can you state it for the record?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I propose that it reads, “The board shall, before taking any action against an organisation under subsection (1), give an organisation the opportunity to be heard.”  The difference is to show cause or to shift the burden of proof, which I am sure that you have also understood.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, when you are called to show cause as to why action should not be taken against you, you are called upon to defend yourself. It is a defence. When you are given an opportunity to be heard, you are being called upon to give your defence in response to the accusation. Therefore, I do not see the point of departure between showing cause as to why disciplinary action should not be taken against you and the right to be heard. 

The essence of this clause as it is or even what you are proposing is to make sure that the rules of natural justice are followed. If the requirements to show cause why satisfies the tenets of the rules of justice - because in showing cause why you should not be punished, you are defending yourself – (Interruption). 

MR SSEGGONA: To my brother, hon. Adolf Mwesige, the difference is this: To show cause means a prima facie case has been established against you. It is not actually an accusation against which you are defending yourself. The next thing you are doing is to say, “Please, do not discipline me for the following reasons”. You are more or less mitigating. I thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Natural justice, as a principle in our laws, emanates from the Constitution. The principles of natural justice and the words used in the Constitution are, “a right to be heard”. I think that we will be consistent with our national Constitution if we used the same yardstick rather than importing these other words, which could be subject to a different interpretation. Whereas I may agree with hon. Mwesige, you never know some other person would say, “Well, well”; when they say, “please come”, it is not answering allegations but they are about to take disciplinary action against you, can you explain yourself. I think that those are two different things.

Mr Chairman, I do not think that it hurts the mover of the Bill; if that is what he had in mind, - right to be heard and natural justice - let us put those very words within the clause. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we finish this, honourable members? We seem to be agreeing but we are now using words to say the same thing. Can we take a decision on this? The proposal is that to be clear and avoid any ambiguity in terms of importing secondary rights to a person who has already been presumed guilty, what they want to say is that there must be presumption of innocence rather than presumption of guilt in which case you now come to defend yourself at a secondary level. Can it be clear in the terms proposed since hon. Adolf Mwesige says the difference is not there? Can we now take that formulation?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I suggest that the clause reads, “The board shall, before taking any action against an organisation under subsection (1), give an organisation the opportunity to be heard.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Give the organisation.  

MR SSEGGONA: I thank you. “…give the organisation the opportunity to be heard.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There was an issue of revocation, which has not been captured because it has not been proposed.

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, I think what was in the mind of the drafters under (v) fully bordered around what is actually true, that what is not prohibited is allowed. This is why I would like to move an amendment, if it pleases Members, that under (b) we say, “Summon and discipline organisations, and the disciplinary action may include but not limited to…” and then we enumerate this. I am saying this because revocation is coming out but there are others, which may not be exhaustively captured here; so my thinking is that we add that as it would take care of the rest of the things. 

MR MWESIGE: With due respect to hon. Otada, hon. Katuntu had really made the point earlier to the effect that if you choose to start prescribing sanctions, penalties and offences, you must then be exact and exhaustive in everything. Therefore, when you come here and propose that sanctions may include but not be limited to, you are leaving the entire body of sanctions to speculation. It means that the regulatory body – (Interruption)

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, I completely withdraw that. (Laughter)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, before we close, is it therefore necessary to continue with the wording, “may include the following” after we have exhausted – “Summon and discipline organisations, and the disciplinary action may include…” and then you start enumerating?

MR KARUHANGA: I thank you, Mr Chairman. Whereas I agree with my senior colleague on what he has just proposed, I would like to add something. I have been perusing this entire Bill, particularly the section for interpretation, and I kept wondering what would constitute blacklisting. In procurement laws, blacklisting largely implies that if that company is supplying Government or its entities, it would probably not be allowed to supply for a given period. Since here we are trying to be specific and exhaustive, what would constitute blacklisting in this case? I would like to seek clarification from the minister. If it does not constitute anything in particular, then we can remain with what we have provided above.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, certainly we may have to reword the provision and delete the expression “include”. Maybe we can say, “Summon and discipline organisations, and the disciplinary action…” – (Interjections) - Okay, I missed a step. I think we need to draft in the positive rather than the passive voice. We may have to readjust the whole setting to say, “The board shall have power to- 
(a) 	co-opt technical officers to deal with specific issues; 
(b) 	summon and discipline organisations by- 
(i) 	warning the organisation; 
(ii) 	suspending the permit of the organisation; 
(iii) 	exposing the affected organisation to the public; 
(iv) 	blacklisting the organisation” – and I wanted to include, “revocation of an organisation’s permit.” 

It should be something along those lines. Mr Chairman, the drafting can be concretised later for as long as we capture the main principle. However, I thought that we should include the revocation of an organisation’s permit as one of the powers. When we do that, I think with the other amendments which have been made, this provision should be put to a vote. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to this amendment?

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I had asked for clarification for the word “blacklisting”. What would it mean in this particular context? You blacklist an organisation, so what? What happens to that organisation?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what is this blacklisting? What is the idea of blacklisting?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Chair, it is one of those areas that you want to have in the law, that when an organisation is acting contrary to the certificate they were given, it can be blacklisted. They can be blacklisted because of bad conduct in accordance to the certificate they were issued. It is a word that has been used in our law books and it is important that – (Interruption)

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I invite the House to think about the word, “blacklisting”. If it remains ambiguous, then maybe we have to interpret it in the interpretation clause. In the event that we cannot do that, it should be deleted because it remains vague, improper and it will be interpreted by anyone in any way. 

I also want to comment on (b) – “summon and discipline organisations, and the disciplinary action may include…” I thought -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That one has been redrafted. Are you still pursuing it?

MR KYAMADIDI: First of all, I am aware that this came from the First Parliamentary Council and there was some drafting there, and sometimes they also make mistakes. The phrase, “disciplinary action may include…” to me imputes that -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, they have changed that already. Honourable members, can I put the question to this?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, the reflection of the representative of the youth, who I last understood as a youth, is that when you blacklist, what is the effect? Assuming the bureau pronounces its verdict and says that this NGO is hereby blacklisted, what is the effect? In the ordinary terms when somebody talks about blacklisting, it is if you are exposed to the public and it is only a comment to the public that this is a bad organisation. In other words, the organisation will continue to function with those who chose to – (Interjection) – No, no, I want this answer from the minister. 

There is a provision for suspension of a permit. You have blacklisted my organisation but you have not suspended my permit and you have not revoked my permit, because there is provision for all that. Now, if the bureau sits, accords me a hearing and says that my organisation is blacklisted, what are they telling me to do or not to do? I will take it as information.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, hon. Sseggona, for giving way. Blacklisting, as I understand it legally, is equivalent to a caveat emptor - buyer beware; deal with this organisation at your own risk and peril. I think it is a good enough sanction.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman and colleagues, blacklisting is not a primary function; it is a secondary function. I will give you an example. You revoke the licence of this company X but in addition to its revocation, you blacklist it. You may revoke the licence of this organisation, which was licensed to carry out a particular activity, but tomorrow it might come and apply for another activity and another licence. If you have not blacklisted it and it qualifies, you have the discretion this time to allow them do another activity.

However, if this company - for arguments sake called Sseggona Children Protection Inc. - (Laughter) – wanted to operate an orphanage in Busiro or Wakiso and somehow it ended up doing illegal activities and the licence was revoked and it was blacklisted, there is no way that company would come and say this time they are not operating an orphanage but they are going for activity X. I hope I am clear. Therefore, the minister should have that clearly in mind, that blacklisting is secondary. In addition to this sanction, we cannot touch this company even with a 10-foot pole. I think that is what it means.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are we together now, honourable members? We need to move, honourable members. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I would like to totally agree with hon. Abdu Katuntu on blacklisting a company and I am going to give two examples. I would like to give an example of an organisation, which was stealing people’s money and people became very poor in western Uganda. The company was called COWI. They could not revoke the permit of this company because this law had not yet come into place. They are still operating. I even saw their car in Mbarara last week.

Mr Chairman, I have a conviction that if a company’s permit is revoked or has been suspended, it should be blacklisted so that it does not steal from people again. It should be blacklisted so that the public get to know; otherwise, they will come to Kampala and steal from everybody because Kampala is very big and then they will go to Mbarara and do the same thing. Let the people of Mbarara know that COWI is not very good. That is why I would like to support hon. Abdu Katuntu that we give the board powers to suspend, revoke and blacklist. I hope hon. Gerald Karuhanga is listening seriously. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I now put the question to the amendment as proposed?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, while I agree with hon. Abdu Katuntu’s proposal, I still have a problem with the use of the word “black”. I would like to propose – (Interjections) - Kindly, listen to me. No one else is going to liberate Africa; we can liberate it ourselves. Let us use the words, “negative listing”. It is a better expression than “blacklisting”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the language of the law has got to be consistent. “Negative listing” would require a definition even in the Interpretation Act. There is no issue about blacklisting; it is in the Bill. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairman, I propose that we delete the word, “blacklisting”. Given the reasons the Members were giving, it is redundant. When you look at the expression, “exposure of the affected organisation to the public”, what does that mean? Isn’t that equal to blacklisting?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I will put the question to the proposal that the word “blacklisted” be deleted.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I will now put the question to the amendments as proposed in clause 7.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to amend subsection (2) by deleting the words, “chairperson and”. It is therefore redrafted to read as follows: “The affixing of the common seal of the board shall be authenticated by the signature of the Executive Director.” The justification is that this is a common practice and the board is not a day-to-day board. Therefore, the chairperson of the board may not always be there and this would paralyse the work of the bureau.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to amend clause 9 by-
(i) amending the headnote to read, “Board of Directors”.

(ii) redrafting sub clauses (1), (2),(3),(4) to read as follows:
“(1) The bureau shall be governed by a board of directors; 
(2) The board shall consist of the following:
(a) The Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Internal Affairs or his or her representative who shall be the chairperson of the board;
(b) The Permanent Secretary of the ministry responsible for finance, planning and economic development or his or her representative;
(c) The Permanent Secretary of the ministry responsible for gender, labour and social development or his or her representative;
(d) A representative of the ministry responsible for security;
(e) Two representatives from the non-governmental organisations sector in Uganda;
(f) One eminent person from the public; and
(g) The Executive Director who shall be an ex-officio.

(3) The members of the board shall appoint a vice-chairperson from amongst themselves who shall assist the chairperson in the operation of the board.

(4) The member of the board provided for under paragraph (f) shall be appointed by the minister and shall have proven experience of at least 10 years in any, but not limited to the following fields:
(a) Organisation regulation and administration;
(b) Law;
(c) Public administration and management; 
(d) Public finance; or 
(e) International relations.” 

The justifications are: to clarify on the membership of the board; and to include representatives from the NGO sector in the membership of the board since the law is aimed at regulating NGOs. 

(iii) Amending sub clause (6) by- 
(a) substituting paragraph (d) with the following: “(d) is convicted of a criminal offence in respect of which a penalty of imprisonment of one year or more is imposed without the option of a fine” 
(b) inserting a new paragraph (e) to provide as follows: “(e) is adjudged insolvent”. 
(c) inserting a new paragraph (f) to provide for abuse of office. 

The justification is: to remove the ambiguity on the issue of conviction as a ground for removal of a member of the board; and also to introduce bankruptcy as a ground for removal of a member of the board.

(iv) Amending sub clause (7) by redrafting it as follows: “(7) Where a member provided for under subsection (2) (f) resigns, dies or is removed from office under this section, the minister shall within three months appoint another person to replace the member and to hold office for the remainder of the term of that member.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is the word “bankrupt” the same as “insolvent”? Can they be used interchangeably? Can you adjudge someone insolvent? I think the word is bankrupt.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Mr Chairman and colleagues, I would like to appeal to the committee to follow the way boards are appointed in Government. There is a laid out procedure on how boards are appointed. They are appointed by a minister and approved by Cabinet. The layout of these very big people would perpetuate a situation that has failed. I do not want to go with a failed arrangement. These are very busy people.  Permanent secretaries are very busy people on a day-to-day basis and rightly so. Now, for them to find time to manage the affairs of a new institution, which we wish to become a robust institution in managing of this dynamic sector, would create a difficulty in day-to-day implementation.

Therefore, I recommend that we maintain this clause as it is in the Bill, that the board be appointed by the minister and approved by Cabinet. However, the NGOs can have two representations on the board and the rest remains as stated in the Bill. This would give us an effective board, consistent with the way boards are appointed and governed in Government. These other proposals would make the working of this board very difficult and it would not function well. I thank you.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairperson, the committee had thought that permanent secretaries would constitute the membership of this board. However, as I was consulting colleagues behind here, who are members of the committee, about the submission of the minister, we realised that these are very busy people and may not have time to take on these tasks. We would like to concede to the minister’s proposal as long as we retain representation of two members from the NGO sector.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, there is a big problem. The minister seems to think, and that is what has destroyed our boards, that when you talk about a board like this one, you are dealing with people who are going to sit everyday like we have seen with some boards. The reason - now I will adopt what the chairperson is running away from - I believe these people proposed in here will be better is that they can appoint representatives; and two, these are people with specific qualifications. Where you are not spelling out the specific qualifications and competences, especially in terms of academic qualifications, you are better off having these people who have the requisite academic qualifications.

I have looked at it; it is generally about proven integrity. I do not know about the mechanism you have to determine this proven integrity and whether it not the usual rhetoric employed when we are establishing boards. I can read them; there is one on local governance, law, public finance, security matters, international relations, et cetera. I have seen an authority in this country where they have consultants in the legal field without practising certificates. 

My view is that we take the list provided or suggested by the committee at page 14; except my view would be that what is presented as (c) – Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development or his or her representative - should appear as (a). This is because in my view, the functions we are talking about are largely to do with activities under this ministry. I know that there is a section of Ugandans who feel that everything must be seen with lenses of security. However, my view is that we maintain this list as suggested by the committee and we transfer (c) to become (a)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise on a point of clarification from the minister. First of all, I do agree with his proposal, but the normal composition of these boards is that the Permanent Secretary would be secretary to the board. The chairperson had suggested that the Permanent Secretary be the chairperson, which was odd. However, the minister said later that these government officials are usually too busy to sit on these boards.

Therefore, the clarification I would like to seek from the minister is whether the Permanent Secretary is going to sit on the board as is the usual case or if the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs is too busy to sit on the board. If not, then who would be the secretary to the board?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to agree with the minister that we need effective boards. Quite often, we have passed Bills here and I am normally disturbed with boards formed by representatives like those that the chairperson of the committee was proposing.

Experience shows that these permanent secretaries belong to almost all boards of most entities of Government. You will find the PS of the Ministry Finance, Planning and Economic Development belonging to over ten boards. This PS will not find time; he will just delegate a commissioner, for example, or somebody from the ministry to go to the different meetings. 

Mr Chairman, I believe this Bill is not seeking that. It is seeking to solve a particular problem. If this problem is to be solved, we need to give it necessary capacity in terms of boards and propose people who are independent. So, I would like to support the minister’s proposal. 

However, I have one issue to raise; when you say not more than seven persons, I would like to know whether the chairperson and the vice-chairperson are among the seven –(Interjection)- Mr Chairman, I am getting indication from the Frontbench that the seven persons do not include the chairperson and the vice chairperson; that means if we add these two, they will become nine. We need to cure the tendency of having packed boards. Nine people are too many. We need to restrict ourselves to seven so that the chairperson and the vice-chairperson are included in the seven and we get five other people to be on the board. I thank you.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Chairman, I want to point out that actually, it does not refer to nine; it says the chairperson, the vice-chairperson and not more than seven. Not more than seven could be two or even one. We need to be very specific on how many members.

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I want to make a proposal on the composition. The gender part has been taken care of and on affirmative action, we need a person with disability among the board members. The reason is that three quarters of the lives of persons with disabilities are catered for by NGOs and some of them have been taken advantage of. When people give services to persons with disabilities, they deceive them and say they are going to support them. I think there is need to have critical expertise of these people on this board.

I also would like to support the minister on the composition of the board. We need to get people who are committed to regulate and are able to do this work other than just having permanent secretaries who will be delegating different people to the board. Thank you.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Mine is a simple one; I agree to most of the suggestions given but on (2)(c), I think as members have intimated, we need a specific number. If that board is not made up of nine people, it will not be fully composed. Therefore, (c) should read, “…a vice-chairperson and five other persons” - that is what the members are saying - so that they are seven. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have we agreed to that composition now - the number of the people on the board? – (Interjection) - That imposes an unnecessary discretion; they say it should be fixed so that they are clear about it.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to concur with the minister about the composition of the board, but I would like to find out whether this is a fulltime board. If it is a fulltime board, then the other permanent secretaries do not fit in it.  This is because when you look at the responsibilities of the board, they are supposed to monitor and regulate, among other functions. Where will the permanent secretaries get time to monitor the activities of the 	NGOs?

I would, therefore, like to concur with the minister and say that we support that but also reduce on the number of board members. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the wording as stated in the Bill is correct. You have just heard from hon. Asamo about the inclusion of people with disabilities. I think if you left it at that formulation of not more than seven members, it gives – I hope the minister is listening. I was just saying that the proposal of not more than seven members gives flexibility to the minister, given now the dimension hon. Asamo has brought here, to take care of such cases in case they arise. “Not more than seven” to me is better wording for the flexibility of the board’s composition.

The minister has heard the sentiments of Members, that they would not want the total number to be more than nine. So, when he is forming the board, he should be cognisant of those concerns. Otherwise, he should take care of the issues that were brought up by hon. Asamo.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do we need a flexible number or we want a fixed number?  The debate is that they want a fixed number. That is what brought us to this particular discussion. The drafting should therefore, conform to having a fixed number. It is either nine or seven. We should take a decision on which one it should be. Should we go with seven? If you prefer seven, then I will put the question to that and we deal with it. 

Also, the consensus seems to be that the composition of the board should be as in the Bill rather than as proposed by the chairperson of the committee. That means that the proposal from the committee now stands withdrawn. Is that correct in relation with the composition of the board? Is it withdrawn?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairperson, we withdrew the part of the permanent secretaries but retained the two representatives of the NGO sector. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that was agreed to by the minister; it cannot be withdrawn. Let us zero down the issues.

MS KAMATEEKA: On the issue of numbers, it is the Bill that has seven and we would like to change it to five so as we have a total of seven.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The total number of members of the board should be seven people, not so?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The issue of representation of gender and disability will be a matter for consideration when these appointments are being made; is that correct? Can we now take a decision on this?

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Chairman, I have an issue with clause 3 which is also –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We finished clause 3 long time ago.

MR MAGYEZI: No, it is sub clause (3). My understanding is that the minister’s intention is to have all this expertise represented on the board – law, local governance, public finance, among others. However, the formulation is quite confusing. It says, “The members of the board shall have proven experience of 10 years in the following fields…” It is as if all of them will have 10 years of experience on the dot and each of them will have his or her own field. 

I would like to propose that we reformulate that to read, “A member of the board of directors shall have proven experience of at least 10 years in any of the following fields…” This is in case I have experience in two or more of these fields. “A member of the board shall have proven experience of at least 10 years in any of the following fields…”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that is okay, Members - “at least 10 years…” - so that it is clear. Can I put the question to that?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OTADA: I just want seek clarification from the minister. The areas of expertise have been clearly enumerated but when you get to (e), I really would like to have it clear. When you say “security matters or international relations”, is it a typo? Is it is a standalone - (e) security and (f) international relations? Is it a typo or it is “either, or”?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the whole thing is optional except that the last word now carries the word “or”. 

MR OTADA: I just wanted clarification on that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is very clear.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, first, I do not know if hon. Magyezi had somebody in mind that is old enough to have 10 years’ experience. When you are talking about 10 years and you add “at least”, it sounds mean for the young people. However, since it has passed – (Interjections) - I am tempted to say “at least” for five years but not for 10 years. Are you looking at some of your political opponents coming on board after failing? (Laughter)  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member, it was saying, “experience of 10 years”; how would the phrase “at least” make it worse?

MR OBOTH: At least makes it worse –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the Bill as it is was saying one needs experience of 10 years.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, my problem is actually with the words “at least”. If we are looking at 10 years as more experience, if we put the words “at least”, we are providing for the minimum - ten is the minimum. 

We have very able young people in this country who are very helpful day and night; they are hands-on. We are now talking about transition and the like but we are still stuck in the past - old service. Mr Chairman, can you guide me so that I do not fall into the temptation of recommitting this, so that we change it to at least five years?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What you want to amend is not the phrase “at least”. What you are proposing is an amendment to the number of years. You need to be specific about it. At least 10 years is the same as 10 years, except that you have to find somebody who has exactly 10 years. That is the only issue.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, with that guidance, I therefore would like to move for re-consideration of the 10 years. If we are to retain the word “at least”, then we reduce from 10 years to five years but then we leave “proven experience”. However, for some of you who are legislating this law with other people in mind, you can go for 10 years. (Laughter) 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairperson, it is true there are very many young people with five years’ experience who are very intelligent and can manage some of these issues. However, let us look at boards; they are supposed to be policy institutions. What you take there is a wealth of experience to guide the executive and management. You take skills. If you have five years’ experience, you need to seek a management job down there; you need to continue working. 

I do not think that five years is long enough for one to start – I will give an example. If I were the minister responsible for this and I am supposed to be recruiting a chief executive, I am going to look for a chief executive with experience of 10 to 15 years plus to run that institution and yet you are getting somebody of five years’ experience to start looking after this person with 15 years’ experience. It becomes a problem. I know we could be a little bit selfish because we might need these jobs – (Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, chairperson and thank you, on. Abdu Katuntu. As you are saying, to get this young person of five years’ experience to be chair of a board where the chief executive has 15 or 20 years’ experience would cause a problem. However, you are forgetting that the law of diminishing returns could have also set in for that person of 20 years’ experience. So, that cannot be an excuse for having that.

Furthermore, if we are to say that the experience of five years is too minimal, then the Chair of today’s session would not be the Deputy Speaker of this Parliament. If we were to say five years of experience in Parliament was not enough to make him the Speaker of this Parliament, then he would not be there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that is not a very good example. (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: On that note, I will not take any other information. I can only tell you that the current presiding officer has been in this House for some time. Even when he was not in this House, he was holding jobs that relate to the work which this institution does. So, the experience is there.

Mr Chairman, when you look at the qualifications being given, I think we have limited them. What are NGO’s? These are socio-economic institutions or organisations. Therefore, we would need people who are skilled in the socio-economic sector. That is why I was comfortable with the proposed amendment, which unfortunately the chairperson withdrew, about the composition of the board. 

Can I therefore suggest that we expand the qualifications - chairperson and the minister, if you may think about it – to include persons learned in labour and socio-economic development, economics – This is because you have limited. Also, I really do not know why we have this fixation about security. These institutions are largely socio-economic organisations. What concerns security in this? 

There is a big problem because we are looking at these institutions as if they are law and order institutions; they are not, for heaven’s sake! These are organisations involved in socio-economic development. Therefore, primarily, our focus should be on people who are learned in the socio-economic development sector. That should be the primary qualification here –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, local governance - Why not governance? Is it specific to local governance or is it governance?

MR KATUNTU: There is local governance, which the Chair is talking about; if I have been a sub county councillor for five years, is this what you are talking about? I know my brother has been a local government councillor but I am not talking about you. I think what we will have to look at is what these organisations primarily deal in and we should provide those types of qualifications, not these ones I am seeing here.  
May I, therefore, move - Chairperson, if you look at what you had provided in the proposals about the composition of the board, the committee seems to have brought it out well on page 14 of the report. They mention finance, planning, economic development, gender, labour, social development and obviously you can put law; it will always fit there – (Interjections) - I do not think we need this local government thing. They also mention organisation regulations. I do not know who is learned in organisations regulations. (Interruption)

MR KYAMADIDI: Mr Chairperson, I am rise on a point of order. You are aware that since 1990, this government has adopted the decentralisation system of governance. You are also aware that much of what we do is based on local governance and that most of these NGOs work very closely with local government. 

If I can precisely give some examples, if you go to the NGOs in the north, many of them work closely with local governments. If you go to the west, CBOs and even NGOs work closely with local governments. So, is the honourable senior learned colleague - I am paralegal - in order to demean the local governance experience in the work of NGOs? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is a matter of opinion.

MR KATUNTU: As I end, I would lie to say that these institutions literally work with everybody. They work with the children, women, soldiers - literally everybody. Just working with other sections of society does not mean that somebody has to be learned in that particular sector.

Mr Chairman, if the minister and the chairperson of the committee do seriously consider this, I think I would move the amendment that we adopt the qualifications provided for in the report of the committee at page 14.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, but what they provided for is under their proposed sub clause (4).

MR KATUNTU: Yes, but I was talking about is what is provided for. I can specifically put forward what I wanted to bring out. “A member of the board…” -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Without bringing it out, they cannot know what to agree to or not to agree to. So, you have to bring it out.

MR KATUNTU: I was proposing thus: “A member of the board of directors shall have proven experience of 10 years in the following fields: finance, planning and economic development, gender, labour and social development, law, order, security - (Interjections) – We can say security matters; that will be okay.

BRIG. KATIRIMA: Is the honourable member on the Floor in order to impute that security has no relevance here when he knows that he cannot establish a coffee plantation in Somalia today or South Sudan? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please, consider those.

MR KATUNTU: I, therefore, move my amendment. As for what my brother, hon. Katirima, is saying, I do not know even where Somalia is, so I have no opinion about that.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, well I agree with hon. Abdu Katuntu on the qualifications mentioned. My strong objection is on the phrase, “at least 10 years”. Even when we say “at least five years”, the minister can appoint somebody of 20 years’ experience. Insisting on ten years because you think five years is too young is a suspicion of imprudence on the part of the minister. That is why I personally resisted the temptation when hon. Oboth was saying we should include regional balancing. I said the minister is not imprudent to appoint only people from the north where he comes from. He can appoint people from anywhere. So, he can as well look for people who are competent.

However, the second ground is: what happens to the young people who will also want to train in corporate matters and mentoring? The minister, of course, is not imprudent to appoint his daughter who has just graduated. However, the minister, with assistance from other officers of Government, may identify somebody who is studied in law but has not hit the threshold of ten years. 

That is why I liked the phrase by hon. Abdu Katuntu where he said, “at the risk of sounding selfish” for them who are aging. You have a Member of Parliament like hon. Gerald Karuhanga, who can be a Member of Parliament, or hon. Alengot for that matter, who qualify to be Speaker of Parliament but you are saying he or she does not qualify to be a member of a board, where there are even chances of mentoring. I think we, the old people, should stop being selfish. We should allow room for growth where someone demonstrates ability. 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that actually, the proposal of “at least five years” does not exclude having other members on that board that may have experience of more than five years. 

What the current proposal does is that it fails or impedes any person who may have only five years’ experience from being a member of the board. However, you could have three members of 10 to 15 years’ experience and two members of about five years’ experience, so that you have continuity and grooming of leaders.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you for that information. Finally, you may even find that the minister appointing this board is hon. Evelyn Anite. What is her experience in terms of age? So, I think - (Interjections)– The experience is sole candidate? That is not true. I rest my case.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am one of the young people this country has. However, I would like to state that we must give institutions the necessary requirements they need to perform. A board of an entity is responsible for formulating strategic direction of that entity. It is responsible for policy and oversight functions. 

True, the young people need mentorship and representation, but if we are talking about a board of an entity, you cannot exclude experience. There is experience that is required to perform at that level. If you want to learn, be down there and see what is happening up there and then over the years, you will get to appreciate what is required to be there. Therefore, Mr Chairman, I would like to appeal to colleagues that a minimum of 10 years’ experience in various fields, which I am also going to come back to, be retained.

The hon. Abdu Katuntu made a very good proposal but I would like to improve it. He talked about experience in finance, planning and economic development. I feel this is not specific. Maybe experience in economics and public finance can cater for that area. I do not understand where experience in organisational regulations and administration comes from. Maybe the drafters of this Bill need to clarify to us what comprises experience in organisational regulations -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, just propose what you are proposing.

MR MUSASIZI: I would like to propose that this area be substituted with experience in public administration; it would be clearer to –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, honourable member from Rubanda, one of the youngest people in the country; I am proud of you.

Since we are having difficulty in enumerating this, can we resolve the issue of either five or 10 years but then say, “In the relevant field”, so that we leave the job of determining to the minister. Let the minister determine. Since he is a general, if he wants to bring only generals – This role of prescribing the field - Now you see organisation regulation here; which university teaches that? 

I just wanted to share with you that information so that you can modify, so that we can agree on either five or 10 years but in the relevant field.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, hon. Oboth, for this information. By the way, Mr Chairman, you do not need to be very old to acquire 10 years’ experience in a relevant field. I graduated when I was 23 years old and that was 11 years ago. If I were to be appointed on the board, I have relevant experience to perform at that level. So, I would like to allay that the fears of hon. Gerald Karuhanga. (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. Whereas I appreciate that you may have experience after 11 years - Mr Chairman, we had an opportunity to visit the Kenya Electoral Commission and the officials and the entire commission attended that meeting. It was such a wonderful blend of young and old men and women. You could see the vibrancy, energy and the spirit that was actually thriving in this institution.

Therefore, whereas it is important that we need this experience, it is also necessary that we have a blend. As we know, ideas are evolving and with the e-learning and all the technology, you may want to have a mix of the old and those who are slightly young so that you have better results.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, honourable member, for the information. However, I would like to insist that we need not compromise on experience, Mr Chairman. So, in conclusion, I would like to propose that in (a) we replace the phrase, “organisation regulation” –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member, the proposal in (3) is: “The members of the board of directors shall have proven experience of at least 10 years in the relevant field.” That means we delete the rest - (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) and (f). That is the proposal. I put the question to that one?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now, let us go to the 10 or five years’ experience. The amendment is that it should be five years because the Bill says 10 years. So, I put the question to the amendment that it should be five years?

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.03
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report thereto. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.04
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that clauses 7, 8 and 9 were passed as amended. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.04
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Mr Speaker, motion for adoption of the report from the Committee of the Whole House - I beg to move -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that we will be taking a decision on is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I will put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this would be a proper time to adjourn the proceedings of the House. A request has been made by a party in the House that there will be some meetings tomorrow. We will also have members of Cabinet having some meetings. We also have consultations that need to be made on some of these issues so that when we come back, we can move faster. Today we have been very slow on this Bill and yet I had anticipated a faster speed when processing this Bill since there was concurrence on both sides of the House, but we have not been very fast.

Honourable members, we will not be proceeding tomorrow but we will proceed on Thursday. Whips need to help us with the necessary mobilisation. As I said, some of the decisions require numbers that are set in the Constitution. We need a particular number for us to take certain decisions. I will respect the letter from the Leader of the Opposition and the meeting we had with the Chief Opposition Whip that there will be a delegates’ conference for the FDC party tomorrow. We will honour that so that they can have that meeting so that when we resume, all the members of this House are in the House so that we take some decisions. This House stands adjourned to Thursday at 10 O’clock.    ou 

(The House rose at 7.0 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 3 September 2015 at 10.00 a.m.) 

