
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 9 September 2021

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Death has again struck the Parliamentary household. I have learnt of the passing on of Mzee Mathias Ngobi, who is reported to have rested at the ripe age of 99 years. 

He was one of the founder legislators in this country. He sat in the LEGCO and participated in the Lancaster Conference, which determined the cause of the independence of Uganda. Hon. Ngobi represented Busoga South in the First and Second Parliament, and held various portfolios as a minister in the then Executive branch of the Government. 

He was a Member of the Third Parliament; the National Consultative Council and a minister. He was also a Member of the Constituent Assembly, which promulgated the 1995 Constitution.

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, let us celebrate the life of this illustrious Ugandan and convey our sympathies to his family, relatives and friends. Honourable members, for him and for those who have also passed on, let us observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today is Thursday and what that means is private Members time. Today, I have not received many of the matters that are coming from private Members in terms of petitions, motions and other related matters. However, I have a few urgent matters to be raised and we will deal with that. 

You also know that today is Prime Minister’s Time and it starts at 4 O’clock. The rules have changed; they now present the question to the Prime Minister and she comes and answers them. That will be it for today and some business to follow. 

Can I have Members who had urgent matters to raise them quickly, so that we get to the Order Paper?

2.14
MR CHARLES MATOVU (NUP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent importance. The Special Forces Command (SFC) in Katabi Town Council Nkumba Bendegere Ward, evicted over 700 residents. These residents were evicted from Lwanjaba Landing Site, where they have been for over three decades. It is where they derived their livelihoods and engaged in other economic activities.

The eviction has rendered them homeless and deprived them of their economic and social livelihood and human dignity. They have sought shelter elsewhere in the nearby villages, one of which is Kavundira, which happens to be a wetland. Others include Bukorwa and Mwanga Landing Site. Some of them have been given shelter in makeshifts by a one Sarah Kyomugisha, who charges them a monthly rent of Shs 30,000.

THE SPEAKER: What do you want to be done?

MR MATOVU: My prayer is that the Government relocates the affected people to nearby places, preferably landing sites, since their livelihood is derived from fishing and other related traits and provides them shelter and other social amenities like food, mattresses and even start-up capital. 

I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Frontbench -

2.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Mr Speaker, I am going to link up with the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to attend to the matter urgently. The emphasis of the SFC and who was evicted is what I am concerned about. Otherwise, we do not usually do that as we are a very disciplined force. However, I am going to tell the minister to attend to the matter urgently.

THE SPEAKER: Is it just a matter of the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs? What about the humanitarian aspect - the displaced people and shelters?

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Mr Speaker, the Government is well coordinated; we work together. When the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs finds the issues of shelter and all that - even at SFC level, we have capacity to do that but the two are going to coordinate very well so that as Government, we address the matter.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Gen. Kavuma, on what matter do you rise? 

MAJ. GEN. KAVUMA: On Information –

THE SPEAKER: Information to who? Okay.

MAJ. GEN. KAVUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to give information to the Government Chief Whip. If I heard well what the Member raised, he talked of evictions that have been conducted by the SFC. He did say that this took place decades ago. It seems he is not complaining about the eviction; it is as if the eviction was legal but the Member’s request is for these people to be settled. 

I think that settlement is not for the SFC, if the eviction was done legally –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF). I was expecting you to come this side since you are nonpartisan – 

THE SPEAKER: He is a Member of Parliament. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is, what is eviction? When someone says people have been evicted - can you explain what you understand by eviction? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, his point was simple. Was it illegal or legal? Apparently, from what the Member is saying, there was no complaint about the eviction process. It is the result of the eviction process that has affected these people. 

MAJ. GEN. KAVUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think a different authority would be contacted, as said by the Government Chief Whip, to settle these people who are suffering. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, an eviction can be legal. There are illegal evictions but then there are also legal evictions. The word “eviction” on its own does not mean it is a negative thing. If your tenant does not pay you rent for many years, you can – 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When an eviction is legal, it is never carried out by the SFC. 

THE SPEAKER: No, they said the person who owns the land is an SFC officer. That is what he said. Let us not mix up issues. He was not evicted by the SFC but the person on whose behalf the eviction was carried out was an SFC officer. That is the point that was made. 

MR PATRICK MWESIGWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising under Rule 8 of our Rules of Procedure. I thank you and the Parliamentary Commission for availing us with offices in various precincts, both here in Parliament and in the neighbouring areas including Kingdom Kampala, where some of us are domiciled. 

In Kingdom Kampala, we have a challenge – 

THE SPEAKER: Can we handle that administratively, please? That is not a matter for plenary.

MR PATRICK MWESIGWA: Mr Speaker, let me be brief – 

THE SPEAKER: It is not a matter for plenary. 

MR PATRICK MWESIGWA: That is why I am raising it under rule 8.

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not a matter for plenary. Please come to the Speaker’s office, raise it and we will deal with it administratively. 

MR PATRICK MWESIGWA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

2.23
MR ROBERT WANDWASI (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to welcome you back to your seat. I rise under Rule 54(2) to report on the state of road carnage along Mbale-Tororo Road between Busiu Town Council and a place called Bulukye because of the two sharp corners of the hills – 

THE SPEAKER: Please wear your mask properly and cover your nose as well. 

MR WANDWASI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This stretch that I have just mentioned is very narrow and has very sharp corners. It has a very narrow bridge which is very close to the National Water and Sewerage Corporation works station. It has become a death trap to both motorists and pedestrians. 

Over the past three years, it has claimed the lives of over 100 people. The latest road carnage happened on 11 July 2021 whereby a speeding TATA truck registration number UAR 536R from Tororo loaded with cement rammed into six people, killing four of them instantly and severely injuring the rest at Manafwa Bridge. 

These people were from the same family of Mzee Wabwire John of Rongoro Village, Bunashimolo Parish, Bukiende Sub-county, Bungokho South Constituency. These were innocent people coming from their garden. 

Please allow me mention the names of the deceased: 

Maimuna Ivan, 25 years, a son.
Boniface Wonaiye, 13 years, a son.
Jackson Mukhwana, 12 years, a son.
Juliet Khaaka Mutonyi, 23 years, a daughter-in-law belonging to the same man.

It is important to note that this road serves the country as an export and import route for goods between Kenya, Uganda and – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please stick to the urgent issue. What is the matter with the road? Then give it to Government to deal with.

MR WANDWASI: As a leader hailing from Bungokho South Constituency, I pray that because of the sharp corners around the Bulukye area, this road between Busiu Town Council and Busoba be considered for reconstruction to minimise or totally avoid the two sharp corners. 

Secondly, widening the road and creation of climbing lanes; climbing lanes should be constructed on the route as you slope from Mbale Town towards Tororo and also as you come from Tororo. 

My other prayer is that this bridge be widened. The bridge is very narrow. Additionally, reinstallation of road signs that can warn the truck drivers who drive from Mombasa, Tororo and along that road can be done. 

With that, allow me to submit this report and lay it on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: No, it is an urgent matter; it is not a report. It has been received. The executive Front Bench, note the road carnage. A whole family was wiped out. Minister of Works and Transport?

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, honourable, for coming up with this matter. I would like to inform you that the Ministry of Works and Transport is aware of the problem and they have constituted a team of engineers from our ministry and UNRA. They are already on the ground assessing the problem and they will soon come to advise the ministry on how to quickly intervene in the matter. 

I would beg that you give us a little time for the engineers to bring back the report and we shall solve the problem accordingly. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: In the meantime, can you do something about slowing down the speed of the trucks that are moving there so that when all these other engineering things are going on, at least people are not flying on the road. 

MR BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will take up the matter in the ministry. I will link up with the honourable member and we see the quickest innovation we can make as we pursue the long process. Thank you. 

2.28
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for granting me leave to raise this matter under rule 49. 

The National Medical Stores delivered COVID-19 vaccines to a number of vaccination centres in the country, specifically AstraZeneca, packed in the 4ml bottles lot PV46709 with expiry dates written as EXP 08-2021 and 09-2021. 

In effect, these vaccines have already expired. The programme officer at the Ministry of Health has directed that these vaccines should be used. The dangers of expired drugs and vaccines cannot be overstated. I have the following prayers therefore:

That the expired drugs should no longer be used to vaccinate the population. 

Secondly, that NMS uses the appropriate channels to recall this specific lot that has already expired. 

Finally, countries that are donating to us should donate vaccines that are valid and not the ones that are three months into expiry that by the time they are sent to the vaccination centres, they have expired. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we rely on the technical competence of hon. Baryomunsi? 

2.30
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable member for raising this matter.

As Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Health, we are usually conscious about the shelf life of drugs, medicines and other pharmaceutical products, which come into the country. It is a bit strange that someone could have allowed in vaccines whose shelf life is very short – like he is saying that they are expiring in August or September, the month we are in.

Whether drugs and other pharmaceutical products are being procured by Government or they come through donations or given by third parties, the manufacture and expiry dates are usually key dates of concern. We shall investigate.

I will relay this information to the Minister of Health to conduct an investigation. If indeed there are vaccines, which have reached the expiry date, then they have to be withdrawn from the public. We shall investigate because we do not allow Ugandans to be injected or to consume expired drugs. 

So, we shall investigate and establish the veracity of this allegation and if true, they will be withdrawn. However, I doubt whether anybody would have allowed vaccines, which are expired into the country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. You said you are going to investigate, so we will count on that. 

2.32
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, in the wee hours, the villages of Opwat, Okello-Ogor border, Otada, Wii Cama and Otara in Kuluabura Parish, Minakulu Sub-county were hit by hailstorms, which left a trail of destruction.

Mr Speaker, several gardens of cassava, maize, beans, simsim, soya beans, to mention but a few, were completely destroyed. In fact, the ground was left bare. Several houses were also destroyed with many people left without shelter. In this case, the children were really left and are still in the cold. There were also many people who got injured and are receiving treatment. 

My prayer, Mr Speaker, is that the Government urgently comes to help these people and the affected communities with food, seeds and shelter. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, any comments?

2.33
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Hilary Onek): My sympathies to my colleague for those occurrences. Such occurrences are happening almost everywhere in the country. I have a report, which I will present but which will probably address some of those challenges.

I have taken note of that. We shall send people to check the situation and see what we can send there. Thank you, colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, remember we have a full statement on the status of disasters in the country and the current interventions by Government, coming up next. So, I think that is what the minister means by saying he will be able to speak about it more when he reaches his own statement.

2.34
MS KENNY AUMA (UPC, Woman Representative, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding floods in Kwania.

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, it is over two years since the area around Lake Kyoga, Lake Kwania and Lake Victoria started experiencing the impact of intensive and prolonged rainfalls, which have caused a rise in water levels thereby causing floods in several parts of the country.

Last year, the Minister of Water and Environment predicted these floods to continue up to this year. What is very surprising, Mr Speaker, is that the Government has not taken any concrete steps or actions to avert or support those who have been affected by these floods.

My constituency has been affected by these floods. We have roads, people’s homes and gardens that have been submerged by the floods. The four subcounties that have been terribly submerged are Nambieso, Ayabi, Chawente and Atongtidi. The people in these subcounties are in dire need of humanitarian support in form of medicines, food, clothing and shelter.

It is against this background that I rose on a matter of national importance to inform this House about the terrible situation of the people of Kwania that are in dire need, as well as other Ugandans who are affected by these floods due to the rising water levels from River Nile, Lake Victoria, Lake Kwania and Lake Kyoga.

Mr Speaker, my prayers are as follows:

That the responsible minister and technical team go to the ground to do an assessment of the affected areas and come up with concrete actions and solutions to avert this situation;

That the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, under the Office of the Prime Minister, relocates the affected communities from the lakeshores and they be provided with basic needs like food, relief, blankets, mosquito nets, medicine, as has been done for the people in Kasese; and

That the Government gives extra consideration to the affected districts in Lango Subregion like Amolatar, Dokolo, Kwania and Apac to aid sustainable settlement and protection from this disaster.

I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, any comments?

2.37
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you, colleague, for that additional information. As I mentioned yesterday, areas around some of our lakes are really flooded because the water levels have gone beyond where they used to end. It is not only Kwania or Dokolo, which are around Lake Kyoga. It is on both sides; even on the Nakasongola side, it is the same problem.

If you go to Ntoroko, it is even worse. There are about three subcounties where people have been displaced. They are now squatters; they are in IDP camps because their homes got flooded. Schools have been washed away. Health centres, which are newly built, have all been flooded. The problem is big. I wish we could divert half of our national budget first to tackle disasters; we would be able to rest. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

2.39
MR BOB OKAE (UPC, Kwania County North, Kwania): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of public importance, regarding the Masindi Port ferry.

Mr Speaker, the Masindi Port ferry has stayed for some time yet it can only take four vehicles at ago. The ferry is too old and breaks down every other time. Because of the Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Puranga Road Project, traffic has now increased on this road. I happened to move there on Friday morning, at around 7.30 a.m. and I got 29 vehicles waiting. I was No. 30, yet this ferry can only take four vehicles at ago. 

So, it is a concern to the people who use this road. I want to bring to the attention of this House that this ferry needs to be replaced. I urge the Government to procure at least a new and better ferry, which can take more than four vehicles because of the heavy traffic. I also call upon the Government to speed up the construction of the bridge, which process the Government had already started. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Works and Transport?

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Member for following up the matter. The ferry at Masindi Port could have already been replaced but the ministry is handcuffed due to the budget cuts. The ministry has instructed UNRA to identify a ferry, which is in a good working condition and a bit larger than the old one, so that in the meantime, we take it there as we task the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us funds to permanently fix this problem. As soon as we get it, we shall update you and take it there. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE CHARTER OF FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2021/2022 TO 2025/2026

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility for the financial years 2021/2022 to 2025/2026. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility for the financial years 2021/2022 to 2025/2026. The budgetary document stands referred to the Committee on Budget to look at it and come and advise the House on how we will proceed with it. Thank you. 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF DISASTERS IN THE COUNTRY AND CURRENT INTERVENTIONS BY GOVERNMENT

2.44
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am, sadly, reading the status of disasters in the country for your information. The information paper seeks to address this Parliament on the:

Current status of disasters in the country;

Effects on livelihoods and service delivery, and; 

Response interventions by the Government towards various disasters across the country. 

Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, the country has been affected by torrential rains that led to flash flooding and rising water levels in various parts of the country during both the first and second rainy seasons of 2020. This phenomenon led to inundation of human settlements and other livelihood activities located at the shores of Lake Victoria (Kampala, Wakiso, Mpigi, Kalungu, Masaka, Rakai, Buikwe, Mayuge and Namayingo), Lake Kyoga (Nakasongola, Kayunga, Buyende, Amolatar and Serere) and Lake Albert (Ntoroko, Buliisa and Hoima) and the banks of River Nile in Pakwach and Obongi districts. 

Despite the Government’s efforts to resettle the affected communities since 2020, scores of the population still remain either in displacement or at high risk because a slight increase in rainfall always triggers a rise in water levels in the above-mentioned cases. Knowing water, as a water engineer, we can never force this water to leave our country. If it were possible to change the gradient of the Nile, we would make it go faster. 

The first season (March, April and May) of 2021 was characterised by both delayed onset and early cessation of rains. You may recall that the rains started in late April and ended in late May or early June in most parts of the country. This trend has left serious negative impacts on mostly seasonal crops, with the country currently experiencing rising food prices. The predictions/forecasts for the second season (September, October, November and December) are not any better for the regions dependent on seasonal crops. 

The most notable regions where crops’ conditions deteriorated as a result of the early cessation of the first season rains include the districts of Kaliro, Kibuku, Pallisa, Bukedea, Kumi, Ngora, Soroti, Kaberamaido, Kalaki, Amolatar, Apac and Alebtong in the eastern and northern parts of the country and Gomba, Bukomansimbi, Mubende, Sembabule, Kiruhura, Kazo, lsingiro, Ntungamo, Lyantonde, Mbarara, Ibanda and Kyegegwa districts in central and western of the country. June, July and August is normally a dry season in the eastern, central and western parts of the country, but the extent of dryness was worse than the normal range. 

I have a graph in the report showing how crops and vegetation conditions in the country responded to early cessation of rains during the season. Notice the red line below the long-term mean - if you look at the graph. 

The food security and nutrition assessment, recently concluded in Karamoja by the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM), Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and partners, equally reported acute food insecurity status with 361,300 people representing 30 per cent of the population in Karamoja. This calls for immediate action by the House on the food insecurity threat in Karamoja, if it is to be addressed. 

As the country prepares for the second season, Kabale, Kasese, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko districts are already experiencing a mixture of floods and landslides that are affecting both livelihoods and critical facilities as highlighted in the report.    

The effects of the current disasters in the country can be reflected as follows: All these events have been unfolding alongside other isolated disasters such as fire outbreaks, hailstorms and lightning, among others, and all together contributed to the displacement of 186,525 persons in 27,629 households by the end of July 2021. 

In August 2021 alone, 36,406 persons from 8,775 households have been affected by disasters - mainly floods, heavy rains and hailstorms. Out of these, 1,392 persons from 232 households have been displaced in August. Cumulatively, a total of 222,930 persons representing 36,404 households have been directly affected by disasters from January 2021 to date.

In the year 2020 alone, natural disasters caused Uganda an economic loss amounting to over Shs 563 billion, which is approximately $152 million, an equivalent to 0.42 percent of the national GDP. 

The economic loss is distributed across seven key sectors, namely transport and infrastructure - mainly roads and bridges, which had a loss of Shs 206.7 billion; commercial and residential housing is about Shs 154.2 billion; agricultural losses is Shs 77.37 billion; education - destruction in schools and educational facilities is Shs 35.44 billion; environment and natural resources equivalent of losses is over Shs 33 billion and; health facilities, health centres and so on destroyed is nearly Shs 31.8 billion; water and sanitation structures affected is equivalent to Shs 23.8 billion. Therefore, a total of 82 districts, out of 135, were affected.

In addition to the above natural disasters was the COVID-19 pandemic. It must be noted that COVID-19 impact on the country's food security is mostly positive, since it pushed many people into agriculture, despite the erratic weather patterns highlighted above. Although the same cannot be said for the urban dwellers, whose source of food is mainly cash purchases since their sources of income were restricted by the lockdowns. 
The above disasters, therefore, continue to negatively affect people’s lives and livelihoods. 

In Kayunga, Buliisa, Ntoroko and Nakasongola districts for example, the rise in water levels pushed the lake shores and wetlands boundaries exponentially inland, up to three kilometres in some areas, invading farmlands, gardens, protected areas, submerging infrastructure, landing sites, docking stations for ferries, human settlements, leaving a trail of destruction including displacement of entire villages.

The floods affected the population, who lost food crops, livelihood sources and houses. Social service delivery was greatly disrupted by enormous damage to roads and bridges, health facilities, water points, education institutions, among others. From the rapid needs assessment done, it was noted that there is a great need for safe water supply, sanitation, nutrition, health services, food assistance and non-food items such as mosquito nets and blankets for the affected persons especially in the internally displaced persons (IDPs) camps. 

Response interventions by the Government are as follows:

To respond to the needs of the disaster victims

The Cabinet approved emergency relief funding to support the relief needs of affected Ugandans. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been releasing the funds in installments. Even though not adequate to meet the enormous needs, the funds have enabled the Office of the Prime Minister to continuously come to the rescue of the most vulnerable Ugandans, through provisions of relief food and non-food items and will continue the effort as more resources are availed.

Between July 2020 and July 2021, the Office of the Prime Minister had distributed relief food and non-food items totaling to 3,655,800 kilogrammes of maize flour, 1,226,800 kilogrammes of beans, 13,400 kilogrammes of sugar, 6,900 pieces of iron sheets, 35,730 pieces of blankets, 23,770 pieces of jerrycans, 33,275 pieces of tarpaulins, 23,800 pieces of mosquito nets and 2,540 pieces of basins. However, these are just peanuts compared to the magnitude of these disasters on the population of Uganda. It is far beyond what we can touch for this.

Moving forward, my office already has a number of requests for relief, pending response. Now that the rainy season has started, more disasters are anticipated. In the short-term therefore, there is a need to continue to support the disaster victims with distribution of targeted food assistance, provision of cash transfers where necessary, agricultural inputs, seeds, seedlings, fertilizers, tools where possible to restore and maintain food security and nutrition-sensitive production capacity, support to storage, transformation and marketing of essential food production.

The affected persons also need to be provided with essential non-food items for household use, hygiene and sanitation kits, mobile toilets in IDP camps and water treatment kits.

In the medium-term, there is need to undertake a joint early recovery needs assessment to obtain clear and reliable data on early recovery in the affected communities and households. This then will be followed with quick impact and response to enhance early recovery in affected communities and households through funding in small impact community projects.

There is also a need to promote climate-smart agriculture and improve agriculture practices and technologies including use of meteorological information for food production and fast maturing nutritious food; and up scaling disaster risk financing in drought prone communities. In short, all these disasters need a multi-sectoral approach and not just this small office under the Office of the Prime Minister.

Therefore, my office together with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and partners, launched the IPC report on the drought situation in Karamoja and now needs resources for Karamoja drought response to mitigate loss of lives and suffering.

I also need resources to fund a detailed resettlement strategy for the 30,338 internally displaced persons (IDPs). I need these funds so that I can secure land away from those flooded areas like in Ntoroko, around Lake Kyoga etc and get the displaced population shifted to drier places. We have estimated the cost of doing that at Shs 120 billion. 

The office also plans to strengthen the capacity of district management committees in the local councils to fully function during the needs assessment and distribution of emergency relief, coordinating and managing disaster issues including displacement induced by disasters.

Yesterday, somebody raised a question that the districts do not have capacity to verify this disaster programme. We have taken note of that and we shall try to find a way of empowering the districts. If I could get some concerned officer in every district, empower them with motorcycles to run around and get information to feed our offices on time, it would be better. Of course we shall need a little budget for that.

In the long term, development priorities need to be accelerated, that is, increase production and value addition chains, sanitation access and safe water, health and childcare. There is also need for more predictable safety nets and interventions to improve post-harvest handling and storage for households to keep food stock through to the lean season. These are all in partnership with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

District Local Governments must enforce physical plans and environment laws to prevent people from settling in protected areas and in close proximity to river banks and lake shores. It should be noted that some of the persons affected by the rise in water levels were settled in zones within the gazetted boundaries of the rivers. 

Actually, we shall have to combine with the Ministry of Water and Environment to ensure that they demarcate where the water levels has now reached so that nobody in future can build beyond that. If the water level has stretched to about two kilometres from the shores, let that be marked so that the population is aware of how to manage that area.

Lastly, deliberate measures must be in place to restore damaged mountains ecosystems and mitigate environmental degradation in order to mitigate disasters like landslides and floods. These normally happen mainly in Mt Elgon area around Bududa and all those surrounding districts like Namisindwa and also Kasese where currently, the flash floods with boulders of rocks roll down the mountain destroying the lives of people. All those will need to be re-organised. 

The population has to be resettled. There must be a national human settlement plan that will take care of such situations. When people degrade very stiff mountains, you find some houses on top of it because of lack of land. They keep removing all the trees. They plant only crops there and the place is open. The rain pour will then weaken the rock base and they roll. As I mentioned yesterday, some rivers are now rock beds. When those rocks come down, they destroy homes and people’s lives.

Therefore, I am begging that together with the Ministry of Water and Environment, we must have a comprehensive plan on how we can re-organise these areas.

Any other questions can be answered. Otherwise, I have a list of interventions that we have planned, attached here in a tabular form. If you find that it is lacking, I am at liberty to receive your information and we include it in this plan. Thank you.

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable minister, for this statement. Honourable members, you will find from pages 9-20 of the minister’s statement - I think he has not had time to go through that - pending disaster response interventions in August 2021. There are details by districts, the issues and action. You might want to crosscheck and see if it is not captured there. That then means it is not in the Government systems. You need to probably find a way of raising it. Maybe not now but even by a chit, I am sure the minister will be able to incorporate it.

Honourable members, under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, this statement attracts a debate without a decision required. Can we proceed with the debate? 

Ms naluyima: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Can the ICT team provide for us a coloured graph on page four? It talks of red lines yet we have a black and white graph. Thank you.

The Speaker: Thank you. The honourable member from Pakwach District should start the debate. Remember, the Prime Minister is here so at 4 O’clock, we shall start the Prime Minister’s question time and thereafter, we resume if we are not able to finish. This debate attracts one hour under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and that starts now.
 
3.08
Ms jane pacuto (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take the opportunity to thank the minister for the report and the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Relief for partly responding to some of the disaster needs of the people of Pakwach, especially the fact that we have been flooded for about two years now. I think the issue of disaster in this country needs to be taken a little bit more seriously. We need strategic decisions to help the ministry.

I would like to concentrate on the part of floods. For about two years now, a great part of this country has been flooded. Like the minister has rightly stated, this has gone beyond the river banks or lake shores. It is, therefore, time for the Ministry of Water and Environment to surely demarcate. However, as they do that, we have people who have lost their social-cultural heritage. There are cases where villages and graves have been submerged. In my culture, it is terrible to have the grave of your great grandfather or even child swept away; it is a taboo. 

Therefore, it is now time for us, as Parliament, since we have started the budget process, to consider giving the Minister of Disaster Preparedness appropriate funds to purchase land. This will help the minister to relocate and settle our people, who have been affected by floods and are now taking refuge with relatives. 

Secondly, it is common knowledge in this country of how much we have degraded the environment. The minister has mentioned one; the hills in the Elgon. However, we have a lot of vegetation that has been destroyed for charcoal making, agriculture and animal production. 

Mr Speaker, I recall that in the 10th Parliament, Members of Parliament were promised tree seedlings. Can we, as Parliament, take a deliberate effort to restore the vegetation in this country that has been greatly affected by walking the talk? The Members should be given tree seedlings to go and plant them along the river shores and other parts of this country. Mr Speaker, I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, let us share the time because at exactly 10 minutes after 4.00 p.m., we shall stop debate because that will be time for Prime Minister’s Question Time. We will have taken a one hour off today’s debate, so, let us share the time. 

3.11
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the response. The honourable minister of Disaster Preparedness should not be seen – we normally appear to be lamenting but in preparedness, you do not lament. 

Mr Speaker, disaster can be a blessing in disguise. I have noted the fact that the minister has distributed over three million kilogrammes of posho and over one million kilogrammes of beans. I will be very much interested in knowing what actually is in the store because that is what shows whether there is preparedness or not. The rains have started; so, we expect more calamities. 

We also have the Minister of Finance here. The Minister of Disaster Preparedness should be working together with the Ministry of Finance. 

During the last calamity, the OPM had no choice but to import food from Malawi. The minister has just indicated that there was a bumper harvest. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the people went back to the villages to plant and that is why we have had a bumper harvest. However, how prepared are we, as the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, to buy off some of this food so we can store it in our silos? That same food can then help us in times of difficulty. If our food continues to be exported during the times of bumper harvest to Kenya, then we import back posho and beans, then we are actually stressing our economy. 

Honourable Minister of Finance, the best thing would be - and we have always demanded - for us to revive the silos so that they can become our fall back positions in times of need. 

Mr Speaker, going by the minister’s submission, where he said that Shs 552 billion has been spent on disaster, which is 0.2 per cent of GDP, this does not only call for a response from the Minister of Disaster Preparedness but also from the Minister of Finance. We are talking about losing money here. If Shs 130,000 –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Microphone. 

MR MIGADDE: Mr Speaker, as we continue to lament and complain about that, there are also people who do not have water yet it is the same water that we should plan to harvest. Some of this water should go into our farms to help us harvest throughout the year. Therefore, we should take advantage of this. God has brought us disasters and this can be a blessing in disguise. Let us learn from our past mistakes. Thank you very much. 

3.15
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank the minister for the comprehensive report presented.

However, I would just like to inform the minister and the House that going through the report, there is a disaster in Bundibugyo that I have reported here before but it is always mistaken for landslides yet this disaster is about land subsidence. I reported it here and a team of experts was sent to Bundibugyo. They compiled a very good report but I do not know if you have looked at that report. 

The matter is that there is a case in Bundibugyo where a huge mass of land subsided and went down by as much as five metres. Some of these land masses would not have subsided. Water has come up and a lake-like body of water is forming up. For example, there is a lake that has been formed in Nyankiro Parish, Kirumya Subcounty in Bundibugyo in my constituency. 

Delegations from the Government have gone there, including experts from the department of geology, which compiled a report that ruled out faulting. This is because people originally thought it was a continuation of faulting but they ruled it out and said there is a lot of water underneath, which heats up the ground. Due to that, space is created and forces of gravity push these land masses to sink and create those depressions. 

As a result, a number of people have been displaced and they recommended that the Government needs to do a lot more study and geo-hazard mapping. The study will sensitise the people on how far this is going to be, in order for them to be relocated away from those areas. 

I agree that we have landslides and floods but we also have land subsidence. This has not happened anywhere in the country. I invite you, honourable minister, and whoever is concerned, to come to Bundibugyo and see what is happening.

We are getting destruction of infrastructure like roads. We now have two subcounties completely cut off because when this land subsides, there is a cliff that is created and the district cannot afford to maintain those roads. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.18 
MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The matter of disaster preparedness has come on this Floor very many times. Most of the time, these are natural phenomena that we can predict and prepare for, very well, as a country.  

The then Minister of Disaster Preparedness in 2011, Tarsis Kabwegyere, came up with a policy on disaster preparedness. Mr Speaker, even the minister is saying nothing in relation to this policy, yet there is a lot of detail on how we can prepare as a country and how best we can plan better for this country.

Many times, when there is a disaster, our Government only responds with food, beddings and mosquito nets - looking like that is the best we can do. These disasters destroy people’s livelihoods but once they give you a blanket and food to eat - about one or two kilogrammes – the Government thinks they have done enough. We want to start hearing that in the next budgeting, we are providing enough funds not only to respond to these immediate problems but also on restoration of people’s livelihoods.

Mr Speaker, when I was going through the policy, I saw that it provides for ways on how we can prepare ourselves, as a country. However, we always leave it on paper and come here to lament. A minister comes before us and talks like an ordinary Member of Parliament about problems - the way we should be talking about them.

For example, on the issue of floods, it is provided that these places can be gazetted. We need to be creating restoration of wetlands as well as gazetting flood basins - and these are some of the things we would be hearing the minister either soliciting for money from this House to attend to them or doing something like that tomorrow, in Bududa – because we know that Bududa will, anytime, have problems. 

Mr Speaker, we know these places and we need concrete plans before this House - that when these things happen, we are ready to respond. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The way the honourable members are rushing to reactivate the microphone simply means your time is up. Please, do not engage it again. 

3.22
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the minister for the report. He highlighted many issues and I would have loved to see the Minister of Water and Environment here because the interventions he highlighted were in regard to keeping the environment. We used to think that floods only occur in the mountainous areas but of recent, we have had floods in lowland areas such as Nakasongola - as near as Kigo, it was flooding.

Of recent, in Matugga here, people could not pass when they wanted to access Bombo, among other areas. Therefore, it is a big problem. First of all, you realise that since 2009, the temperatures in the Indian Ocean increased and that led to the rise of water levels in Lake Victoria. I think we have to plan. 

Originally, in schools, we were all educated on meteorology areas and we thought that we had a national meteorological centre that could predict what would happen in regard to climate, weather and general global warming - because we are not going to run away from that. However, that has now deteriorated. We need to reinstate and also plan ahead. When you go to the US, they usually have disasters - floods and typhoons - but they inform people to move away four days before. They try to have measures on how to relocate people and by the time this disaster happens, the people are not in those areas.

However, in Uganda, we only prepare when a problem has happened. I know that the minister will not tell us but when you ask what is in the ministry, you will realise that there is no money. 

I would like to urge us to support the ministry because we are going to see more floods. The temperatures are rising and this is common knowledge everywhere and we are going to see more floods. We need to support the ministry and also urge the Minister of Water and Environment to present a report on what they are planning. He said that people must move away from lake areas. He also said that we must see that the environmental rules are observed. They are not observed in this country. If you took Entebbe-Gulu Highway, you would see that most of the factories are being constructed in wetlands – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.25
MS VICTORIOUS ZAWEDDE (Independent, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. I would also like to thank the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. Robinah Nabbanja, who paid a visit to Nakasongola on a fact-finding mission on the effects of the floods. On behalf of the people of Nakasongola, I appreciate the relief we got from the Prime Minister’s office. Thank you very much.

I would also like to give information to the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees that we were really affected by the rising waters of Lake Kyoga. Good services have been taken up, schools have been flooded and health centres have been submerged. Generally, allow me to talk about Rwapanga Health Centre III. As per the health policy in Uganda, every subcounty should be allocated with a health centre III that is fully equipped with a maternity ward. However, at Rwapanga Health Centre III, the maternity ward was submerged, the placenta pit was flooded and even the heart clinic is submerged.

I, therefore, call upon the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, together with the Ministry of Health and that of finance, to relocate Rwapanga Health Centre III to another area for better health services in Nakasongola because we cannot do with poor services at the health centre III level. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Member for Nakasongola District. 

3.28
MR JAMES OLOBO (NRM, Kioga North County, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to give additional information to the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. As you are aware, Amolatar District is the only peninsula district in this country. The floods have affected us from both Lake Kyoga and Lake Kwania. The roads have been cut off in all the 16 subcounties. There are other worse ones, where they have become islands now.

My prayers are:

1. 	There are three places, where we use boats. The Members of Parliament have bought boats for their people but we do not have boat engines. If you have any three, please assist us with them.

2. 	Minister of Works and Transport, all the roads have been cut off in the 16 subcounties. We need diversion and the district does not have enough funds to do that. I am requesting that you visit me so that you see what I am talking about. 

The other is to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. A 25-kilometre electricity line is in the lake. That is a time bomb for us. If it falls, we will hear of many dead. I, therefore, request the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development sends a team down. That line needs to be diverted. 

I beg to submit. 

3.29
MR ANTHONY ESENU (NRM, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This happens to be my maiden speech too. I would like to congratulate you and welcome you back to the House and all Members upon being elected. I stand here to add my voice to the previous speakers on the issue of disaster. 

My constituency, Kapelebyong County, lies astride the wetland or watershed between Mountain Moroto and Lake Kyoga. Whenever there is rain, four out of seven of the subcounties end up under the water. The issue of water is very strange; there is flooding but also water logging. 

As the minister of disaster preparedness talks about how to respond to the issue of floods, I request that they include the challenge of water logging, which goes hand in hand with the floods. The water logging precedes and goes beyond the floods themselves.

We are annually affected to the point that close to two of the subcounties are permanently displaced for about three to four months. Roads are cut off and as a result, transport is impacted. Services are not delivered and the cost of service delivery goes very high. 

On that note, I would like to request them to put that into their programming to come and see how they can address the issue of water logging. We would like to pray that the ministry considers the impact of this water logging on the houses. 

Last year, the entire police department had to be relocated in Kapelebyong because all the houses began to collapse. They had water coming out of their compounds. If they could consider the issue of the kind of structures we need to construct in such areas that would be very key. 

On the issue of putting up proper roads, right now, as the rains are becoming prevalent, we cannot travel. About three quarters of the road is inaccessible. I, therefore, join to request that the ministry considers how to address the issue of roads for my community. Hospitals and health facilities are equally affected, and so are the schools. 

I beg to add that as you prepare a response for the whole country, consider places like Kapelebyong, Amuria and Katakwi, which lie within that watershed between the high and the low lying areas. Thank you. 

3.33
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister of disaster preparedness for the presentation. 

I would like to report to this House that in Nakasongola, as he has clearly stated, a number of villages have been submerged by water. This has taken a period of time. I would like to also report that the Prime Minister was there and she witnessed. She came with a big team. 

A number of people, when their villages were submerged, went to settle on people’s land. Currently, they are in camps. The landlords have given them a timeframe of about five months. I would like to ask the minister: what resettlement plans do you have for these people? Otherwise, any time, they will be chased by landlords and have nowhere to go. 

Therefore, I want to appeal to the minister of disaster to have a resettlement plan so that those people in Nakasongola and also other areas are planned for.
 
Secondly, I used to sit on the Committee on Presidential Affairs in the last term of office. I managed to go to Bundibugyo where my colleague, hon. Muhumuza, comes from. There is a river, which burst its banks and created another boundary between Uganda and Congo. Part of Uganda is now in Congo and another part is – the water has made a curve and our part went to Congo. Now, it is the people of Congo who are utilising our land, yet it is land for Uganda. 

I would like to appeal to the minister and the Government to take interest because Congo will one day claim that land. It might end up the way we were fighting for Migingo Islands. Before that happens, I would like to request the Government to take keen interest, go to Bundibugyo and ascertain those issues before they bring conflicts between Uganda and Congo. Otherwise, we have a number of conflicts with some other countries. So, before that one also comes, the Government should take keen interest in it. I beg to submit.

3.35
DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonero Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I listened to the minister and he ended up asking for a budget. 

I would like to appeal to the minister to come up with a framework that gives other Ugandans the opportunity to support and provide for our fellow Ugandans, when they face disaster. There must be a framework that informs the people of Uganda about the disaster and the needs of other people in this country. It is a shame, when I see a brother in Karamoja dying of hunger yet there is a lot of food at my home. 

Even America, the biggest economy, when they experience a disaster, they appeal to their people. We must come up with a framework in this country, apart from talking about the Government budget, where Ugandans can show love to other Ugandans. Even in this city, there are people who are facing disaster because they lost jobs. You must come up with a framework where I can drop food, when I am not playing any politics but showing love and reaching out to a fellow Ugandan. 

That framework must be from the disaster preparedness ministry so that Ugandans can reach out to others. That can only come from your ministry; to inform Ugandans and tell them about the needs so that we can contribute in addition to the budget you are talking about. I beg to submit. 

3.35
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My constituency is on the slopes of Mountain Elgon. It is at the highest peak, which hosts Wagagai Peak. 

Year in, year out, we have continuously got floods. Last week, we rose on the Floor of this House, together with my colleague from Lwakhakha, alerting the ministry of disaster preparedness of the impending big landslide. There is a very big crack, which has cut across Mountain Elgon, right from Bududa up to Sironko and Bulambuli. 

I would have expected the minister’s response to also capture Mountain Elgon Region and possibly the measures the ministry is taking up in preparation for the risks soon to occur.

Honourable minister, disaster preparedness is not only about giving out blankets and food items but how prepared you are in terms of management of the whole process. I believe by now, the district – (Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, hon. Ssasaga, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the crack he has just mentioned stretches through four districts and actually includes the county of Trans-Nzoia, which is also in the Mt Elgon area. It stretches from Namisindwa, Manafwa, Bududa to Sironko and partly Trans-Nzoia.

Besides that crack, there are numerous cracks in districts like Bududa, Manafwa and Sironko and I expected the minister to have conducted a detailed assessment of the magnitude of the dangers that they pose because that is a looming disaster at the cost of human lives and property. That is the information.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you for the information. Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have accessed the microphone before so you lose this chance for now. (Laughter)

MR SSASAGA: Mr Speaker, as my colleague has informed the minister, we would have loved for the minister to come with a comprehensive and detailed plan as far as Mt Elgon region is concerned. 

I think by now, you should have equipped the District Disaster Management teams. How prepared are they? You should have trained the local leaders by now. In the event that there are landslides, how prepared are the local leaders and communities?

You also need to tell us about the Contingency Fund. What is the status of the Contingency Fund, which I believe, by 2011, was passed to be in the Prime Minister’s Office and respective ministry? I beg to submit. I can take information from –

THE SPEAKER: No, I will give the honourable member her time.

3.41
MR TOM EKUDO (FDC, Gweri County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give information to the Minister of Relief Disaster Preparedness and Refugees.

In his communication, he said he wants to put these disaster preparedness committees in the districts in place. I want to tell you that from 2011 to 2016, when I was LC3 chairperson of Gweri Subcounty, we formed those committees even at the district level. That was at the time when we had the breakage of Awoja Bridge. 

From that time, those committees ceased to be in place. However, those committees are there, only that the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees does not bother about them. I need to inform you.

I am happy that you have put Teso on the list. Teso always experiences drought in the middle of the year; that is June to July. However, this time round, it was experienced between 10 May and 12 August 2021 meaning there was no harvest at all in Teso Sub-region, including my county as a case study. A report was submitted to the Office of the Prime Minister.

It is now my request that the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries come in to give irrigation systems to the people of Teso in order to continue with agricultural production since agriculture is the backbone of Teso.

We are not lazy; we are very active. It is only rains that are making us lazy because you cannot do anything. It is my prayer that the minister plans to give us free seedlings in order to promote agro-forestry because we want to get a solution. 

In case we plant these trees, we shall have rains. Also, give us short-term seeds. That is all I wanted to say. I thank you. (Laughter)

3.45
MS IRENE MULONI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my brother, the honourable minister, for the report. 

In addition to what my colleagues from Mt Elgon zone have expressed here, Mt Elgon is prone to landslides, floods and drought. The Government took it upon itself to find a lasting solution by setting up the settlement camp in Bunambutye. A number of people have been resettled and Government also agreed to plan for at least Shs 8 billion every financial year for their resettlement process.

However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, according to the report that we have received from the minister here, I do not see any mention of some of those programmes that Government has put in place. 

For the last two years, we have not seen the Shs 8 billion going towards the resettling of those people in Bulambuli every year. Otherwise, this would go a long way in trying to safeguard the mountainous areas and promote afforestation so that our people are resettled in safer places.

Finally, I would like the minister to indicate the timelines of these responses which are in the queue for these districts that have experienced these disasters. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.46
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for the presentation.

First of all, we are very happy with your report; bringing out some of the vulnerabilities. However, my first prayer is to regularise the vulnerability assessments. When we get these vulnerability assessments, we inform the early warning systems that we have.

We have the Uganda National Meteorological Authority (UNMA) and the Office of the Prime Minister that is also taking on that role of giving us information early to enable our population decide adequately on what to do. However, as we speak, most of the reports show destruction other than what will happen in future. 

In the 10th Parliament, when I was coordinating the Parliamentary Forum on Climate Change, Members were accessing some early warning information from UNMA. Now that there are proposals of merging, I think they are somehow disorganised. I pray that this Parliament is also put on the list of respondents for this information.

Mr Speaker, the issue of increasing water on lakes is not only as a result of increasing heat or temperatures but as a result of siltation as well. Our people have gone ahead to use mountains for planting crops and that has also exacerbated erosion that brings a lot of soils in our lakes.

There are some people, including some Members of Parliament, who accessed leases to plant forests. However, it is over four years but some of those people have not used the land leased to plant the trees. Those pieces of land are bare. As a result, there is lot of soil erosion, which ends up in our rivers and lakes, causing a lot of siltation and increased water levels. 

So, it is very important that the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Minister of Water and Environment go to that place so that they can actually inform us about what is taking place there. For example, the river catchment areas, water sheds and cancelling of titles in wetlands – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. My friends at the back, let me start with the Woman Representative of Oyam and then I come this way. 

3.49
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues in thanking the minister for coming up with this statement. 

I start my submission by asking the minister a question: Your ministry is called the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees in the Office of the Prime Minister. How prepared are we? It is true we have relief, but which is not enough. We experience disasters all over the country. We also have refugees all over the country. 

The issue of disasters is a national and a common phenomenon that needs us to plan for in the present and in the future. There are things that we see and there are those that we do not see. I would like to interest the minister – first of all, in his statement - I have seen lots of money that has already been spent. I represent Oyam District and there are a number of issues, as far as our people are concerned. There are people who have lost their homes and they are sharing shelter with their relatives. I do not see them included here.

Secondly, the issue of tunnels in Teso was raised on the Floor of this Parliament. However, I have not seen it in this statement yet it is a looming disaster. 

The minister mentioned multi-sectoral ministries but I would have loved to see the ministries, for example, the road sector. We have very many negative impacts of disasters on our roads. Water has been mentioned as the cause of the disasters. In the education sector, very many classroom blocks have been destroyed, but we do not have any minister in charge of those dockets. 

My humble submissions are:

We need a national comprehensive plan to be given by the Ministry, Office of the Prime Minister (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees);

We need comprehensive data coming from all over the country and not only one part; and

We need sensitisation. The minister made mention of local governments. They are key in this matter. The people must be sensitised, most especially the women. It is because the issue of disaster, the impact of climate change and environmental laws need to go down to our people. The women who are the majority must be informed and made aware of –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. It is five minutes to 4 o’clock. We are closing this debate at 10 minutes past 4 o’clock. I am rolling this up. I am going to the Shadow Government before I come back to the Minister, Office of the Prime Minister (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees) who will have about eight minutes to respond. Then we will close this matter. 

I think the debate has been good, but the time is not allowing us to go farther. The debate is supposed to be for one hour, and we have only 15 minutes to close. I want to process the closure also properly to include the responses from the minister on the matters you have raised. Can I have the Shadow Minister? 

3.53
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Jonathan Odur): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister, Office of the Prime Minister (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees) for this report. Of course, listening to how he submitted his report, you could feel that the minister also shares the same anguish that Members have.

However, I would like to add briefly that the ministry should come to Parliament every session to brief Members on the assessment they have done and the packages available to avoid Members reporting on these disasters here daily. It is because even after today, another Member of Parliament will come tomorrow with a report about hailstorms or floods. If we had a standard response mechanism that all members of Parliament know, we would not be reporting this here all the time. We would just go straightaway and get the responses and that would help us in every session of Parliament.

Of course, the package itself has to be standardised. When the ministry responds, first of all, their response will come after six months or even a year after you have raised the matter here. Members are here and can attest to that. It is four months since we reported this but we have not yet received what we asked for. 

Secondly, if you are responding, the response must be adequate to address the concerns of the people. 
In my constituency, one time, the ministry responded after six months by taking seeds to my people. The people waited from 8:00 a.m. but the seeds arrived at around 4:00 p.m. When the people were given a cup of groundnuts each, they ate all the seeds on the way as they went back home. (Laughter) So, let the response be adequate so that Members can take care. 

Thirdly, I would like to inform the minister that on his list, I have seen a number of districts. Lira District has been affected. My own constituency of Erute County South, particularly in Agali Sub-county, just yesterday, all the crops and houses got razed down. This report is on the way coming to your office. I do not want to raise it here after.

Lastly, I invite Members of Parliament - we are the ones who appropriate. We are the ones who ask questions here –

THE SPEAKER: There is a clarification matter. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, hon. Jonathan Odur. You mentioned something very interesting, that the ministry took groundnut seeds for planting and the people ate them on the way. What did they plant then? Was one cup of seeds really adequate to plant in about one or two acres? 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you. The point I was driving at is the inadequacy of the response. Most times, Members will agree here, even the posho and beans that are given can hardly be cooked for three or four days in a home. That is the point I was making, my brother. 

Lastly, I invite Members of Parliament that when it comes to the time for budgeting - sometimes we look really funny when we are the ones asking the ministry to do something yet we do not give them money during appropriation. Now that disasters affect each and every constituency, when it comes to budgeting, let us stand firm and provide the ministry with funds so that when we go there, we can get support. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you need to roll this up in about eight minutes. The issues are many – 

MS CECILIA ATIM: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter. I have looked at the presentation of the minister and I am rather surprised that it leaves out some of the very critical areas, for example Kasese. Kasese has not been mentioned in this report. We would have wanted to know - Kasese has been burdened with floods for a long time. By now, you should have a programme on how to deal with it. 

Secondly, Dokolo, for example, has even cut off some of the vital installations of the Government. 

THE SPEAKER: What is the procedure? 

MS OGWAL: The procedural matter is that the floods in Dokolo, specifically in Kacung Parish, Agwata Sub-county has cut off water supplies to the new city of Lira. The letter concerning Dokolo floods has been presented to your office through the Prime Minister’s office. However, up to now, we have not seen any action being taken to ensure the new city of Lira gets constant supply of water from Dokolo. 

THE SPEAKER: What is the procedural point?

MS OGWAL: I want the minister to come back with a holistic report that incorporates all these vital issues. It is because when he laments like all of us, it does not make sense. Is it, therefore, procedurally right for the minister -(Laughter)- Mr Speaker, protect me from the mob.

MR SPEAKER: Honourable member for Dokolo, I don’t know which procedure you are using now. (Laughter) We might have to make a different set of rules for hon. Cecilia Ogwal and another one for all of us because the procedure she uses is quite different from the ones I read in the Rules of Procedure.

Honourable minister, now, you have seven minutes.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am only rich with the information from colleagues. To me, I take your criticisms - or whatever comes - as a lesson which I absorb and see how better I can use them. Therefore, thank you very much, colleagues.

Now, there are only a few areas that I would wish to clarify. First of all, honourable colleagues, I have opened a small office within my office where I would like to start receiving information from colleagues in Parliament so that I can compile them for attention and work on them as soon as we get the resources. The graph is not coloured but I think there has been a problem in transmitting it. 

Regarding food banks, this is something that when we are going to plan. We would like to have at least food storage in every region because food issues have become a problem. We will see if we can have silos in about four or five of our regional centres so that the reaction is faster when there is need for food and other supplies.

I am going to work it out in our programme because at the moment I am working out on the programme of response to disaster, where we will need to be more equipped with equipment. I gave an example of Kapelebyong, Kumi and all those areas. I have been to places like Toroma, Orungo and all these places of the honourable colleagues.

I have seen that when there are heavy rains, like now, the land is all flooded with about six inches of water and the cassava gets rotten and so on. Actually, at one point, I went there with my allowance of about a million shillings in my pocket but I had to spend all of it on the people whom I saw suffering, including an old public servant who retired and was sleeping on water. It was painful. Those are the challenges we go through.

Regarding the floods that have gone beyond the banks; that is true. I gave you a proposal that we should mark those positions where the floodS have gone. I would wish to budget, if possible, with the Ministry of Water and Environment and work out solutions to those people who are affected by water displacement.

If we can demarcate those places and source for money to acquire land on a dry land - on better location - to enable these people to move away from the waterways. That would be the best solution –(Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: The clarification I would like to seek from the honourable minister pertains to the Contingency Fund. You have always complained, whenever you have come with a report to this House, that what this House appropriates to the Contingency Fund - you have always been frustrated by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Therefore, we would like you to come out very clearly on this because it is supposed to be 0.5 per cent of the previous national budget, according to Section 26 of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015. What is happening? Other sectors do not complain? Security receives its whopping trillions; what has been happening to the Contingency Fund? Who is frustrating you, honourable minister? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you cannot raise a clarification point on a matter that has not been raised. You cannot use this opportunity to bring in issues that have not been said.

MR ONEK: Colleagues, you must know that these disasters we are talking about - the effects of excessive rain and so forth - are not alone in the country. There is now COVID-19, which requires a lot of vaccinations and the rest of it. All these were not in the plans of the Ministry of Health and it all comes from the Contingency Fund. That is one example and there are many such occurrences. Actually, the 0.5 percent you put for the Contingency Fund, by itself, is not a budget for the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. It is one of those budgets we can beg to get money from in order to respond to disasters.

Somebody mentioned here about preparedness. Yes, we are now more prepared than we have ever been before. We know when those disasters are coming, we predict them and we even inform the Government and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and other colleagues that we expect this disaster. 

We have hazard maps –(Interruption)

MR KYOOMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I move on the point of privilege. The minister has just presented his statement here and is actually expressing that he is even more prepared than ever before. Just the other week, I was here on the Floor of Parliament and I presented the issues of a parish in my constituency, which was hit by heavy rains, hailstorms and hailstones. Two people died -

THE SPEAKER: Did you say you rose on a point of privilege?

MR KYOOMA: Yes, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, raise the point of privilege.

MR KYOOMA: Is it a matter of privilege that when the minister is more prepared than ever before and he puts those places which are pending response for the month of August, he leaves Ibanda District when I presented the issue here and the letter was written to his office? Is it a matter of privilege that Ibanda be left out? 

THE SPEAKER: (Laughter)– Please, let us stop amending rules. You must have shared a cow with hon. Cecilia Ogwal this morning. (Laughter) However, that is certainly not a point of privilege; you know what privilege is. You wanted to raise a concern that your district has not been captured in the minister’s report and you used a very rare vehicle - and I was surprised if there was a matter of privilege arising and it was not to my knowledge.

However, I think that the minister has received the issue.

MR ONEK: Honourable colleague from Ibanda, when I said that we are prepared, sorry, it might be misunderstood. “Prepared” means with information and not with material. (Laughter) Can I explain before you just jump in?

THE SPEAKER: I don’t know the use of language today in this House. (Laughter) 

MR ONEK: First of all, colleagues, before people interrupt, let me explain. In disaster preparedness, we have developed - during my tenure of eight years - a system connected to the World Hydro-meteorological Systems, whereby we are able to predict. Within a period of a year, we can predict ahead of time, when we can have El-Nino and when we can be all right, when the rain will be normal and when we shall have drought. All that information is available. 

We have been demanding that we are given a budget based on our plans, which are information-based. That is how we are prepared. Unfortunately, the resource is not coming back to support that base. These are the challenges we have but we are prepared and in terms of information, we are up to date.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your time is up.

MR ONEK: Thank you. We shall work on physical plans to see how this Parliament can assist us. We can generate budgets based on our projections of the disasters and also how we can tackle the current problems.

I have mentioned silos for food storage, if possible, in the regions to ensure that we respond fast. Our response takes ages because we have to first look for money. We are not organised in respect to that. If we are well planned and have a budget, we could even buy all this bumper harvest, store it in those silos to ensure that our response is timely.

Mr Speaker, I was in Bundibugyo. Although, I did not go close, I was shown a depression, where the earth went down. I did not go close because you never know - it could be dangerous –(Laughter). However, I saw that and there is a possibility that there are some geophysical challenges, whereby maybe underground, there could be causes why this earth moved a distance. 

We have been working with the Makerere University Geological Department but they are equally cash constrained. For example, the crack on Mountain Elgon is not only there. It follows the route to the Eastern Rift Valley up to Kenya; it is going across. In fact, in maybe another a thousand years, the African Continent may be split and there will be an ocean between us. Uganda may be split into two with a big ocean between, so that the eastern part of Uganda may go as another island. Northern Uganda will be split into half and one part will be in the Western. I really do not know but these are the geological predictions.

We have engaged Makerere University to develop and set up a gadget for monitoring the rate of displacement of that crack. How wide is it opening and at what rate so that we can determine the dangers ahead of time. For the other predictions, we have, except for that one, we are trying to work on.

We have put some early warning systems in some places like Pallisa. In Butaleja, we have put an early warning system against floods. The problem with us is that when systems like that are put up, there is no culture of maintenance. Sometimes it goes off and you need again to wake up people at the headquarters to go and reset it. Those are the efforts we are trying to make amidst scarce resources.

Mr Speaker, every district has hazard maps. These reflect whether there are going to be landslides or possible flash floods or whatever nature like drought. I would recommend that every Member from a district gets a hazard map for their district to know in advance what may befall you, if there is El-Nino rain. Our job will only be to announce. We can announce that there is a possible drought coming and will affect this region so that you know what to do. That information is now available in our department of disaster. Therefore, we are disaster prepared but not resource wise.

We shall have to work closely. In fact, with all this information you are giving us, I will try to call my colleagues from the Ministry of Water and Environment so that we form a joint committee and address this problem collectively other than my ministry struggling around with posho, thinking that we are solving a problem. We cannot solve it that way. We have to sit together and address the fundamental issues and collectively report to our colleagues in Parliament so that they are aware of what is happening around. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your time is already up. It is now Prime Minister’s Time.

MR ONEK: Thank you, colleagues. I think I am very rich with information. I will go ahead and work on all this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to say something but before he says anything, let us talk about priorities. 

The priorities of the Government are not set by Parliament but by the Executive, which sits in the Cabinet, headed by the President. That is where the budget themes and all these things are agreed and that is where the priorities for the President who proposes the budget, is set. 

Please, let us stop passing the torch to Parliament, which just processes what has been proposed by the President. Honourable minister, please go and put this case before the Cabinet. Let it be a priority because by coming here and making it look like we are the ones who can change things here, puts us at loggerheads with the President for nothing. Get it done from there and when you come here, we only approve what the President has proposed. 

The Prime Minister is here – I have not yet given you the authority to speak yet you are switching on the microphone. Please, allow me to finish what I am saying and then I can allow you to speak. 

It is a shared responsibility but all budgetary proposals come from the President, not Parliament. Therefore, it is up to the Executive to set its priorities right. If the matter of disaster affecting our people is serious, rank it high and fund it –(Applause)– so that by the time it comes to Parliament, we will only say “Whoa, they have done very well. This time we will approve.” We approve and give you the tools you need. 

Honourable minister, even your own priorities are not clear. Do you need tools and what tools? We do not know. You propose those things to the President who prepares the budget and comes and reads it to us that this is what I propose for this financial year. The Constitution says so. Let us follow what the Constitution says.

4.17
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I want to first of all, inform you that the Ministry for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees falls under my docket. The Cabinet discussed this extensively and we all agreed to come up with Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) that will help us to move forward; we are doing this. The only reason we look a little bit shabby this time is that so many calamities befall this country. You are aware.

Like any other country in the world, we had COVID-19 and so, we felt we needed to save life, before any other thing. We also had locusts, which came in the eastern part of the country. We now have these other calamities. You know how big our budget is, as a nation. You know that we also suffered; the economy is struggling and I hope you know that. 

When we have lockdown after lockdown, that also affects the economy and of course, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development cannot just get money from anywhere unless we get it from taxpayers. You are also aware that the burden of borrowing – you know how far we have gone because Parliament is aware of everything. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to commit that the Government of Uganda is aware of this and we are prioritising it. We have done enough but we need to do more. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That was a very powerful statement from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, do you have anything to say? 

4.19 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to enhance the submission of the Minister of Disaster Preparedness with one point in regard to the contingency fund. 

The Public Finance Management Act of 2015 established a contingency fund of 0.5 per cent of the previous total budget. We have had constraints. However, we have walked the journey in the current running year and have provided for an amount of Shs 62 billion in the contingency fund as well as Shs 228 billion to cater for COVID-19 related disasters. 

In regard to funding the disasters from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, we have so far released Shs 15 billion and this is consistent with the quarters we have in a year. Our projection, assuming we do not get such disasters which keep coming, is to have utilised the Shs 62 billion by the end of the financial year. 

On the question of the role of the Executive on budgeting vis-a-vis Parliament, my view is that we should not burden Parliament. We are currently working out a solution in such a way that planning should inform budgeting and not the other way round. 

Over the years, I have seen situations whereby budgeting has been informing planning. Beginning next financial year, Mr Speaker, you will see a difference whereby the budget we shall bring to Parliament will be informed by the planning. (Applause) 

The planning will solve most of the challenges our honourable colleagues have been highlighting in this space. 

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: That is a very good statement to close with. It gives us hope, as Parliament, because the accusation has always been that Parliament has not done one thing or the other. We cannot propose a budget; the Constitution does not give us the mandate to do that. It is the President who proposes the budget to us; we look at it Vote by Vote and then appropriate accordingly. 

Nonetheless, you make it look like it is Parliament which should – that is why you have this problem of Parliament trying to do this because there are glaring gaps in some sectors, which you seem to have overlooked. That brings conflict. We do not want this conflict to continue. We want smooth operations between Parliament and the Executive Branch of Government. After all, we all work for the people of this country. Thank you. 

Can we have the same item under 4? - Hold on a bit. There was a question that was raised by hon. Jonathan Odur from Erute South about the COVID-19 vaccines. I think we now have more information with Dr Chris Baryomunsi. 

4.23
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Earlier on, at the beginning of this session, hon. Jonathan Odur raised a matter of urgent attention where he said there are vaccines circulating in the country with expiry dates of August 2021 and September 2021.

I did promise that we would find out and I have since gathered some information which I would like to give the House. 

There are no vaccines with expiry dates of August 2021 being given out, as we speak. 

It is true that there is AstraZeneca which is expiring on 30 September 2021. I can give the details - we have two batches:

Batch 1 with load number PV46705 - I think this is the same number hon. Jonathan Odur gave me - that came into the country on 18 August 2021. These are 247,680 doses.

Batch 2 with the number PV46706 with 51,840 doses. This batch also came together with batch 1 on 18 August 2021. 

The National Medical Stores distributed these vaccines starting on 20 August 2021 across the country and they are currently being given out. There are a few doses remaining and the information from the Ministry of Health is that by the end of next week, these AstraZeneca doses will have been consumed.

The expiry date being 30 September is within the said limits and there should be no problem with that. The guidance from the World Health Organisation and the medical profession is that when vaccines reach the expiry date before they have been used, they have to be withdrawn and cannot be used on the human population. The reason is that the potency of the vaccine significantly reduces, not necessarily the safety. The safety may be okay but the effectiveness and the ability to protect someone decreases. 

Therefore, this is the information. I am assured that by the end of next week, all the remaining few vials will be used up so there should be no cause for alarm. I thought I should communicate that. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to also thank hon. Jonathan Odur for the vigilance. I think all of us should be vigilant so that we pick out all these issues from our communities. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We still have a pending matter on item 4.   

GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK, 14TH TO 16TH SEPTEMBER 2021

4.28
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, allow me to give a statement to this august House, on the business for the succeeding week. Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure requires the Leader of Government Business to make a statement in the House regarding Government business of the succeeding week. 

I am, therefore, submitting the following business for the succeeding week from 14th to 16th September, 2021: 

A statement on the update of COVID-19 vaccination in the country;

A statement on the update of the construction of Kabale Airport and expansion of Entebbe Airport. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

4.29
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, hon. Hellen Kahunde, Member of Parliament for Kiryandongo District, gave a preamble that the traditional secondary schools in Bunyoro sub-region are in a very dilapidated state. They include: Kabalega, Duhunga, lkoba, Sir Tito Owiny, Kibanda, St. Edwards, and Naigana, among others.

The question was, what plans does Government have to get them fully rehabilitated since most of them have colonial structures that do not meet the current education standards?

My response is that the Ministry of Education and Sports is aware about the challenges related to the dilapidation of the infrastructure in traditional schools across the country. 

Given the high cost associated with the comprehensive rehabilitation of structures in the traditional schools, the Ministry of Education and Sports has designed a project for consideration by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The project will address the challenges faced by the traditional schools in a holistic manner (infrastructure, leadership and Governance).

Colleagues, in the meantime, let me inform, you that there are on-going interventions by the Ministry of Education and Sports to rehabilitate traditional secondary schools within the resource envelope available. For financial year 2021/2022, l3 schools are set to receive support for civil works and two of these schools, are from Bunyoro sub-region. They include Kabalega Senior School and St. Edwards Bukuumi Senior Secondary School.

The other beneficiary schools include St. Henry’s Kitovu, Lango College, Bukedi College, Kachonga, Nabisunsa Girls, Nabumali High School, Mvara Senior Secondary School in Arua District, Makerere College, Kigezi High School, Busoga College Mwiri, Kings College Budo and Ntare School. The Ministry of Education and Sports will continue intervening in the traditional schools in a phased manner based on the resource availability as we await approval of the proposed project by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and of course Cabinet. Kibanda, Kabalega, Duhaga and others, in other regions, will be prioritised in the next phase.

Hon. Charles Tebandeke, Member of Parliament, Bbale County said Bbaale-Kayunga Road is 89 kilometres from Galiraya-Kawongo-Kayunga town. It is the only main feeder road to Kayunga town and the district. If worked on and connected with a ferry on Lake Kyoga, it acts as the only shortcut and way to connect to Northern Uganda to the Central government through Lake Kyoga thus, Apac, Amolatar, Lira and other regions like Teso, Masindi, and Nakasongola, among others, are.

Bbaale-Kayunga Road has ever been promised by the President of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Tibuhaburwa Museveni, during three consecutive political terms campaigns in 2006, 2011 and 2016 remaining nonreactive.

The road, if constructed serves, almost 70 per cent of the 1,580 taxpayers’ old kilometres that Kayunga District is selected hence, 1,110 square kilometres (Bbaale constituency) which doesn’t bear any tarmac road hence, retarding the social economic transformation and development since it accelerates the rate of accidents and death by dust and muddy slippery ground during sunny and rainy seasons respectively, thus, the urge to know the Government’s plan on its construction and the entire process of tarmacking.

Question two was, what is the stand of Government on the construction and tarmacking of Bbaale-Kayunga Road?

Mr Speaker, my response is as follows: the Kayunga-Bbaale-Galiraya Road, which is 88.5 kilometres, is an existing gravel road in the central region of Uganda in Kayunga District. The road starts in Kayunga Town Council and ends of the shores of Lake Kyoga at Kawongo Landing Site. Colleagues, I am going to Kayunga tomorrow, and my brother knows.

The road is part of the national road network, which is managed and maintained by the Ministry of Works and Transport through the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). 

Mr Speaker, this is one of the national roads selected for upgrading to paved standard by the Government of Uganda as part of the National Development Plan III. The upgrading of the road to paved standard is expected to improve road transport in Kayunga District.

Mr Speaker, the NRM Government appreciates the importance of the road in terms of the social economic development of Kayunga District. It is expected that upgrading the road will increase the volume of trade in the district, improve the connection to the shores of Lake Kyoga, and improve the population’s access to social services.

The feasibility study and detailed engineering design for upgrading the road was completed in 2015. The road upgrading project was then included in the roads that were selected for upgrade in the NDP III period running from financial year 2021 to 2025. The road upgrading project will be undertaken in line with the NDP III.

Mr Speaker, I would like to assure the House that the Government of Uganda has prioritised the upgrading of the Kayunga-Bbaale- Galiraya Road as part of the NDP III. The Ministry of Works and Transport, through Uganda National Roads Authority, will ensure that the road project is undertaken as planned in the NDP III period.

Again, hon. Charles Tebandeke, Member of Parliament for Bbaale County, asked a question as follows: How is Government planning to harmonise the sugarcane growing projects across the country, which looks negative in terms of economic benefit analysis to the respective areas of sugarcane growing like Eastern (Busoga: Mayuge, Kakira, Kaliro and central, which includes Bbaale-Kayunga. 

The project is anticipated as a poverty casual focal point and slavery pool of employment sources. I pray that the Government regulates:

 On employment job description by investment companies for a just and fair pay of casual staff i.e., shamba boys, cooks and askaris, to mention but a few, who earn an average of Shs 3,000 per day;

Investment companies establishing both plantation and processing firms within the same operating areas so as to satisfy this economic benefit analysis; and

Sugarcane plantations drawing marginal revenue pay back to respective communities to cater for negative feedback in respective sugarcane growing communities.

My response is that since the early 1990s to date, the sugar industry has been one of the fastest-growing industries in the country. The sugar factories expanded from three sugar mills in 1995 to l4 sugar mills as of today. 

Uganda’s annual sugar production has increased from 240,000 metric tonnes in 2008 to 560,000 metric tonnes in 2020, annually.

Uganda is the only country in EAC which exports sugar in the region. The sector contributes revenue to the Government in form of taxes, amounting to over Shs 290 billion annually and employs over 60,000 people directly into the factories and over 200,000 people as cane out-growers. 

In addition, the industry produces over l00MW of electricity from bagasse (the fibrous by-product left after milling the sugarcane) and about 50MW is offloaded to the national grid to supplement our electricity supply to industries and communities.

Five sugar factories – Kakira, Lugazi, Kinyara, GM Sugar and Hoima Sugar – produce ethanol spirit, most of which is utilised to produce alcohol-based products such as sanitisers. The sanitisers have helped us in the fight against COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, the sugar industry contributes significantly to the socio-economic transformation of our country.

Mr Speaker, the sugar industry is currently faced with several challenges like many other sub-sectors of agriculture and industry that have impacted on the productivity and profitability of the industry. These include: low demand for sugar and limited access to markets during the COVID-19 period; under-utilisation of installed sugar milling capacities; climate change impacts affecting crop yields, disease and pest outbreaks.

Planned interventions by the Government to enhance the sustainability and competitiveness of the sugar industry include;

Legal and regulatory framework

The Sugar Act, 2020 was assented to by H.E the President in April 2020. The object of the Act is to provide for the development, regulation and promotion of the sugar industry. The implementation and monitoring involve various stakeholders from the Government, sugar millers, out-growers and other private sectors. 

I have directed the minister responsible for trade, industry and cooperatives to put in place regulations and appropriate structures to spearhead implementation of the Sugar Act. This will streamline the registration, licensing of investments in the sugar industry, contractual agreements between farmers and millers as well as sugarcane pricing.

Support towards import substitution and export promotion

The Government has licensed five sugar factories to produce industrial refined sugar, as the President has been saying. The production of industrial sugar in the country will enable us to reduce import bill of industrial sugar and save foreign exchange. This will also enable the millers to purchase more sugarcane from out-growers at even higher prices because there will be demand.

Establishment of Sugarcane Research Institute

The Sugar Act, 2020 provides for the establishment of a sugarcane research institute to undertake research for development of new varieties that are early-maturing, with high sugar content and resistant to diseases, among others. This will replace the existing poor cane varieties, which take 18 months to mature and have low productivity. 

The Government has prioritised establishment of the key research institute under the agro-industrialisation programme of NDP III.

Support towards value addition and capacity building for involvement of local communities

The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, through Uganda Development Corporation, has prioritised the establishment of a farmer-based cooperative society factory in Busoga Region to increase value addition and diversification to other products such as ethanol. 

The out-growers will become shareholders and own the sugar factory in the long run after building the necessary skills in management. 

In addition, the Government has planned to build two incubators to facilitate sugar cone out-growers to build capacity in product development and entrepreneurship in the Busoga Region as well.

Implementation of the Bio-Fuel Act, 20l8

The Bio-Fuels Act, 2018 was promulgated to introduce bio-fuels blending with petroleum products to be used in motor vehicles in Uganda. 

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is in advanced stages in finalising the development of the regulations to enable the Act to be implemented.

This will achieve the following benefits; 

Improve Uganda’s energy security by production of our own fuel. 
Create market for sugarcane to supply sugar mills to produce ethanol.
Create opportunities for employment.
Combat effects of climate change by reducing greenhouse emissions that arise from burning petroleum products in vehicles. 
Save the country by 10-20 per cent foreign exchange on the importation of petroleum.

Honourable members, there are adequate laws and regulations to ensure our labour force is appropriately managed, including payment and enforcement of health and safety requirements in the workstations.

The Government, through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, will further study the matter and provide a report to the House, in compliance with labour regulations in the sugar industry.  Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

Hon. Kiwanuka Abdallah, Member of Parliament, Mukono North; this is his submission. Article 208 of the Constitution –

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have a timeline of 45 minutes to deal with the questions and you have used most of it already. I still see you have a lot of work.

MS NABBANJA: I still have a lot of work.

THE SPEAKER: So, I will give you up to the top of the hour to conclude.

MS NABBANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Kiwanuka Abdallah, Member of Parliament, Mukono North asked this question:

“Article 208 of the Constitution establishes the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) as the armed forces of Uganda. The functions of the UPDF are well spelt out in Article 209 of the Constitution and Section 7 of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Act, 2005.

In a July 1, 2021 directive to the Minister of Health and Minister of Education and Sports, copied to the Vice President, the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs Permanent Secretary and the Chief of Defence Forces, the President directed that all new Government schools and hospital projects should be handled by the UPDF Engineering Brigade, starting from the 2021/2022 financial year. 

The President has further issued a number of other directives to the Executive Director, Uganda National Roads Authority to enter into agreements with a number of Chinese companies to design and build selected roads in Uganda.

The question is: 

Whether the directives of the President intend to provide for a new function of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces?

Whether the directives of the President supersede the procurement procedures under the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act and regulations made thereunder?”

My response, Mr Speaker, is below:

The Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces is a creature of the Constitution, pursuant to Article 208 of the Constitution. Article 208(1) of the Constitution establishes the armed forces to be known as the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces. Article 209 of the Constitution sets out the functions of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces. These are: 

To preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda; 
To cooperate with the civilian authority in emergency situations and in cases of natural disasters;
To foster harmony and understanding between the defence forces and civilians; 
To engage in productive activities for the development of Uganda.

Similarly, Section 7 of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Act, 2005, as amended, is in pari materia with the provisions of Article 209 of the Constitution that sets out the functions of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces.

In responding to the first question, it can be understood from the provisions of Article 209(d) of the Constitution and Section 7(d) of the UPDF Act of 2005, that the President’s directive to the Ministries of Health and Education and Sports to use the Army Construction Brigade to undertake construction projects is consistent with the functions of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, as the law permits the defence forces to engage in productive activities for the development of the country.

It was observed by H.E the President, in his letter dated 1 July 2021, that the Army Construction Brigade has built capacity and has been implementing many projects, ranging from simple to high level and advanced construction projects at a lower cost. Therefore, in light of the above provisions of the law, it cannot be said that H.E the President is providing a new function to the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces.

On the question of whether the directives of H.E the President supersede the procurement procedures under the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act and the regulations thereunder, Mr Speaker –

Directives pertaining to the construction brigade to undertake construction works under the ministries of health and education

Pursuant to Article 99(1) of the Constitution of Uganda, the executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President and is exercised in accordance with the Constitution and other laws of Uganda. According to this Article, the President has the mandate to issue directives within the confines of the Constitution and other laws of Uganda. Article 79(1) of the Constitution bestows upon Parliament the powers to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.

In exercise of the above function, Parliament enacted the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003(PPDA Act). The preamble to the PPDA Act sets out its objective as formulation of policies and regulatory practices, in respect of public procurement. 

Section 2(1)(a)(i) of the PPDA Act provides that the Act applies to all public procurement activities that apply to finances originating from the Consolidated Fund. The term “procurement” is defined under Section 3 of the PPDA Act to mean “acquisition by purchase, rental, lease, hire purchase, licence, tenancy, franchise or any other contractual means of any type of works, services or supplies or any combination.”

Furthermore, under Section 3 of the PPDA Act, a procuring and disposing entity is described to include a ministry or department of the Government, district council or municipal council, a body corporate established under an Act of Parliament, a company registered under the Companies Act, in which the Government controls more than 50 per cent of the issued share capital of the company.

Consequently, the schools and health facilities operated by the Government are procuring and disposing entities, whose construction projects are funded by monies from the Consolidated Fund and as such, are mandated to procure the construction works, following procedures laid out in the PPDA Act.

Section 95A of the PPDA Act provides that a procuring entity can undertake works using the personnel and equipment of another procuring entity. It states as follows:

“95A. Force account mechanism

A procuring and disposing entity may, in accordance with regulations made under this Act, undertake works using the Force Account Mechanism. 

In this section, Force Account Mechanism means undertaking the works of a procuring and disposing entity using the personnel and equipment of the procuring and disposing entity or another procuring and disposing entity.

With the above mechanism, procuring and disposing entities in the Health and Education Sectors, to which the Presidential directive applies, can directly engage the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs under which the army construction brigade falls under the Force Account Mechanism as envisaged under Section 95(2) of the PPDA Act, which allows a procuring and disposing entity to undertake the works of a procuring and disposing entity using the personnel and equipment of another procuring and disposing entity. 

What is the rationale of Force Account Mechanism? The rationale of Force Account Mechanism is that Government entities may have the capacity through equipment and personnel to undertake construction works, supplies and consultancies. Examples of Government entities that have used the Force Account Mechanism to undertake construction works include:

The Uganda Police Force was engaged by the Ministry of Internal Affairs to paint its premises on Jinja Road. 

Kira Motors Corporation engaged the National Enterprise Corporation (NEC) to undertake the construction of the assembling plant in Jinja.

Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA) used their own personnel to undertake works for the road connecting to Kigo.

National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) engaged the Ministry of Works and Transport in 2019 to use their newly acquired equipment to clear the land in Amuru for sugarcane planting. 

The following are some of the advantages of employing Force Account Mechanism to execute construction projects:

This mechanism reduces on the lengthy procurement processes involved in all procurement methods which might also be derailed and delayed by administrative reviews. 

This mechanism reduces the cost of the works, supplies and services as it is cheaper in comparison to the market price, thus money from the Consolidated Fund is saved and can be applied to other activities. Also, there is an added advantage of non-accumulation of interest on late payments.
 
There is no need for performance and advance payment guarantees as a procuring and disposing entity is dealing with another Government entity. 

It is important to note that the above Force Account Mechanism does not apply to donor funded projects in the Health and Education Sectors where agreements with donors contain conditions that providers shall originate from the country of origin of the donors. In such cases, the conditions imposed by the donors override the Force Account Mechanism. This is pursuant to Section 4(a) of the PPDA Act which under – 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is a point being raised. Honourable members, I have advised against accessing the microphone before permission is given. On what matter do you rise, honourable member?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, you said at the beginning that the Rules of Procedure provide that the Prime Minister has strictly 45 minutes. Rule 45(9) provides that the Leader of the Opposition will be required to reply. Right now, I have checked the time and the Prime Minister has gone beyond one hour and yet the Leader of the Opposition will also be required to respond. So, I seek clarification whether – 

THE SPEAKER: Is it clarification or procedure? 

MS OGWAL: I can amend it to be procedure. Is it procedurally right for the Prime Minister to continue beyond the 45 minutes? 

THE SPEAKER: If it is clarification then the Prime Minister has to deal with it and I am sure she does not want to deal with this matter. If it is a procedural matter, however, I gave a guide [Member rose_] Have we amended the rules to accommodate further procedures? 

MR TIMUZIGU: Mr Speaker, I stand to seek guidance from you concerning the procedure we are following with regard to the questions sent to the Prime Minister. Questions are sent and the Prime Minister comes and gets a chance to answer them. I am seeking guidance on a situation where a person will need to bring a supplementary question if at all he or she is not satisfied with the answer from the Prime Minister. 

THE SPEAKER: What do the rules say? Just stick to the rules because they do not permit supplementary questions to the Prime Minister. We amended this rule at the end of the last Parliament and introduced these new procedures. They cut out supplementary questions to the Prime Minister. So, the 45 minutes are for the Prime Minister’s Time alone and you must respect that. She is the Prime Minister.

On the matter of time, however, I think we have exceeded the time allotted. I was just going to allow the Prime Minister to complete one question and then I come to the Leader of the Opposition because the time is really gone. Just finish the question that you are dealing with and leave the next ones, from number five, for next time. 

MS NABBANJA: Let me go to another question since Members have the answers on the iPads. Can I finish the question, Mr Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: No, the time is over. 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I also want to remind you that I started at 4.20 p.m. because there were some other engagements that you put in – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you making an appeal now? 

MS NABBANJA: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me take a procedural matter.

MR OSHABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance that we should leave the Prime Minister alone. Whereas the rules provide that the Prime Minister shares the response with the Member who asks the question, some of these questions cut across the country. Are we proceeding well if it is only the Member that asked the question who receives a copy of the response? The rest of us here cannot follow the presentation because it is not uploaded on the iPads. For example, the responses –(Interjections) Oh, are they there? Thank you, I am sorry. 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please wind up so that the Leader of the Opposition can speak.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, let me go to the fifth question. Hon. Emely Kugonza, Member of Parliament for Buyanza East County, Kibaale District, asked a question that on 17 August 2021, in a meeting of the Bunyoro Caucus with His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, I was directed with the Ministry of Education and Sports, to establish a taskforce and fast-track the implementation of the establishment of a public university in Bunyoro. 

He asked, “Honourable Prime Minister, how far have you gone with implementing the presidential directive?” 

My response, Mr Speaker is that the Government has embarked on the process of establishing public universities across the country to accommodate the growing numbers of students who need university education.

Indeed, on 17 August 2021, H.E, the President directed me and the Minister of Education to establish a Task Force to fast-track the implementation of the establishment of a public university in Bunyoro. Stakeholders' engagement has already been done; the Task Force has already been established to fast-track the process and the university is expected to begin in the next financial year, 2022/2023. 

Similarly, the Government is fast-tracking the establishment of Busoga University. The establishment of the task force is in advanced stages and the university is expected to begin in the next Financial Year 2022/2023. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. 

I will read these other questions and give responses next time. However, honourable colleagues, you can go through these questions because they are already uploaded on our IPads. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Today you have been so full of details and you couldn’t cover the whole range of questions. However, the details are good but they limit you in how many questions you can deal with. You might need to review how you handle this in the coming days.

5.10
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In my reply to the responses by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the complaint has more or less remained rife because she should be extending courtesy to the Office of the Leader of the Opposition with copies of the written – again, she has fallen short of what she pledged the other time – that those copies come in advance so that my reply is from an informed position.

However, that notwithstanding, I would like to thank the honourable member from Bunyoro who raised that question of rehabilitation of schools. Schools, the country over, are in dilapidated state and before you get to secondary schools, the Government has failed in the lower primary institutions. Even with UPE, which has helped to cause massive enrolment, you do not see a commensurate expansion of facilities. 

Pupils study under trees in places or districts which are prone to heavy downpours. Most of them go back early because under trees, they cannot stay and learn under the rain.  

Therefore, before you even make those pledges of renovating schools like Nabumali High School, as it has been mentioned - at least I must salute the old boys; they have already engaged in the renovation of the school. I know that in most traditional secondary schools, which you have mentioned, the old boys are doing something. I wish the Government could compliment the efforts of the old boys that are doing the renovations of those dilapidated buildings. 

About the question on roads like the Bbaale-Kayunga and Kayunga connecting to Kyoga - the issue of roads in the country is of grave concern. You know that the ministry, particularly the works and transport sector, is one those that take the lion’s share of the Budget, after security. It takes trillions of the taxpayers’ money.

Looking at the quality of the roads that are being constructed, you realise that it is wanting. I would request that, since you have already demonstrated right from the inception, by word and deed that you are intolerant to corruption, you should subject some of these contractors to scrutiny. There is need for a value-for-money audit or even a forensic audit to establish why most of the works on these roads are shoddy with compromised quality.

Also, there is a challenge with the pledges made by the ruling party - the NRM - for which you are the Leader of Government Business. The pledges that were made almost 30 years ago have never been honoured yet you continue making more. What guarantees are you putting to give optimism to the recipients of these services?

The question that was raised by hon. Tebandeke on sugar, you have not dispensed justice to it. He raised a question about the plight of the out-growers and you see, sugarcane growing communities in the whole country are not only limited to Busoga or the central region here; even in the western and northern Uganda. They are almost slaves in their own country because of exploitation by the sugar milling companies.

There is need for urgent intervention by the Government to engage the farmers into a conversation and listen to their plight. In fact, you took ages explaining the Act, which Act  ought to be reviewed. That Act has issues; it is the one responsible for causing these challenges of discontent amongst the farmers. Therefore, the Act which you were glorifying and dressing in all manner of good ropes is the one that is infringing on the rights of the farmers and it ought to be reviewed.

Hon. Abdullah Kiwanuka had a very important question and the details under verbosity in your response even confused him. His question was about the President’s directive, which almost constitutes him into the PPDA. By the way, the issue of concern to the Wanaichi is why the UPDF is dominating in a number of projects.

You will find them in charge of Operation Wealth Creation, even in natural resources; you will find them in mines, water bodies, forests, UWA, in gold and URA, where there is monetary gain. Wherever there is any monetary gain engagement, they are there. Now, even in contractual activities, they are the ones being directed to take over. This is going to raise the level of discontent in the marketplace. 

Already, there is a universal outcry from those who have been in these contracts and indeed as the Leader of Government Business, you must bite the bullet and advise the Head of State that it would be illegal and a total contravention on the law for him to make such a directive that would make him look ugly, like he is constituting himself into an Act.

Lastly, about the university, by the way, your response was hiding behind the technicality of force on accounts; so what? Even if it is about force on account mechanism, it doesn’t give the President the audacity to direct that a certain section of our institution, like that of the army, should take over contracts in infrastructural developments.

The last one is about establishment of Busoga University. All of us, especially those colleagues on our side of the political divide, are never opposed to the establishment of universities. Even the other day, you saw that we were very supportive of the Mountains of the Moon University. 

However, when you raise the justification that it is about strict observance to the national objectives and direct principles of state policy, like that of equitable distribution of resources or of higher institutions of learning, then it should be seen in word and deed. 

If you are constructing Mountains of the Moon University, there should be an equivalent one - the Mountains of the Sun - in the east. For instance, if you talk about –(Interjection)- For Busoga, we have no issues. It is already in the pipeline but how about the Mountain of the Sun - Mt Elgon - which by the way has a comparative competitive advantage of sports? Why not consider constructing a sports university those ends so that Ugandans will see a balance?

Therefore, Busoga University should have been established yesterday. We are only waiting for that motion and we shall be supportive. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition, for those – they used to be comments but the new amendments say: “May comment or reply.” That is why the Leader of the Opposition is going through all the questions, blow by blow.

I have statements in response to some issues. I think let us finish this today, if possible.

RESPONSE to an URGENT QUESTION raised by Hon. Solomon Chelangat Alinga Over the need for THE Government to fast-track compensation of project-affected persons (PAPS) of the Kapchorwa-Bukwo Road

The Speaker: This is for the Minister of Works and Transport. I hope you do not have very long statements on this. 

5.20
The minister of state for works and transport (Transport) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to respond to the matter of concern raised by hon. Solomon Chelangat Alinga, Member of Parliament for Too County, regarding the need for the Government of Uganda to fast-track compensation of project-affected persons (PAPs) of the Kapchorwa-Bukwo Road project.

The upgrading of Kapchorwa-Suam Road (73 kilometres) and the high-altitude training centre’s access road (12 kilometres) is a project financed by the African Development Bank (ADB). The procurement of works for the road were delayed by a whistle-blower’s complaints and other technicalities. 

The civil works contract was signed on 7 May 2018 and physical works commenced on 1 October 2018. The completion date was originally 1 October 2021. This has since been revised to 15 February 2022, through an extension of time due to bad weather and other factors. As at the end of June 2021, physical project progress was at 43.14 per cent.
 
The total approved value for resettlement was Shs 58,371,887,594 to cater for the 4,540 project-affected persons. Out of these, 3,405 project-affected persons have since been paid a total of Shs 37,138,535,405. This constitutes 70 per cent of paid PAPs.

The land required is 365.85 acres and so far, acquired land is 340.44 acres. The percentage of land paid for stands at 93.05 per cent, which means that we are progressing well.

Payment of the PAPs is ongoing and is being fast-tracked. However, owing to the severe cuts in the approved budget by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the remaining payment is likely to be delayed.

My ministry remains committed to paying all PAPs whose land has been reserved for the road project. I beg to submit.  

RESPONSE to an URGENT QUESTION raised by Hon. Ezama Siraji Brahan On the delayed construction of the Koboko-Adjumani Road

5.24
The minister of state for works and transport (Transport) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At the 13th Sitting of the First Session of the Eleventh Parliament of Uganda held on Wednesday, 4 August 2021, hon. Ezama Siraji Brahan, Member of Parliament for Aringa County, raised a concern over the delayed construction of Koboko-Adjumani Road. I beg to make a response to the concern as follows:

The Koboko-Adjumani Road is a long stretch whose project implementation has been phased into three, namely; the upgrading of Atyak-Laropi Road, upgrading Laropi-Moyo-Afogi Road together with construction of Laropi Bridge and upgrading of the Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo Road. I wish to report the following progress:

Upgrading of Atyak-Laropi Road (66 kilometres)

The project is under implementation with the financing from the European Union. The civil works contract was signed on 13 January 2020 and construction works contract commenced on 1 June 2020.

The contractor is continuing with the mobilisation of personnel and equipment, finalising the camp establishment and maintaining the existing road, that is, from 30 to 66 kilometres. 

The physical works on the section from 30 kilometres to zero started on 1 September 2020 and physical progress stands at 25 per cent.

Challenges faced by the project:

Mobilisation of personnel and equipment due to inter-border restrictions arising from the outbreak of COVId-19 pandemic;

Abnormal rainfall during April 2021 affected the progress of earth works, submerged section (at km 62-km 63), limiting access to the Umi ferry landing site.

Land acquisition

The number of paid project-affected persons stands at 730, which constitutes a percentage of 57.84. Land captured is 288 acres - that is to say, the land captured in the system with full information without any issues to hamper project progress.

Upgrading of Laropi-Moyo-Afogi Road (37 kilometres) and construction of the Laropi Bridge

Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) is undertaking detailed engineering design with intention of upgrading this section to complete the corridor up to the border with South Sudan. With financing from the Government of Uganda made available, implementation should commence in Financial Year 2022/2023 Upgrading of Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo Road, which is 105 kilometres.

Detailed engineering designs have been completed. 

The project was approved for financing through a branch by the World Bank as a humanitarian refugee area access road.
 
The procurement for civil works is progressing with the contract award expected by January 2022, with no objection from the World Bank. Construction is expected to commence in 2022. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.  

RESPONSE ON THE ALLEGED SUB-STANDARD WORKS ON UGANDA NATIONAL AUTHORITY ROADS BY SOME CONTRACTORS PARTICULARLY THE NGORA-AKEDOT-MUKONGORO-MBALE ROAD

5.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to respond to a matter of concern raised by hon. Christine Apolot, Woman Member of Parliament for Kumi District on substandard Works on Uganda National Roads Authority roads by some contractors, particularly the Ngora-Akedot-Mukongoro-Mbale Road. 

Briefly, Kachumbala-Kidongole Road 
This section of the road is in good condition. Grading was completed and spot graveling works are on-going, as I speak. 

Kapir-Ngora-Akedot-Mukongoro Road

Maintenance intervention was carried out in quarter four; April - June 2021 and is now in good condition. 

Mukongoro-Kidongole Road

Currently, UNRA is undertaking routine maintenance of the road. On the whole, UNRA is not only maintaining roads in the area, but it is supervising works to ensure the roads are sound and motorable.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Next [Hon. Christine Apolot rose_] Honourable, what is the issue?  

5.30
MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister had time to visit the road and I also visited it recently. Mr Speaker, that day, when I raised that matter, there was also an issue of a road that is supposed to be constructed under the Local Economic Growth Support Project - the LEGS Project. 

I remember, the focal point person, by then, even informed the district authorities that the national launch of the LEGS Project was going to be in Kumi along the Oluwa-Kanyamutamu-Kamacha-Bukedea Road. Up to now, nothing has been done. The road connecting to Ongino Hospital is impassable. If it is not a land cruiser, any other motor vehicle cannot carry a patient -  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you raised specific issues, which have been responded to, and now you are bringing additional issues. It cannot be accommodated. 

MS APOLOT: Mr Speaker, the issue of the LEGS Project was raised together with this road and the response has not been provided. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that the minister did not capture it? The problem with raising these matters under urgent matters is that you end up with these kinds of situations. It was not properly captured; you just spoke and left. 

However, if you had a formal question, all the details would be captured like the way the Prime Minister responded to some of them. That is the way they respond to Questions for Oral Answer, which is more detailed and formal than this informal one. 

Now you see, in this one, the minister picked some and left out some yet you are now bringing it back. We will take the minister’s response and move on. Honourable minister, do you want to answer the supplementary issue that was raised by the Member for Kumi District? 

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have heard the issue from the honourable. I commit that after here, I will contact her and we sort out what I did not capture.

Concerning the other issue of visiting the road, the ministry has taken note and next week, around Thursday or Friday, one of my colleagues is going to visit these very roads. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. As I keep saying, it is not so much the responses you give here but what you do in the field is more important to us, as representatives of the people. When these matters are raised, it is better you go to the field, rather than preparing a statement and come here. When you go to the field the Member feels happy and people are content and life goes on normally. Next.

RESPONSE ON THE DELAYED FULFILMENT OF GOVERNMENT’S UNDERTAKING TO PROVIDE ROAD CONSTRUCTION UNITS TO NEWLY CREATED DISTRICTS

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to respond to a matter of concern raised by hon. Patrick Nsamba Oshabe, Member of Parliament for Kassanda County North, on the delayed fulfillment of the Government’s undertaking to provide – [Mr Oshabe rose_]

THE SPEAKER: Really. Please, honourable, let us have some order. The minister has not even said a word. Allow the minister to respond and then you can raise – are you the one who raised the matter? Let the minister respond and if there are gaps, we shall see how to fill them, like the Member of Kumi did. 

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Thank you very much. I beg to make the following statement on that matter. 

Background 

During the financial years 2017/2018 and 2018/2019, the Parliament of Uganda approved the creation of 13 new districts. The new districts did not benefit from the previous consignment of road equipment that the Government procured from Japan, since they were non-existent at the time of procurement and distribution. 

The new districts, with their corresponding parent districts and the dates of creation are indicated in the table, which you have on the iPads. I am not going to go through it for the interest of time. 

The new districts of Rukiga and Terego were created during the Financial Year 2019/2020 and the total of 15 new districts had no road equipment units. 

During the Financial Year 2019/2020, the Parliament of Uganda appropriated Shs 58.9 billion for procurement of road construction and maintenance equipment for the 13 new districts to support their public works departments. Each new district was to receive a complete road unit comprising one motor grader, one wheel loader, one fibro roller, two dam trucks and one water bowser. 

Status of the procurement 

The procurement process of the road equipment for the 13 new districts with the total contract of Shs 46,846,328,113 was completed in March 2020 and the contracts were cleared by the Solicitor-General on 3 April 2020. 

While the contracts were signed by the respective service providers, the permanent secretary paused signing the contracts pending release of funds by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, the funds for the project were not released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development due to the limited resources available, mainly caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. 

Way forward

The requirement for additional road equipment for the new districts should be made through the provision of the supplementary budget since the ministry does not have the funds in its current budget. The total requirement for the road equipment for the 15 new districts, including the new districts of Rukiga and Terego, which were created towards the elections, is Shs 55 billion. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.37
MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for responding according to the current status quo. Their hands are tied because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development failed to release the money when it was budgeted for and has not provided a window on how to respond to the problem. 

Mr Speaker, we are suffering in the districts. I am the Chairperson of the Committee on Roads in Kassanda but every time, we have nothing to use. We have to go and borrow machines from the nearby districts and many times, they are also busy working on their roads.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is in this House. Can he respond to the proposal because the Minister of Works and Transport is proposing, in his submission, that in the next supplementary expenditure, money should be provided for road units for the new districts. Can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development make a commitment before this House? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: That was supposed to be a supplementary question to the minister who was responsible for the question. If the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has something to say about this, it would be okay.

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are going through difficult times. The COVID-19 situation presented circumstances, which are beyond our control. 

As a result, we had to do drastic budget cuts in order to mitigate the effects of COVID-19.

We would like to advise the affected districts, in the meantime, to use the available equipment in the mother districts as we wait for the economy to improve and we provide the funding. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next -

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO URGENT QUESTION RAISED ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF THE 41KM KYAPA-KASENSERO ROAD

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Works and Transport -

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At the l3th Sitting of the 1st Session of the 11th Parliament of Uganda held on Wednesday, 4th August 2021, hon. Geoffrey Lutaaya, Member of Parliament, Kakuuto County raised a concern over the deplorable state of the 4lKM Kyapa-Kasensero road. I stand here to respond to that concern.

Kyapa-Kasensero (4l KM) road is a “Class C” unpaved road under Masaka UNRA station. The road connects off Masaka-Mutukula national road through Kyapa Trading Centre, traversing Kyotera District via Kyiyebe Trading Centre and terminates at Kasensero Landing Site; a very busy commercial centre on the shores of Victoria near Uganda-Tanzania border. The road traverses through low-lying areas characterised by swamps and weak clay soils that make it susceptible to flooding during the rainy season. 

However, the road is used by medium and heavy trucks daily that transport fish from Kasensero as well as other agricultural produce. Thus, any disruption in traffic flow can easily generate complaints from the community.

Road surface condition 

Kyapa-Kasensero road is currently under framework contract for Mechanised Maintenance by M/s Kasese Nail and Wood Industry Limited to specifically work on flood sections so that they are made safe and passable even during the rainy seasons.

The road surface is generally in good motorable state, especially in this dry season, since the framework contractor M/s Kasese Nail and Wood Industry Limited carried out heavy grading and filling of the entire 4l km.

Drainage 

The framework contractor has not yet started on drainage works, citing financial constraints due to delayed payment. As a stop-gap measure, Masaka UNRA station provided the contractor with six lines of assembled ARMCO culverts to be installed by the contractor. At the moment, the contractor has halted the execution of road works pending securing funds.

Recommendations 

The road is generally in good condition. There is need for payment of the framework contractor, M/s Kasese Nail and Wood Industry Limited, so that he speeds up execution of the pending road works namely drainage works, more swamp fill, and gravel wearing course before the rains start to intensify. Attached are some photographs taken along the different sections of the road.

You can see the photographs on your iPads. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Do you have a supplementary question?

5.44
MR GEOFFREY LUTAAYA (NUP, Kakuuto County, Kyotera): The matter of Kyapa-Kasensero road requires someone who has ever used it during the rainy season. The information I would like to give the honourable minister for the – 

THE SPEAKER: Do you have something else to ask the minister arising from the statement he has given?

MR LUTAAYA: Yes, whatever UNRA is doing is not new. They have done it for years but nothing has changed. Whichever murram they put on that road is immediately going to be disrupted by the floods. Murram is just a painkiller on that road. We are requesting for a tarmacked road because it is immediately going to be disrupted by the floods. That is my submission. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your efforts are not working. (Laughter)

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have heard from the honourable colleague. We always follow up such advice in the ministries with write-ups. The question he asked was the state in which the road is as per now. If he had a proposal of tarmacking, he should have brought up to the ministry rather than coming here to the august House, we take time answering, among other things. 

The Government is willing to work on the road as you have proposed but you have just heard from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that there are districts, which do not have good roads like yours. They have crops and cannot sell them. They are unable to get equipment until they work on these roads. We need to be patient as the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has said. 

There is no permanent situation, money will be available and these things will be worked on. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. The next matter is not ready; both the person who asked the question, hon. Enos Asiimwe, Kabula County and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries agreed that it would be better to present that next week. I have allowed them to do that and so, that is not coming today. 

The next item, which is re-designation of Members to the sectoral and standing committees, won’t be handled today. And we may never handle it unless I see that there are a lot of issues that require that we should do so. We will probably deal with it next week after some discussions.

The honourable member for Kasilo has an issue that he needs to raise now quickly on some situation. 

5.47
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me time to raise this matter. I just want the Prime Minister to help Ugandans. Since the extension of the lockdown for 28 days by H.E the President lapsed last week, Ugandans are wondering under what circumstances now, we are continuing the lockdown. 

Yesterday, I found some Ugandans ‘exchanging’ with the police at a roadblock. They cited the fact that the 28 days have elapsed. So, can we get some update on whether we are in the extended curfew days or whether it has elapsed? What should Ugandans do? Ugandans need to be updated because the 28 days elapsed and if so, what is the way forward? 

I know cases are increasing in some places like in Teso Sub-region but people need to know what next. When is the President addressing the country again to give them an update on whether the lockdown is going to be extended or not? Thank you.

5.49
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, my brother has asked a very good question. I would like to inform Ugandans that the cases of COVID-19 are going up. The only solution to this is vaccination. 

We have got a chance that we now have access to vaccines. By the end of October, we shall have got vaccines to vaccinate over 5 million people. That way, we shall have no barriers at all. At least we shall have vaccinated the most vulnerable group of people in the country. That is when we think we will ably open our schools with no worry of having our children transmitting the virus to the parents who can easily die. 

Your question of road blocks - we still have to endure the curfew until a certain time when we shall tell you whether we are safe, through the Ministry of Health and our scientists. 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the issue is, can there be a communication to the public to that effect? I think the honourable members are also missing the President. I see the Member for Kumi Municipality, the Member for Kasilo pleading to find out when the President is going to address the country again. 

MS NABBANJA: Through Parliament, allow me to inform Ugandans that the curfew continues. We shall come out to inform you when it will stop. It is better for me to inform you of the mitigating measures and when we shall at least have reached a certain level. 

We intend to get more vaccines. We expect to get nine million vaccines from Pfizer, nine million vaccines from Johnson and Johnson and nine million vaccines from AstraZeneca. 

By close of November, we shall have gone to at least 11 million people vaccinated. (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Are you accepting the clarification, Prime Minister, or you have finished? 

MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is my very good friend. By the time I rise up to say something when she is the one speaking, it must be sensible.

The question I would like to directly pose to the Prime Minister is, when is the President coming to address the country on the issues pertaining to the issue of the curfew and COVID-19? When? We have missed the President. We have not heard from him for some time. (Laughter) Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, that shows how Ugandans love our President. The President has been addressing the nation. We have channels of informing the country. We shall still go through the same channels to inform you, Members, when our beloved President will address the country again. 

THE SPEAKER: Members, thank you very much for a fruitful week. We have done quite well this week and we look forward to next week when we shall proceed with this. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are running out of business and we are now just trying to find business. 

Like I guided last time, our rules, as amended, are very clear about saved business; they are not automatic. The business that has been saved from the 10th Parliament will have to be reintroduced into this Parliament so that it can be captured and sent to the active committees now. 

So when, for example, a Bill is reprinted and re-dated, we will bring it back and send it back to the relevant committee. Then the committee will assess what the previous committee did. If they are satisfied with what the previous committee did, then they will come and say to us, “We own it, they have done a good job, we will move from here.” But if they are not satisfied with what the other committee did, they will say, “No, we are starting from scratch, we are not satisfied with the work that has been done so far.” That is what the rules say. 

So, it is not automatic that once it is saved, it is therefore, in the House. This is because we do not have it in the 11th Parliament and it has to be reintroduced so that we can send it to the relevant committee. 

So as of now, we do not have much business. If the situation is going to continue, I will want us to start the debate I had proposed earlier on what, we as Parliament, think our contribution can be in planning for the next five years. In our view as representatives of the people, what do we want to see Uganda look like in the next five years? What do you want Uganda to look like, as Members of Parliament? 

If we continue with this scarcity of resources called business, I will initiate that debate, which will take about two weeks. By that time, we will have generated business and Members will be actively speaking to the country about what they want to see, as a Parliament. 

House adjourned to Tuesday, 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.55 p.m. and adjourned until 14 September 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 