Thursday, 20 September 2012

Parliament met at 3.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Ms Proscovia Oromait

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on your behalf, I congratulate, hon. Proscovia Oromait, upon her election and I want to give her the instruments of office of a Member of Parliament starting with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which should be your Bible. I also wish to handover to you the Rules of Procedure, which I invite you to study; they will guide you in your deliberations. 

I understand you are Member of the NRM; the Government Chief Whip will assign you one standing committee and one sessional committee. On this side are Members of the NRM, and on the other side are Members of the Opposition and the Independents.

The Oaths were administered to:

Mr Muwanga Kivumbi Mohammed

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kivumbi, on behalf of the Parliament, I congratulate you and I want to welcome you to Parliament, and to give you the instruments of office for a Member of Parliament. This is the Constitution, which will guide you in what you are doing. I also give you the Rules of Procedure of the Ninth Parliament; please study them, they will help you to do your work.

I understand you are a Member of the Opposition; the Leader of Opposition will assign you two committees; one standing committee and one sessional committee. On this side there are Members of the NRM, and on the other side are Members of the Opposition and the Independents.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to apologise for the delay in starting today’s sitting; we were engaged in grave matters of the state, but I hope that we shall get time to catch up with all our activities. 

I want to make a small amendment to the Order Paper. I will allow four Members to make personal explanations.

I also wanted to update you on the arrangements for the Parliamentary Week, about which you were informed a few days ago. The whole country is in the process of celebrating the Golden Jubilee. So, Parliament has set aside the Parliamentary Week starting on Monday, where we shall have inter-denominational prayers here at 10 o’clock in the conference hall.
Parliament of Uganda has adopted the Crested Crane as the symbol of our Independence, which we want to preserve. So, on 26 September 2012 we shall have a charity walk to raise funds to save the Crested Crane. 

The funds will go to the conservation of our national symbol, the Crane. A number of organisations have been invited to come and participate in the fundraising. We shall also plant a tree and also launch a blood donation drive on the same day. But those activities will take place in the morning. We shall sit as normal in the afternoon of Tuesday.

On Wednesday, we shall launch the Parliamentary Studies Institute in the conference hall, and we shall also have a netball game between the women Members of Parliament and those men who want to play netball, together with the veteran netballers of Uganda. We shall also have a football match between the Parliamentary Football Club and the veteran footballers of Uganda at Nakivubo Stadium. So, on Wednesday, we shall not have a sitting. So, I invite you to practice hard so that we can show the veterans that our legs are still agile. 

On Thursday, 27 September 2012, we shall have a public lecture on the theme: “Uganda at 50 years. Parliament’s achievements, prospects and challenges.” Prof. Augustus Nuwagaba who was with us at our induction has been invited to make the main presentation. That function will take place at the Imperial Royale Hotel at 9 o’clock in the morning, but in the afternoon, we shall sit as usual here.

On Friday, 28 September 2012, we are going to have a special sitting in honour of the LEGCO Members. We have looked for a number of them. They have been invited to come here on Friday morning of the 28th, sit in the gallery and listen to our debate on Uganda at 50 years.  So, that will be done on Friday morning and then in the evening, we shall honour them at a function at Munyonyo Speke Resort. 

I also want to inform you that UWOPA is also organising a celebration of our Golden Jubilee. Their function will take place on Sunday, 7 October 2012. We expect to recognise a number of former speakers, former leaders of Government business, former leaders of the Opposition and many others who have contributed to this country, including President Yoweri Museveni who was chairman of the NRC and the representatives of the former Prime Minister, Dr Apollo Milton Obote, and many others, including Benedicto Kiwanuka and other Ugandans. So, we invite you to come to Munyonyo to witness as we recognise the contributions of our senior citizens.  So, honourable members, that is the information I have for you on the Parliamentary Week. Thank you very much.

3.35
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, thank you for the elaborate plan for the celebration of the 50 years. May I take this opportunity now to ask the Executive side because they have been busy planning for celebration of the 50 years. When is the Executive making a statement in Parliament to brief the Members of Parliament and the country at large, for us to know what is going on? Because we are only seeing construction in Kololo and we are reading in the papers, but no statement has been made here. Can we ask the government side through the Prime Minister to make a statement to Parliament and the country through the Speaker? Thank you.

3.36
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate and welcome our two new colleagues in our Parliament of Uganda, and the Commission will give them all the support to ensure that they start their work immediately.

But, Madam Speaker, why I rose is the issue to do with the Order Paper. I have been consistently raising the issue of taxing contraceptives, and the Minister of Finance has been making a pledge to bring a statement to that effect. But when I look through the Order Paper, I do not see that item; the issue of taxing contraceptives, condoms and Mama Kits. 

So, I do not know whether the minister has failed to prepare a statement and, therefore, we should take a decision as a Parliament. I would want to know what has happened and I am raising this because many partners continue to raise concern.

For instance, I have a letter from USAID-Uganda written to the Commissioner, Customs and Excise Department, Uganda Revenue Authority, again complaining about the same issue. One of the cardinal points raised is that USAID has a bilateral agreement with the Government of Uganda, where there is a provision that the agreement signed provides for exemption of VAT as well as other Government duties and fees. But now, Government is levying taxes on these contraceptives brought in by USAID and other agencies contrary to the agreement which is existing. 

Therefore, we need a statement from the Minister of Finance and I think this also becomes extremely important even when you look at the colleagues who are entering Parliament. They will be immediate clients for some of these products we are talking about. So, the clients are also in this House. (Laughter)

Allow me, Madam Speaker, to lay on Table this letter that strengthens the issue I have been raising in the last few days. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I know that the minister had undertaken to make a statement, but I am not seeing him.

3.39
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Mrs Christine Ondoa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to assure the House that this matter was discussed with Ministry of Finance this morning and the statement is ready and I am sure, any time, they will be able to give it to the House.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For purposes of the record of Parliament, I just want to lay on Table the letter I have just made reference to, written by Edward Michalski, the Supervisory Executive Officer of USAID-Uganda written to the Commissioner, Customs and Excise Department, Uganda Revenue Authority, Kampala dated, 23 August 2012, and the issue is about charging a tax on contraceptives being brought into the country by USAID to support the USAID Afford Project, and yet the bilateral agreement existing between USAID and Government of Uganda exempts those products from VAT and other duties. I beg to lay on Table the letter.

I also want to lay on Table a payment receipt by Reproductive Health Uganda of Shs 13.38 million as  one of the consignments that had to be paid to Orient Bank Limited, dated 16 July 2012.  And, maybe as the minister clarifies, she needs to give assurance that the monies which have been paid by these agencies will be refunded. I beg to lay on Table the receipt that I have made reference to. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.41
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine really was to weigh in on the question from your communication about the 50 years of Independence, and as a Member, I appreciate and you have outlined well the activities within the ambit of Parliament.

But Madam Speaker, I wanted to remind the House that sometime back, a statement was prepared by Government. It somehow vanished from the radar, and up to now, we have not been told as to what became of that statement. But mine was really to inquire. In some other countries like Sierra Leone, the 50 years is preceded by the unveiling. Now, what do we have with us as a country?  Mulago was unveiled on the eve of Independence, but now after 50 years, what is there for us to show? (Laughter) Are we going to witness jet acrobatics? Should we expect jet acrobatics as it was this morning? (Interjections) What is up the sleeve of Government? Do we have a spectacular achievement? I am really at a loss. Fifty years, and they want to hatch it! Fifty years! Can we be prepared as to what to expect as a country? I really beg that the Leader of Government Business, with the knowledge that NRM has had the monopoly for almost 28 years in power - we have taken the biggest share of the Independence period -

THE SPEAKER: I think you are now debating. I do not know who is going to answer. Can I ask the Leader of Government Business, when are you briefing the country about the preparations? I think that is what people want to know. 

3.44
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): I wish to thank you Madam Speaker –(Interjections)- for –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members.

MR KAJURA: I would like you to permit me to advise this noble House that the person coordinating these activities is expected here any time. I beg for your indulgence and patience for him to come; hon. Muruli Mukasa - Muruli! –(Laughter)- So, I could as well be a Muruli –(Laughter)- because being a Muruli is not a bad thing. So, I beg to –(Interjections)- I do not think that is a question to answer. Those who are interested in that one, I am very available at a quiet time and I will do wonders. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want you to join me in welcoming in the Distinguished Strangers Gallery hon. Fred Mukasa Mbidde, Member of EALA –(Applause)- We also welcome the Lord Mayor of Kampala, hon. Erias Lukwago –(Applause)- We also have in the Gallery our citizens from Kaliro represented by hon. Kenneth Lubogo and hon. Flavia Munaaba. I do not know where they are seated; of course you have seen the people of Butambala. They were here for the swearing-in ceremony. (Applause)

You have also seen the people of Usuk; they are also here for the swearing-in (Applause)
 
I also want to introduce pupils and teachers of Tropical Primary School, Najjera, represented by hon. Nganda and hon. Sseninde. They are somewhere - there they are. 

MR SEMUJJU: Guidance.

THE SPEAKER: On what?

MR SSEMUJJU: On the communication. Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Madam Speaker, you have given us an elaborate programme, which will allow Parliament to participate in celebrations to mark 50 years of Uganda’s Independence. There has been an attempt to make these celebrations appear like a one-group celebration. At Kololo grounds, the billboards that have been erected there are billboards of 50 years; but the most prominent writings there and pictures are “26 years.” There are even pictures of people who did not participate in the Independence struggle, but are actually beneficiaries. We have had many heads of state, but the individuals responsible for erecting billboards at the Kololo grounds have put the picture of only President Yoweri Museveni, prominently writing there “and 26 years of” this and that. 

The guidance I am seeking from you, Madam Speaker, is whether they will not make the same attempt to hijack the Parliamentary Week and skew it to look like it is also celebrations of 26 years of one group in power; because, it will make some of us uncomfortable. We are eager to participate; and I am raising this as a serious matter. (Interjections) All that is at Kololo grounds where the main celebrations will take place are pictures and writings of 26 years. So, what do we do in circumstances like those ones? 

THE SPEAKER: I cannot answer for Kololo. I am not in charge of Kololo. I think the Minister for the Presidency will inform you. About Parliament, it is fully a parliamentary function. Do not impute improper motives on the Speaker. Let us go to the next item.

3.49
MAJ. (RTD) JESSICA ALUPO (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this chance to make a personal statement under Rule 46(1) of our Rules of Procedure on the by-election in Usuk County, which took place on 12 September 2012. 

In the same vein, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the people of Usuk County for again empowering the young people by electing the youngest parliamentarian ever –(Applause)- in our country and indeed in the whole of Africa. Furthermore, I would like to thank and congratulate the NRM leadership and my colleagues who participated in the by-election in Usuk County. 

According to the records of the Electoral Commission, NRM, UPC, DP, FDC and seven Independents participated in that by-election. At the end of it all, the NRM took the day with 11,000 votes followed by an Independent who got 5,000 votes. FDC got 2,000 votes. 

However, I want to clarify on the allegations presented by hon. Partick Amuriat Oboi of Kumi County on the Floor of this Parliament on 18 September 2012. For example, orchestrated violence during the by-election; Army and Police deployment in the district and particularly in Usuk County; individuals mentioned in his statement; Minister of Education using military and political science and issuing threats.

I would like to clarify on those issues my colleague pointed out as follows. First, I did not participate in any violence and any act which violates the law. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, I am a law-abiding citizen –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, what I was saying is that I am a law-abiding citizen who cannot even hurt a fly. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Secondly, Madam Speaker, On the Police and military deployment, I know that hon. Patrick Amuriat was a visitor in Katakwi. It is important for him to appreciate that the people of Katakwi and Usuk County in particular, are protected from cattle rustlers by Anti-Stock Safety Unit, which he unfortunately mistook to have been deployed there over the by-election since he was a new person in the area. (Laughter)

Thirdly, whereas we have a privilege to speak in this House, some of the individuals mentioned by my honourable colleague in his statement cannot come here to defend themselves on the Floor of this Parliament. So, it is unfair to them and an insult to the people of Usuk County. I, therefore, demand for an apology from hon. Amuriat for coming here to insult the people of Usuk County. 

Finally, on the issue of military and political science, hon. Amuriat knows that I am both a graduate of political science and military science. But for the sake of clarity, in light of this statement, I was making a speech at Soroti University lounge on 4 September 2012, encouraging students to join the Army after their graduation so that they can attain additional wisdom, discipline and patriotism traits to make them pillars of peaceful transformation like me. 

Madam Speaker, let me also thank the people of Usuk County for their calmness, for their patience and for their political maturity during the by-elections despite the alleged provocative statements uttered by some of my colleagues from the Opposition, including: “Orphans are not wanted in Parliament.””Do you know what killed her father? This one will also die the way her father died.” “Your candidate is a child” “We are bringing “Kanyamas” from Busia, Bukedea, Kumi and Soroti to deal with you on election day.” “You Karimojong, what do you want in NRM?” “We shall bring posho, blankets and mosquito nets to confuse you on the eve of the elections.” Those were some of the unfortunate speeches that came from some of the Members of the Opposition during the time when they were canvassing for votes in Usuk County. But the people were very peaceful and they listened to them. But they knew that on the Election Day, it was NRM that they were going to vote for.

In conclusion, in light of one of the individuals mentioned by hon. Amuriat in his statement, whom he clearly stated that he comes from Atutur in Kumi, I would like to demand an apology from hon. Amuriat for exporting violence from his constituency of Kumi, which he represents in this House, to a peaceful Usuk County. (Applause) 

He should also apologise for coming to Usuk physically to preside over this violence that he transported from Kumi to Usuk County. 

I would like to encourage my colleague to accept defeat with humility. It is a democratic principle for us to know that in every game, there is a winner and a great looser – 

THE SPEAKER: I ask the members in the audience not to participate in the proceedings. 

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Alengot Proscovia Oromait for overwhelmingly triumphing the other nine candidates who competed with them. But in the same vein, I congratulate all of them who participated and thank them for the peaceful way in which they tried to canvass their votes, and I wish hon. Alengot well in this august House.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to welcome the suggestion by hon. Amuriat to investigate all political actors who participated in the by-elections in Usuk County. This would also help individuals mentioned in hon. Amuriat’s statement to be listened to. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you once again for the opportunity and I would like to thank my colleagues for their kind attention. I have said all this for God and my County. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us here from hon. Jjeje Odongo - no motion at this point; I refer you to Rule 45. 

3.58
GEN. JJEJE ODONG (Ex-Officio): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to make a personal statement; an explanation in response to the very serious allegations made against me by my son, hon. Patrick Oboi Amuriat , MP Kumi County, when on the 18th of this month, he made a statement on the Floor of this Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I am making this statement pursuant to Rule 46(1) of our Rules of Procedure and I must add that I do so with a very heavy heart indeed. 

As a committed cadre of NRM, it is my duty, it is my obligation and it is my conviction to support the activities of NRM. It is against this background that I was involved in the Usuk County by-elections and I have no apologies to make for that involvement. 

During the course of my involvement, I did not plan, I did not forment, and neither did I orchestrate any form of violence. It was not necessary. Personally, I abhor and detest violence, especially election-related violence. 

Whereas I did not personally witness any violence, if indeed any did occur, I condemn it in the strongest terms. We, the Members of Parliament have a privilege to make statements on the Floor of this Parliament. Sadly, sometimes, we use this privilege to make very sweeping and serious allegations against people who never have or get the same privilege to respond. 

In his statement, hon. Amuriat made very serious allegations against certain individuals both from Usuk and beyond. I wonder when and where we will hear the voices of the voiceless people of Usuk. 

Madam Speaker, it has been stated that there was heavy military deployment during the Usuk County by-elections. Let me take this opportunity to inform you colleagues that in Usuk County, as indeed in all counties that border Karamoja, and have suffered from cattle rustling, Anti-Stock Safety Units (ASTUs) are deployed at every sub-county. In Usuk, in addition to ASTUs, there is a military unit stationed at a place the locals have now decided to call “Baghdad”. Because of this there is, therefore, indeed quite a high presence of military people – people in uniform in Usuk County. This is usual and normal for the people of Usuk. However, a visitor and especially one who does not know these facts of deployment will see what the people for Usuk find normal, as something extremely abnormal. I guess this is what happened to hon. Amuriat.

In conclusion, I would like to agree and support hon. Amuriat’s proposal that this Parliament should interest itself in the role various political leaders from Teso sub-region played in the Usuk County by-elections. 

However, I would like to also urge that Parliament should interest itself not only on the four political leaders that hon. Amuriat identified, but rather all the political leaders in the Teso sub-region as well as those from elsewhere who participated in this by-election, and I must add, across the political divide. Only then shall we get the full picture of what actually happened.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I have said this, and want to thank you all for this opportunity and your attention. It is sad that we make very sweeping statements, but it is an opportunity for us to heal wounds if any of us was indeed hurt. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Christine Aporu.

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TESO AFFAIRS (Prime Minister’s Office) (Mrs Christine Amongin Aporu): Pursuant to the provisions of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, Rule 46(1), I take the opportunity to make a personal explanation on the statement that was made by my colleague, hon. Patrick Amuriat.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to make a personal explanation on hon. Amuriat Oboi Patrick’s personal statement to this august House regarding the unfortunate incident of assault on him on 12 September 2012, in which statement the honourable member called upon this House to interest itself in the events, especially the acts of assault on him, that took place on that day, and find out the role I played in these events. 

My brief statement is that I am a Member of the National Resistance Movement, and I was Member of the Campaign Committee for the NRM candidate, Alengot Proscovia Oromait, now the MP.  

Madam Speaker I was in Usuk County from 3rd to 10th September 2012.  I participated in campaign rallies addressed by the NRM candidate. I do not remember seeing or witnessing any incident of violence in the process of canvassing for votes by all candidates in the Usuk County by-election.

Candidates during the time I was there, had their programmes well arranged, and supporters followed them to the venues.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, although we have the privilege to stand and speak on the Floor of this House, those affected do not have that privilege to be heard, especially  those named in the statement by the MP of Kumi County. Also, let me say that I welcome the investigations as proposed by the Member so that the truth comes out.

Madam Speaker, on 12th September, the day of the election, I was on official duty in Soroti District at Teso College Aloet, Soroti Secondary School and I proceeded to Ngora High School in Ngora District. I only returned to Katakwi District Headquarters in the evening of that voting day to witness vote tallying and to hear the final election results.

I was not aware of the unfortunate incident of assault on the honourable member. I do not condone acts of assault, violence or atrocity in whatever circumstances. If this incident occurred, then it is very unfortunate. I stand to totally condemn the acts and to call upon honourable members to treat these acts with the contempt they deserve.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for your kind attention. [HON. ODONGA OTTO: “That is a good statement.”] (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amero.

4.09
MRS SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria):  I thank you, Madam Speaker –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MRS AMERO: I stand to respond to the allegation made in the personal statement of hon. Patrick Amuriat Oboi. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me a chance to respond to the allegations that were made against me in a personal statement brought to this august House by hon. Patrick Amuriat concerning the by-election in Usuk, and implicating me to have had a hand in his assault as absolutely lies.

I was in Usuk executing my duties as assigned by the NRM Party. I was also invited by my colleague, the Woman Member of Parliament for Katakwi District as a neighbour to support her in mobilising votes for the NRM candidate.

Thirdly, I share boundaries with Usuk and, therefore, what affects Usuk affects Amuria too.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this august House that hon. Amuriat has no authority to ask why I was in Usuk, because I am not answerable to him in any way. I share boundaries with Usuk. What does Hon. Amuriat have to do in Usuk? [HON. MEMBER: “What about you?”] Amuria was curved out of Usuk and that is why I had to support my mother district. 

SPEAKER: Honourable Members, Order!

MRS AMERO: Finally, Madam Speaker –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members.

MRS AMERO: Can hon. Amuriat prove with evidence that I am the one who assaulted him? (Interjections) 

I want to conclude my statement by saying that I only heard the voters discussing that hon. Amuriat was found dishing out money to the electorate to buy votes and he was bundled up and taken to Police. What happened to hon. Amuriat, I do not know and I even do not want to know. I thank you very much, Madam speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. Honourable members, those statements were made under Rule 46(1) and are not subject to debate. However, each of the Members has said that they want the matter investigated and so, I think we need to agree on how we are going to move on the investigation. Can we – yes, hon. Winifred Kiiza.

4.13
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity.  I would also like at the same time to take this opportunity to thank the whole House for the support you gave me during the by-election of Kasese. (Laughter) In the same vein, I would like to welcome our two colleagues who have joined us this afternoon. Welcome to the House, and I wish you the best.

Madam Speaker, what has come out of the Usuk County by-election is a replica of what has been taking place in most of the by-elections in this country. And in most of these by-elections, the Police, the Army and individuals are mentioned. I would like to suggest that we do not leave this matter to the Police alone. A select committee of Parliament be formed to investigate these matters, including all that has taken place in the by-elections we have had. (Applause) 

I am saying this because both sides of the House now agree that there has been some violence. Kasese was not exceptional; it was bloody.  Bukoto was not exceptional, it was worse. Butambala the same; and Jinja was the same. So, let us compile information from all these by-elections that we have had to enable us find a lasting solution for the next election that we may hold. This will also help us promote democracy that we so much desire. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

4.15
MR NSUBUGA BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to use this opportunity to thank the entire Parliament of Uganda for the support that I received during the by-election that I won in Bukoto South, recently. However, as the previous speaker has said, indeed, after the elections of 2001, this House formed a committee that investigated the elections of that year, because they were violent. A report was made by that committee. However, that report was never laid before this House, and so, it was never debated. It was concerning election violence.

Today, in my constituency, Madam Speaker, with your permission I am even ready to play a video in this House for you to see how violence was meted out not only to my voters, but also to Members of Parliament. On the eve of that by-election, I had six Members of Parliament in my constituency, and they were arrested and put in prison.

Madam Speaker, time has come where a Member of Parliament is now arrested like a chicken thief in an election. I heard my sister saying that hon. Patrick Amuriat was a visitor in Katakwi District –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, don’t discuss the content of the explanations given. Just move a proposal.

MR NSUBUGA BIREKERAAWO: Madam Speaker, I, therefore, propose that a select committee of this House be formed to investigate - and should take all the divides of the House - and come up with recommendations that will be tabled here, other than the one of the committee set up in 2001, which was never tabled in this House. So that, whoever committed a crime will be brought to book. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to propose that we look at this matter again on Tuesday. However, I would like to say that if hon. Winifred Kiiza seriously wants this matter to move forward, you should draft a motion, set out the parameters to help us agree on the terms here, on Tuesday.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, how about my report? I was also wondering when the committee that was set up to investigate the assault on the Lord Mayor, hon. Erias Lukwago and myself by the Police, would come out. I am saying that because up to day, I don’t know where that report is. So, I don’t know whether you can use your prerogative to direct that this report be brought to the House because the person who assaulted has just been promoted –(Laughter)– and we are not happy about that, and we are still waiting for that report, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall cause the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and explain the status of that report. Next item, please.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET ON THE HARMONISATION OF THE BUDGET FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

4.19
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to report that we had a very fruitful meeting this morning with the Minister of Finance represented by the honourable Minister of State for Planning, Mr Matia Kasaija. In that meeting, we came to a consensus as a committee and left it to the minister, who asked us to give him time up to Tuesday for him to come back with the figures. That is all I have to report, Madam Speaker.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I happen to have attended that Budget Committee meeting. And, I remember very well that hon. Matia Kasaija came to us and requested to be given time up to tomorrow –(Interjections)– up to tomorrow, yes. He said that he was just going to consult his technocrats and present a corrigendum - and he said until tomorrow. He immediately left the room where the chairperson, other members and I were. So, unless there was some other communication to the chairperson of the committee. Otherwise, the communication from the minister was that we wait until tomorrow.

However, I must say that the whole country should know that it is the Executive holding the passing of the Budget and not this Parliament. Since last week, it is them who have been asking for more and more time. Parliament and the Budget Committee have been consistent. We have been telling them to execute their duty so that we can pass the budget, but they have been postponing now up to next week.

Madam Speaker, I would like to think that the chairperson of the committee did not hear properly. Otherwise, there was a communication that until tomorrow.

MR TIM LWANGA: Madam Speaker, what I have said is what happened. You see, whether tomorrow or Saturday, that is up to the Executive. Otherwise, through hon. Matia Kasaija, the Executive said that they will report back to us on Tuesday. In fact, the minutes are being prepared.

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, there is no need to argue because there is no sitting tomorrow, and so they cannot report tomorrow. The next sitting will be on Tuesday.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I am also a member of the Budget Committee and I attended that meeting. What should come out clearly to this House is that the entire Budget Committee told the minister to go and look for the money. So, as Parliament and as chairpersons and also members of the Budget Committee, we pronounced ourselves very clearly to the minister. I even moved that probably he should not come back to the committee if he has not got the money. 

So, as members of the Budget Committee and as chairpersons of other committees that were attending – as Parliament - we are now functus officio. That means the ball isn’t in our courts. We resolved that way in that meeting and that has been minuted. 

I thought the chairperson of the committee should have made this explicitly clear. When the Executive comes that is how they transact their business. So, they should let us rest and stop intimidating Members; we had already resolved in that meeting.

MR TIM LWANGA: Madam Speaker, when I reported, I used English and I said we came to a consensus. I don’t have any other language to use. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Parliament is ready, but let us wait and take the final decision on Tuesday. Next item, please.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we had commenced debate and now I invite hon. Nandala to take the Floor. Honourable ministers, where are you going? I think this is disrespectful to the House. The business of the Bill - it is your Bill; it is the Cabinet Bill. How can ministers just get up and leave? The Petroleum Bill is a Bill of the government.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I want to officially request for permission. I have been using a Ministry of Lands vehicle and now that my vehicle is ready, I want to hand over the Ministry of Lands vehicle. That is the appointment I am going for.

THE SPEAKER: And you will come back?

MS OPENDI: Yes, I will come back.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

4.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for their report and hon. Ken Lukyamuzi for the minority report. Of interest in the report of the committee is that I have not seen where they have done a cost-benefit analysis to come up with the present net value, which is positive so that we could invest in oil in these areas because that is the most important thing.

You could talk about money now, but the cost of the after effects would outweigh what we have got. That is why I do not agree with Members who are saying that hon. Lukyamuzi, our Minister for Environment, said he does not want a refinery. If you look at page 2, he said, why the refinery should be discouraged, and stated three reasons. The moment you answer the three reasons, then the refinery should be there. That was the reasoning he was putting across.

One of the most important issues is the environment, and he talked of tourism. For example, I come from Kyambogo, where I stay. The day before yesterday, an Indian came with ten trucks of policemen and sealed off an area that should not be sealed off using Police. The NEMA people were chased by the Police, and that clearly shows that there is no political will to assist NEMA to work.

In that regard, I would plead with the committee to provide to us the cost-benefit analysis, having taken into consideration the environment and tourism, and see what we can do about it. This is because the value addition you are talking about - I will give an example of Bugisu where I come from. We grow coffee. When President Museveni came in 1986, he said we are exporting coffee without adding value. He has stayed around for 27 years and I have not seen value addition in the coffee sector, and yet coffee is one of the biggest foreign exchange earners. That is why hon. Lukyamuzi’s report is quite important.

I want to plead with the committee on the issue of financial management. If we do not put a better law to manage the money we shall get from oil, we are finished. I want to know which law we should apply. I know Members are arguing that the budget law is wrong, but I don’t think it is true, because if we do not have a better law to manage our money from oil, we shall have problems, and we are destroying a resource, and in the future we will be the losers. 

I want to plead with the committee that we should have a better law in managing our money if at all we go that way for oil so that the future can be the beneficiaries in that area.

Madam Speaker, I have yesterday’s magazine where Tullow, which is going to explore oil, is sponsoring students. I looked through the names and never saw any name from the North, East, Buganda or Usuk -(Interruption)

MS IBI EKWAU: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. I want to inform the House that I had a prestigious trip to Australia and we managed to closely interact with members of the University of Western Australia. In the group were about ten students who are studying geology - all those issues regarding oil. Of all of them, not even one name was coming from any other part of the country apart from the Western part. So, when we say that some of these issues are far-reaching and overstretching to other parts of the country, I think Government should really be fair. I thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable, for giving way; and thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I want to clarify on this. The Western part of Uganda has been over generalised, and this is the time when we must put it in ink so that people know what Western Uganda means. The names that appear on the list, which the honourable colleagues have pointed out, are not from any other place but from Ankole region. So, it should put in context of the Ankole sub-region. 

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. I heard clearly the Leader of the Opposition hon. Nandala-Mafabi talking about revenue, but we have a Bill yet to come to this House that is going to handle the issue of revenues. So, I wanted this one to be very clear and on record that these two Bills are not squarely addressing any issues of revenue as such. We have another Bill coming. Thank you.

MS NINSIIMA: Thank you, Leader of Opposition, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I think it is high time I got clarification from the Leader of the Opposition, because since I came to this House, it is the third or fourth time that he continues to insinuate that the people from the West are benefitting from a number of opportunities including scholarships.

I think during the last presentation on this very Bill, we asked the Minister of Energy to come out clearly. We are also concerned as people from the West that we continue to take this collective guilt of being beneficiaries of scholarships in the name of Western Uganda. The Leader of the Opposition, if you have this information, kindly help us – let us know which people are from Kabale, Kisoro and Ntungamo so that when you always say the West is benefitting, we can come out and also say, “Yes, this is true or it is wrong.” But to continue biasing the entire nation when some of us are not seeing anything – I have tried to ask the Minister to give me a list of people from Kabale who have benefitted from scholarships because I am also concerned. When you go to Kiruhura, you will find their families that tell you that they have studied to the level of masters degrees, but I do not know where you continue to get this feeling. Thank you. 

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, what the Leader of the Opposition is talking about -  the list that came out in the newspapers which he was reading yesterday while we were here – those were scholarships given out by Tullow in their own right. And indeed, they used the British Council, competitively. They advertised and people applied. And when you look at the list, there are names there from Bugisu, Busoga –(Interjection)– Yes, they are there; you table the list. Similarly, my sister, Florence Ibi Ekwau, on those students who were in Australia, indeed, they also applied for those scholarships competitively. So, you cannot blame Government, and say that it is giving out scholarships to only Westerners. Madam Speaker, it is not fair. All those scholarships are applied for by individuals competitively. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I think we run a risk of turning this debate into a tribal talk. I have a problem and we need to get its genesis. His Excellency the President has told us over and over again that when he started sending people to study this sector, he had a special fund for it. And we have demanded for the President to come public by mentioning who he sent out - because it is not about the Tullow scholarships. We have 100 people who have gone to study on taxpayers’ money; how were they chosen? Can the Minister who is saying, “There was competition” tell us what competition was there. Forget about even Tullow and we concentrate on the taxpayers’ money; tell us the competition that was there? Secondly, Can you come clean, and show us the entire list of the people that this country sent out to study the oil and gas sector?

Lastly, I find it strange that it is only one region - if it is competition - which succeeds. Only one region! And, in fact, from the evidence we are getting, it is a sub-region. Our colleagues from Bunyoro and Kigezi have consistently told us that this –(Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. Hon. Katuntu  –[HON. MEMBER: “Which rule?”]- You definitely know that I know the rule perhaps better than you do. Hon. Katuntu has said that he is demanding to see the list of the people who were sponsored on taxpayers’ money to go and study oil operations. That means that he is not yet privy to that list to know who was chosen and from where. Is he, therefore, in order to contradict himself by alleging that the people on the list are from one region? Moreover, in his opening statement, he told us to guard against tribal talk? Is he in order! Should we tolerate this kind of deliberate hate campaign on the Floor?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe we should ask hon. Katuntu to substantiate before I make a ruling.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I actually want to say this and put it on record that I know most of those beneficiaries and I have done my research. Why I am demanding for the official list is actually to expose you. For example, -(Interjection)- I have all the details, hon. Tumwebaze; we have done research at Aberdeen University and all the universities in the UK, Australia and India, and we have all the names. We also know where they come from, but we are asking Government to release the official list.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: (Interjection) I cannot give you the Floor; it is mine. Madam Speaker, I have discovered that our colleagues do not read. I want you to go and read the Auditor-General’s report of 2008/2009. It talks about money which was collected from oil companies by the Ministry of Energy for many years. And there was a complaint that over $10 million has been collected, but not accounted for. A lot of money has been spent to train people in the oil sector, and basically they are from one region. I would like to read the names because I have some here. 

Madam Speaker, it is very unfair that my sister, hon. Muloni, can say this when she knows that even our own region is disadvantaged.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have abandoned the issue of petroleum production and we are now on distribution. Let us first make the law then we shall distribute.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to read these names. (Interjection) Let us read the names so that –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Some of us come from Western Uganda and tend to be stigmatised by some of this talk. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the minister commits herself to bringing the list of the people being named, identifying even the districts, so that I can know whether Kanungu is part of Western Uganda within that context. Let us assure this House that she will bring that list, because I am sure it must be available so that the whole country knows. Otherwise, I do not want to walk on the streets of Kampala and I am seen to be unfair to the rest of the Ugandans.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a further procedural matter on the fact that in the Government of Uganda, the training function belongs to the Ministry of Education. (Applause) Last time we were debating - and actually six months ago, I requested on the Floor of this Parliament that before we 
discuss the reports of the committee, Government helps Parliament by giving us information on the inter-ministerial preparedness; how the different sectors of Government are helping the sector to get ready. And, I continue to hear the Minister for Energy, who is very new in the ministry, being engaged to explain the challenges of training, which is actually for the Ministry of Education. 

Yesterday, I was hearing engagement in the areas of business investment in refinery, which is not her docket, but should be from Finance. For those who were not here in the last Parliament, in the State of Nation Address of 2009, here in Parliament, the President directed that it is the Ministry of Finance which takes the lead. That has remained in theory. It is supposed to be advised by Bank of Uganda in consultation with other ministries. 

Can I request, as a matter of procedure, Madam Speaker, that you direct - because I have been requesting that it comes from Government on their own volition, but it is not forthcoming - that Parliament directs that all the different ministries of Government, including those of Works and Lands,  come and present to Parliament. I am aware they are planning for of both the policy and the technical teams to meet; but there is no output and no budget line, and we on the ground are suffering because of lack of this - 

So, the procedure I am raising is, can we be assisted and also help the Minister of Energy, who is actually being overstretched, to explain to Parliament what is outside their mandate?  Madam Speaker, that is the point of procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Now, that procedure became a submission. But honourable members, on a serious note, the issues raised by hon. Mukitale have been raised two or three times before, and they are really valid; even in yesterday’s debate you were asking, how are we handling tourism? And nobody could answer. Who is looking to education? There were no answers. Will you respond after we close the debate or -

4.45
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I just wish to make a brief response to the questions on training, because as you know, the issue of oil and gas concerns key ministries of Education, Trade and Industry, and Energy. We normally have inter-ministerial meetings. 

On the issue of training any oil experts, it is the Ministry of Education. And, I have been listening to Members of Parliament firing misguided missiles to hon. Muloni on the issue of training.

Madam Speaker, the brief clarification I would like to make is that by the time I joined the ministry, we already had trainees in oil and gas; some of them in Kigumba Cooperative College, who were there temporarily; and some of them in Trinidad and Tobago. 

Madam Speaker, I was very interested in knowing who those people were, and I took time to visit those in Kigumba Cooperative College. I also visited those in Trinidad and Tobago. The most important thing to note is that all those who are undergoing training now, are Ugandan students -(Interjections)- according to my discovery. But the genesis of the training in oil and gas started way back - according to the records in the ministry - in 2008, when my predecessor then set up a taskforce to run Kigumba Petroleum Institute. The taskforce has been working, and it is that taskforce which has been advertising for these students to apply. Those are the records I got from the ministry.

As a way forward, therefore, we are trying to institutionalise Kigumba Petroleum Institute together with the Ministry of Public Service, where we are envisaging the recruitment of all Ugandan people who intend to do oil and gas courses using the Joint Admissions Board like any other Ugandan person who has finished Senior Six and he intends to go to a tertiary institution.

So, Madam Speaker, I think the issue -(Interruption)

MR BIGIRWA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of clarification. I am a Member of Parliament representing the people of Buhaguzi County, Hoima, which is a host community for the oil industry. The Minister for Education has raised a very important issue regarding training. As a member of the natural resources committee, I am seeking clarification, because this matter has quite often come up in my region, especially to do with the institute she has mentioned, that is, Kigumba Petroleum Institute. 

Madam Speaker, even up to now as a Member of Parliament from that region, I do not know the criteria of admission. When did you advertise these positions? Did you place the advertisements in the papers? What is the requirement for entry? It is so saddening to see a Member of Parliament from the region who is not aware. So, which training are we talking about when we cannot know the entry requirements and procedures for the institute of Kigumba and those abroad? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think we have moved far from the Bill. But I do appreciate that the matters that you have raised are important and I would like the minister to bear in mind the constitutional provision on equity and balancing development in the country. I do not think it is enough to say that they are all Ugandans. Which Ugandans? All the Ugandans want to feel part of the programme. Please conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the Bill has a clause about transparency and I think we should practise transparency today. Hon. Commissioner Chris Baryomunsi asked the Minister to tell us when she would bring the list, and I think it is very important. 

The training in oil did not start in 2008. The money had been collected for a long period. It started around 2004. And, I know the current Minister of Energy was an employee in the ministry, so she knows the information we are raising -(Interjections)- She knows - Yes! 

So, Madam Speaker, I think it will be ideal -(Interjections)- No, it will be very important that the minister - but I want to read the names. Let me read these names we have here. Let us start with these ones. (Interruption) 

COL. (Rtd) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we come to this Parliament, it is important that both sides behave honourably -(Interjections)- Yes! Hon. Nandala-Mafabi was the Chairman of the Committee on Public Accounts all those years, and reports were brought to this House. Why did he leave it then and now he brings one side of the audit query without providing answers? Yes, we are being ambushed -(Interjections)- you raised an audit query. You brought a report to this House. I was in this House. I do not remember you bringing up an issue on that matter. Madam Speaker, it is not proper for us to give half information.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, this particular issue has been on the Floor, not once, not twice, not three times, but many times. And hon. Bright Rwamirama, if he is sincere and was attending this Parliament regularly, would know that the hon. Beti Kamya, then, raised this particular issue and we had a big debate. The hon. Reagan Okumu raised this issue and we debated it; and all the time we did not get the right answers from the Executive. 

This particular issue about the inequities in this sector; we know very well that these people have been sharing out these opportunities. The Permanent Secretary, for example of Energy, has had his own children go for these courses without interviews. (Expunged)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please treat each other in a civil manner. Do not make unsubstantiated allegations. It is not fair. I expunge that part about hon. Muloni.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I have listened very carefully to what my colleagues are talking about on this issue. It is a serious issue, and it is something we must handle very carefully. I am requesting that you give Government chance, and we bring the official list of the people who were trained instead of getting piecemeal information from people whom we do not know where they originated from. Let us get an official list from Government -(Interjections)- next week.(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is in the interest of the country to put this matter to rest. So, I now direct that the government produces that list so that we can look at it and put this matter to rest, once and for all. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please, wind up. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am happy that my sister from Kabale answered the questions she was asking me, herself, and I am going to read the few I have here so that -

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, the list which we asked for is of those who are sponsored by the government. What he is reading is what was sponsored by Tullow Oil.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, first and foremost, we have Aliganyira John Bosco -

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, I am seeking a procedural matter as the honourable Leader of Opposition reads the list. I would like to know the names he is going to read, whether they have the districts and the sub-counties, because that is how we can define and be able to tell that these people are coming from these districts and these sub-counties. If that is not the case, then I will seek your guidance, especially when it comes to the Western region, how do you draw the boundary?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let him read the list and then we shall find a way of establishing. Let them go on record first.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have Aliganyira John Bosco -

MRS MULONI: Madam Speaker, just information, so that people understand that the list he is reading are scholarships by Tullow Oil - privately sponsored and not by Government, and from a newspaper.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you recall here one time, we had coffee as a leading foreign exchange earner, followed by cotton and tea. When money was earned in Uganda at that time, it was distributed to the entire country, and we believe it is important in that same regard.

So, these are the names: Aliganyira John Bosco, Amanda Brenda, Angudubo Geoffrey, Arinaitwe Patson Wilbroad, Atuhairwe Ronald, Bamwitirewa Timothy, Byaruhanga Robert, Jumba Peter, Kanagwa Elizabeth Kyaterekera, Kiiza Owen, Naluwaga Carol, Masika Lorna, Muhangi Robert, Nabusoba Irene, Nakamya Emilly, Nakiryowa Hellen, Nassaka Hanifah Lubega, Ntakimanye Aggrey, Ssentongo Ambrose, Tibagendeka Michael.

Madam Speaker, I am happy it is very clear that there is no ‘O’ here, at least we know very well. [Mr Lokeris: “Can I give you the procedure?”] You cannot help me now.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, please wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. Madam Speaker, we shall at an appropriate time even add villages and whatever.

The Chairperson has said there will be a law to manage the revenue. I would be happy to have the law of exploration. We have the law of refining and we have the law about money; because if we do not know these laws all together, we will have a problem, where you can make one law partly strong and the other one weak. 

The law is talking about transparency and the moment we are talk about transparency, it is important to know how we are going to manage the money. I do not also agree with the committee that a company like the National Oil Company should be a private company. We should have a public company owned by Government; we can only talk about -(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I think if you read through the report, including the clauses or the amendments proposed to the clauses, the company will be initially owned by the State, 100 percent.

As the company grows, there are proposals where we will actually even come here to Parliament and agree on whether to float the shares or not. If you care to read through the proposed Bill, the State will own this company 100 percent for a considerable period of time until Parliament is informed as to whether we can float the shares or not. So, I invite my brother hon. Nandala-Mafabi to carefully study the report beyond - you should transcend just a few pages and look at the whole report, please.

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have read the report, and I wanted to advise my Chairman that there also what we call management buy-out.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I wanted to introduce the children of Mbale Police Wanyera Primary School. They are up here in the gallery. You are welcome -(Applause)- They are represented by hon. Wamanga-Wamai and hon. Connie Galiwango.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very, Madam Speaker. What I was trying to tell my brother is that privatising a company is not the only solution. You can do what we call management - and I am trying to advise you that there is no reason for you to say that I should read up to the end. I have read. Management buy-out is the best nowadays in the world, whereby the company remains solely for the people of Uganda, but you have management buy-out. That is better.

In conclusion, on the issue of NEMA; that NEMA is a weak organisation. I do not think it is true. The problem is that there is no political will to assist NEMA. If there was political will, no person would build in wetlands. I read today in the papers that our MPs went to visit a wetland and they were not allowed to see it and were denied access. If a whole MP can be denied access, how about a mere employee of NEMA? I think Parliament should come out now and deal with this issue of environmental impact in the law regarding oil, but not NEMA; NEMA will not do it because NEMA has been defeated by we - ourselves - who are in power. That is the reason we are having problems of degrading our wetlands; they are building on roads and whatever is taking place.

In conclusion, this law needs to be improved by having a net present value. I am sure my chairman, when I mention net present value, you understand. We are going to degrade the environment. We are going to displace people in those areas. We are going to displace animals, and I mentioned it; that is a cost to us. Yet you are only looking at the income we are going to get. What about the costs we are going to incur? Some of them direct and others indirect costs? It is important that we allow this committee to go and do a cost-benefit analysis before we can say these laws are in conformity with what we want. 

I also plead that we get the law about revenue so that we can pass the three laws together. We should not only look at these two laws, we should also look at the law on revenue. The laws should come together. (Interjections) No, we should read them together and deal with them together. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just for the record, the Exploration Bill is here, we are dealing with it. The Refining Bill is with us; even the Resource Management Bill is with the Committee on Finance. All those laws have gone through the first reading.

5.05
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would have loved to add that we also get the State House scholarships list in addition to this other list of scholarships, but let me go to the Bill. 

I want to comment on the petroleum agreements, template or model being attached to the Bill. It is a practice of oil everywhere - oil exploitation - including the common case we keep citing, the Ghana case. If you google Ghana, you will certainly find on the laws -, on the Acts of the Parliament of Ghana on oil - you will find the agreements attached. There is a template of the agreement. 

Now colleagues, we have been raising several issues. One pertinent one has been on local content - several including environment. All these can be captured in a template of the production or petroleum sharing agreement. Petroleum agreements are of a unique nature. One simple sentence can cause chaos in this country. That is why it is important - fortunately, when I had a brief chat with the Minister of Energy, she is in agreement that indeed the template must be attached as a Schedule to the Bills.

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. Indeed, that is what is enshrined in the report. We have actually demanded, and if it is the wish of the House, that a model of the production sharing agreements should be presented to the House before the ministry undertakes any contractual obligation. So, it is enshrined in our report.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you very much, honourable member. Madam Speaker, that is very true. However, what I am talking about is that before we pass these Bills, we want to see a Schedule to the Bills. It is one thing to have a promise and another to pass a law without a Schedule. So, my prayer, my appeal to the Members, is that it is very critical for us to pass Bills with a Schedule indicating a template petroleum agreement. 

The promise can –(Interjection)- I mean how many promises? We have been here dealing with several promises, and it can remain a promise. There are several issues that are captured in the template petroleum agreement. Among these is the local content we have been talking about. It is environmental protection. To mention a little more, these issues we have been raising for the last one hour, what we have been debating on like equity; some of these are equally mentioned.

So, it is so critical. I do not see why we should just take it so lightly that it remains a promise. There are several promises we keep getting. I want to emphasise that 80 or 90 percent of the agreements are captured in a template. So, it is largely the other remaining 10 percent which is left to the Executive and the technocrats. 

I pray that we take this matter beyond what it is. If I may mention a little further, Madam Speaker; the essence of a template petroleum agreement is to protect Uganda’s overall interest as a sole and legitimate owner of crude oil and gas; to optimise Uganda’s benefits, particularly maximising use of local content, goods and services, job creation and business; protect Uganda from unnecessary risk - financial risk; and from current and future legal and environmental dangers. 

You cannot say that this is a matter for postponement. It is a matter you must fix now. We cannot allow that because that is why you end up with all sorts of arbitrations and all sorts of cases because you do not have the template agreement which all Members of Parliament agreed on as representatives of Ugandans. That has been the case in other countries. Why not us? Why do you want to keep it a promise? I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. But honourable members, why don’t you make a proposal during the committee stage? Why don’t you actually bring an amendment with a template agreement and we look at it during committee stage?     
 
MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I can pledge before this House that I can avail to Parliament a copy of the template or model petroleum agreement for the entire House and even the committee to look at for purposes of amending our report. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is not true that we never appeared before the committee. Indeed, the issues that Members are raising were raised before the committee. We formally appeared before the committee. We made an appointment, we were received and we presented our views. Maybe for one reason or another, they were never captured. That is why we have to indicate that once it is not captured in the committee -(Mr Werikhe rose_)- then we bring the matters on the Floor. 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. It is true many stakeholders appeared before the committee. We took into account all the presentations and submissions, but as a committee, we could not take each and everything that the stakeholders presented. So, that is how we came up with this report. If it is necessary, the honourable colleague can still deliver his submissions to amend the proposals at the committee stage. (Interjections) The committee had to discuss the proposals presented and that is what we came up with. We cannot take everything. If it is important that Members are still convinced that the views they presented are necessary, we are before the Plenary. So, we can always discuss them. We are ready as a committee to adopt them.   

5.12
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to contribute on this important subject. Honourable members, my submission will be mainly on the issue of the oil refinery and the issue of the environment, which many of my colleagues have already talked about.

First, in the minority report, which hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi gave, he said that the proposed refinery would increase Uganda’s external debt to 10 times the current figure. I wish to submit that this is misleading. Uganda’s current debt is about US$ 4.7 billion as at 2010/11. If the oil refinery – (Interjections) – Let me complete; if the oil refinery was to raise this cost ten times, it means it would go up to about – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the contents of my paper were specific and elaborate. I never mentioned on any page that by making a refinery, the external debt will increase ten times. I merely said that Uganda will need a lot of money to undertake that exercise, and this is not synonymous with what he is saying. So, is it in order for him to impute on me motives which I never had?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabajo, substantiate.

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Unfortunately, the member’s document is not properly numbered, but I have tried to number it myself. On page 5, he says, “Economic implications and ownership of a refinery. The entire capital and technology will come from outside Uganda. The country’s debt burden will increase ten times from the current debt...” I am reading from your document, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi.

THE SPEAKER: So, you are quite in order. You are in order. (Applause)

MR KABAJO: From this, you can see that if this refinery will cost US$4 to US$6 billion to set up, it cannot possibly increase Uganda’s debt burden ten times like the honourable member is alleging. I suppose that this refinery will be built with private sector participation, which means that some of the money will come from the private sector. 

The other issue I want to comment on is the importance of the oil refinery. We know well that this refinery will have a lot of by-products, which will also help other industries which will use them as their raw materials. So, other industries will also be set up and that will address the issue of unemployment in our country. It will also increase on our export to the region and the whole world. Therefore, it is a very import for our economy.

However, I do agree with hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi on one aspect, that we should be very careful about addressing the environmental impact of this industry. If it is not properly handled, it can be very serious. Specifically, I agree with him that since many of these oil wells are going to be near important lakes like Lake Albert, River Nile and so forth, in case of an environmental disaster it has the potential to cross borders to our neighbours like DRC and Sudan. Therefore, in such a situation, our neighbours might ask from us large amounts of money in compensation. 

My contribution on this would be to request the committee and the ministry to look at a possibility of providing insurance for the operations. In case there is a disaster where large amounts of money has got to be paid in compensations, if the operations are insured we shall have help in paying those big amounts of money, and this is likely to be in billions of dollars. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.18
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I have two observations to make. My first observation is on the national monitoring system. This country lacks a proper system of monitoring and evaluation, so I am worried about how this sector is going to perform. The Constitution of Uganda mandates the Office of the Prime Minister to provide monitoring and evaluation, but to date, such a system does not appear to be functioning at all. 

I am talking about an external system of monitoring and evaluation. I am aware that the institutions being proposed under these Bills will have internal monitoring systems. However, I am worried that the absence of a functional national monitoring and evaluation system may affect the performance of this sector negatively. 

With a proper monitoring system, clear indicators will be defined, targets will be determined periodically and the monitoring system will check and inform us accordingly, and the reporting system will be agreed upon. However, where such a system does not exist, we may have only to rely on reports coming from the civil society organisations and so forth. So, I want to submit that in order for this sector and other sectors of Government to perform, we need a functioning monitoring and evaluation system. This country has not had such a system performing at all.

My second observation is about the issue of local content. For us to enhance our position in this sector, we need to create a large base of entrepreneurs. Someone, actually it was an Indian, defined who an entrepreneur is and they said, “An entrepreneur is one who sees an opportunity where others see none”. An Indian sitting in this Parliament, for example, would easily identify some business opportunity here; for instance, that parliamentarians wear black suits and the next day you would see him manufacturing black suits. One time someone asked me, on a TV talk show, why we allow Indians to come here and produce kabalagala. The obvious answer was that we have failed to package this product to be delivered where it should be delivered and the Indian has seen this opportunity. That is why nowadays, we see pancakes in the supermarkets. Ugandans had not seen this opportunity. 

There are opportunities that are going to be unveiled in this sector but how prepared are our people to tap into these opportunities. This Government has a duty to create these entrepreneurs. There is that old saying that entrepreneurs are born, but today we have discovered that they are not only born but they can be created. So we need to invest in systems that create these entrepreneurs. What we need to do is to inculcate the spirit of enterprise within our situation, to be able to see these opportunities when they avail themselves. As it is today, this spirit does not seem to exist in so many of our people.

We need to roll out a system or an institutional arrangement that is going to deliver these entrepreneurs – people who are ready to grab and sniff these opportunities. These people are not here, and I want to submit that we need to do something about it and set up institutions that deliver entrepreneurs in this country. Entrepreneurs are no longer simply born; we have to create them in large numbers. That is the only way that we shall be able to build this local content in this value chain. (Member timed out) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Jalia Bintu and then we close with hon. Amongi. The minister should get ready to respond. Hon. Anywar, I think by mistake I named you yesterday but you are part of the committee. I do not want to break the rules.

5.24
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to make some observations. My first observation is about the committee on rights. The Bill tries to provide for the rights of the landowners in areas where petroleum activities are undertaken. Clause 132 (1)(b), for example, requires that the licence holder shall not exercise any rights under the licence without the consent of the landowner, and it goes on to outline the area within which the licensee can operate. I want to observe that the Bill tries to achieve a balance between the private rights of an individual and the rights of the licensee, but it fails to address some areas. 

The Bill does not provide for the fishing rights, especially in areas that undertake fishing as an activity. The Bill does not provide for the communal rights, especially in most of these areas where exploration is being carried out like in Buliisa and West Nile, where people own the land communally. The Bill does not provide for the communal rights. The Bill prohibits landowners in the licensed areas from erecting permanent structures. If the Bill is prohibiting these landowners from erecting permanent structures before the whole process can begin, how will these land owners be compensated? 

The Bill sidelines the local authorities especially when it comes to compensation. Actually, they refer to the Government valuer without involving the local councils. This may be a breeding ground for conflict. It has happened in other areas, especially where petroleum production is being carried out, where the local governments and authorities are not involved especially when it comes to compensation. 

The clause on consent prior to petroleum activities talks about the community objection to petroleum activities prior to the granting of an exploration licence and prior to the petroleum activities. However, the Bill limits the rights of the community as far as these objections are concerned; the minister can easily override the community’s objections because the Bill gives powers to the minister to be the alpha and the omega after the whole process has been carried out. The community cannot object to the grant of a production licence in any production area, and this means that the community actually is rendered useless in the whole process.

The community cannot also object to the renewal of an exploration especially in the event that there is a problem; for example, if they were transporting crude oil to areas like Bunyoro and there is a problem and the community says that they no longer want that route to be used but they use maybe the water route – the Bill does not give the people these powers to object. So we need to find a way. I am telling the committee chairperson that we need to find a way on how we can involve the community in the whole process, especially right from the exploration to development and to refining. These are major processes where the community is meant to be brought on board.

I want to talk about clause 43, which creates the national oil company. The roles of the company have been outlined. I have looked through the establishment of the national oil company and the Bill does not provide for an administrative structure. I want to find out from the minister why, because this structure is supposed to be put into place. 

I have seen the appointments of officers and staff of the company and the application and the management of the resultant oil revenues. However, the structure that puts into place the – (Interjections) - No.9 - the national oil company is not stated anywhere. Is the minister going to come back to us with another related law putting into place this structure? I seek clarification. (Member timed out)    

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one additional minute to the commissioner.

MRS BINTU: I want to add my voice to the many voices that have talked about the environmental concern. It has been observed, and I agree with the committee, but the committee’s observations and recommendations do not strengthen NEMA. As we speak now, during the exploration NEMA has up to now not come up with the related policy in management of the waste products. 

We were informed, during a certain conference, that when they start exploring in wildlife reserves, there are certain animals like elephants that respond to the drilling. If during the exploration they crush the rocks, the animals respond to the vibrations. Now that they are going to start exploring in Murchison Falls National Park, the elephants will run towards the communities of Masindi, Buliisa and Nwoya. This means that they will be encroaching on the community crops and we may have a disaster. I do not see any provision here indicating that we are going to mitigate these problems either by putting up electrified fences or a buffer zone that will have ditches that can prevent the elephants from crossing. (Member timed out)

5.31
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. However, I am a bit disappointed with the chairperson because we had some very key agreements on some of the gender issues that should have appeared. I have crosschecked the amendments but I do not see them. Let me start by stating that under the key principles in the Bill, the opening principles are environmental. We strongly believe and feel that there should be a general statement on the issue of the principle of gender in the Bill.

Secondly, under the institutional arrangements, we made a case. I strongly believe, from my interaction with most of the members on the committee, that this was an issue that was agreed on by most of the committee. But on the board composed of seven, there are only two women proposed. The committee had made a substantial agreement on at least three. (Interruption) 

MR WERIKHE: I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. I invite you to look at the proposal of the committee in the report. The view was to have 30 per cent but we went ahead and gave a specific number, and out of seven we said three. We agreed with hon. Betty Amongi that instead of having two, we have three. If we went by percentage, you would have ended up with only two female members but we actually took your proposal to have three, which has been captured.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Okay, Mr Chairperson, let me now invite the House to look at the amendment because the report I got – (Interruptions)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, the honourable member might be having the wrong copy. (Laughter) Otherwise, we took on many issues that hon. Betty Amongi presented. I am also happy to report that some of the colleagues who sit on that committee are members of UWOPA. In any case, if your interests have not been captured, there is still the opportunity to do it here on the Floor of the House. 

Secondly, I would like to inform the House that it is true that – hon. Theodore Ssekikubo talked about the presentation they made – we have captured over 60 per cent of their proposals in this report. You know that you would not have 100 per cent because this is supposed to be a win-win situation and that is how we are proceeding.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you have an opportunity to market it. If your proposals did not get into the report, you still have the opportunity to market them to the House. So, do not worry.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Okay, I am now very confident that – (Interruptions)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I just want to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee on which copy of the report is the true one. This is owing to the fact that he just mentioned to hon. Betty Amongi that she could be holding the wrong copy. So, can he tell us which one is the correct report because I also might be reading the wrong one and end up debating basing on that wrong one? If there is more than one report on the same matter we need to know all that, so that we can debate from an informed position.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I think the correct report – if you crosscheck, for example, on the section relating to the composition of the board, you will realise that there are three female members as opposed to two. That is one indicator. If you find that one, then you know you have the correct report. (Laughter)

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you. I think I will obtain the right report because I have read the one I have. Now that that matter has been substantially addressed in the report of the committee, I want to inform members that when we travelled to Ghana, we looked at the way the Oil Act in that country had addressed the question of local participation. In Ghana, the supply of goods and services is strictly for the local business entrepreneurs. It is only the technical aspect of those things that have to be imported that are supplied. Here, if you go to where Tullow is, like somebody said you will realise that people who are not Ugandans are engaged in the services. 

I would plead with the Minister that even before this law is put in place, the sentiment is that Ugandans would like the local service providers to supply goods and services to these people, and that is pegged on the fact that they want local people in Bunyoro to benefit. So, this aspect should be very clear. There is the condition for licensing but as a condition for renewal, we should not give space for the issue of – (Interruptions)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Betty Amongi. I would like to inform the House that as a committee we really had very passionate submissions on local content. Let me now declare, Madam Speaker, that I feel so passionate about local content. 

The message we got, which is the information I would like to give hon. Betty Amongi and the House, is that countries that have adopted best practices in local content, including Angola, have also adopted provisions which provide for joint venture. So, in a situation where you think the local company does not have the capacity on its own, you mandate, in law, that whoever has that capacity should adopt a joint venture with an indigenous company to provide those services. I want to declare, even as a member of the committee, that I am coming with the amendment on local content and joint venture. Thank you.

MS BETTY AMONGI: As I wind up, let me talk about the issue of parliamentary involvement. While the last bits of the section deal with the issue of submission to Parliament, I do not know whether the committee made some key proposals on issues of reporting to Parliament and how often this report should come in. I also do not know whether the report talks about what the key mandate of Parliament will be as regards to evaluating what will be happening in the instances of the renewal of the licences of exploration and development. That is very important. (Member time out)

5.40
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I just have three concerns. However, before that I want to thank the committee for coming out with this report. I also thank the minister for being available to make those responses. This is a complex and highly specialised area. So, our only hope is the trust we have put in the committee members. For now we trust you, but we might get some shortfalls. Just one word put before the others can give someone fortunes and they will smile all the way to the bank.

Having said that, Madam Speaker, I want to suggest that we insert a clause for an automatic comprehensive review of all these laws after every three years, so that we do not make a law like that of Nigeria, which cannot be amended. Every time they want to change it, bank accounts for Members of Parliament get fat to the extent that they even do not want to talk about it. That is why I am suggesting that we insert a clause that states thus: “After three years, Parliament shall comprehensively review the entire law.” That is why I started with the point on trust. In the event that the technocrats were smarter than the entire committee, there should be a mechanism, other than a private member’s Bill which can easily be derailed, for the automatic review of the law. If the law is okay, we just sit here for only 10 minutes and pronounce ourselves that it is okay and we get home, but I guess when we get started, issues will come up.

Two, I also would like to suggest that royalties to the districts be reduced from the current seven to three or at most five. The justification is that first of all, out of the 25 productive oil wells in the country, 19 are in western Uganda. Oil is not like tomatoes, which you go and harvest from the garden and get back home. There are huge oil deposits that can even run – I was talking to a seismic engineer sometime last week and he told me that oil deposits can even run underground from here to Entebbe. It is at the discretion of the surveyor to choose where to harvest it from. It could be Entebbe, if he sees some gains in doing it from there, or in Kampala. Now I know that it is not a coincidence that out of the 25 oil wells, 19 are in western Uganda. It is a coincidence – (Interruptions)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Odonga Otto for giving way. I think we should not imagine that oil is just a valley or like a river running. These are hydrocarbons trapped in rocks.  So, they are sediments. In fact when we come to handling stratific delineation – I will explain these things when we get there – (Laughter) – you will find that there is no way that you can have one well running from here even up to Nakulabye; no! These are hydrocarbons trapped in rocks. That is why you really have to identify, after carrying out surveys, and actually drill in particular places. Otherwise, you would actually have been in Hoima and just drain all the way from Nwoya up to Hoima rather than actually going there. So that is the information I would like to give.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you. I now know why when Uganda started exploring oil, Congo claimed that the oil was in parts of Congo. You remember we were having skirmishes with Congo around Lake Albert. The chairman’s explanation is inadequate because the Government of Congo then knew that there was high potential that the oil spreads and is greatly extended beneath Lake Albert, and that it can easily also be explored from Congo. What I am saying, and I want to be on record, is that we may need alternative scientific investigations to ascertain why by coincidence 19 out of the 25 wells are in a specific area.

However, in the absence of that, I am now moving that the royalties to local governments be reduced from seven to three. Those who have, like they say in the Bible, shall be added more and those who do not have, the little shall be removed from them. We were just complaining about the scholarships that are going to a specific area- (Mr Peter Lokeris rose_) You know, I have this information. Please, I do not need information; these are oil issues and it has nothing to do with cattle rustling.

MR PETER LOKERIS: I have risen on a point of order. Hon. Otto does not know that some of us left cattle rustling since the time we were born. We have been in school and working. In fact, one time I was a DC, RDC and even treasurer; for that matter, I have not had any time for cattle rustling.

Is it in order for you, the hon. Odonga Otto, who is my neighbour, to brand me as a cattle rustler as if all Karimojong are engaged in cattle rustling, and yet the other time we did not call all of you insurgents? A minister is not in any way a cattle rustler. Are you in order to insinuate so?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, unless you can substantiate that the minister is a rustler, please withdraw.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, in the Seventh Parliament after a huge cattle rustling, it was in all the media that a rustled cow from Kumi was found in the minister’s kraal. He went to court and withdrew the case because you knew what was going to happen to you in court. So, it is public information but in the interest of harmony, I wish to withdraw any insinuation I would have made. Madam Speaker - (Interruption)

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The issue of royalties is very passionate to Members of Parliament that come from that region and even the communities. We had submissions from His Highness the Omukama from Bunyoro and he was even contemplating increasing royalties to 12.5 per cent. 

When we did calculations of the seven per cent in monetary terms, it was quite a lot of money. Even then, the people from that region do not think that this is good enough as compared to what the impact of exploring and refining in that area will be. So, be passionate about it and take care of the interests of the communities.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, if we are considering the issue of royalties, then Busoga that supplies us with electricity from Owen Falls Dam should have the issue of royalties brought on board. The same applies to Karamoja that supplies us with minerals and gold. So probably, we need another comprehensive study on royalties only. Even in Kampala in the city where we all live, they may ask for royalties for keeping the whole of Uganda here. So I feel strongly and suggest that the issues of royalties must be reviewed. Thank you so much.

5.48
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I will first give you the overview of my submission. One is that oil and gas resources should really be held in trust because this is a resource, which belongs to the people of Uganda, and it should not have been separated from the way we are treating other natural resources.

Two, Uganda is learning on the job as far as explaining the exploitation and development of oil and gas is concern. This is in terms of the technical knowhow versus the knowledge and experience the investors have. Actually, the investors are more knowledgeable and superior than us as a country.

Another overview, which I would like to propose, before I go into details, is that because we are not completely in the know technically compared to the investors, I would propose that we should not rush into the production of this oil. There should be no oil production until all the laws and regulations are in place to help us manage this resource very well.

Madam Speaker, I would like to bring to the attention of the House that the problem which we should envisage as we debate this issue is that there are numerous authorities enshrined in this Bill like the minister and the Petroleum Authority. The roles of the board, commissioners and directors are also numerous. There are unclear and overlapping powers, a high administrative burden, overlapping regulatory and commercial roles; so, there is potential conflict of interest. All this would lead to complication and confusion in the process of approval.

I would like to address myself to the details right now. The Bill itself is set to address Article 24. However, we still have problems as a country as I earlier highlighted. If we look at the production of oil, so far there are already agreements signed in this country and as citizens, we have not comprehensively accessed these production sharing agreements. As a committee, members were also unable to analyse the already signed agreements. As a country, therefore, we are not in the know of precisely what we have lost and gained as a result of the already signed agreements in precise terms. 

Madam Speaker, this also brings me – (Mr Werikhe rose_) – You will respond later. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us have information from the committee chairperson.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. Much as we really want to debate in an orderly fashion, I think we should have the record straight. As we talk now, the production sharing agreements are with this House and we even had guidelines from the Speaker as to how you can access them. So, to say we do not have these agreements with us in this House is to misinform the House.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I heard the honourable member’s submission very well. She was asking that of all the agreements that we have signed so far, how much have we lost and gained as a country. Her statement was very clear; right from Neptune, Heritage Oil and Gas, Energy Africa, Hardman Petroleum, Heritage-Tullow, Tullow, CNOOC and Total, how much have we benefited and lost as a country? She is raising an important question that begs an answer.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should not divert the debate; let us make this law first. If you want a report on what we have received, we will have a separate debate and presentation on the performance of all the agreements. Let us first focus on this, make the law, put in the changes you want and we move. You can ask for accountability later. 

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise guidance. I think this issue should unite us and we should debate it with a lot of concern and sobriety. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will give you one more minute.

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Madam Speaker, I was also concerned about the powers that we are going to give to the minister. This should be of concern because as the institution of Parliament, we have been struggling with the Executive to even implement what our voters want; how much more difficult will it be when we have huge sums of money in place?

I would also want to emphasise that we want the petroleum authority to be independent. As per now, we do not know whether with the powers given to it, it is independent. We would like to stress that it should be left to operate independently. 

Regarding the national oil company, this is the real gist of this sector. We would like to have a separate legislation on this, detailing how we are going to move to enable our people to participate. This is very important and we should not put it in the ambit of this law to deny the country details on how this company will operate. 

We are talking about the relationship of the production sharing agreements - the stabilisation clause that was in the previous agreements. The Bill should come out clearly on this, otherwise – (Member timed out). 

THE SPEAKER: You will continue with your submission during the committee stage. Let me now invite the Minister for Environment to respond on environment issues. 

5.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (WATER) (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity – (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)  

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for Environment is on the Floor and you are now disrupting her. (Laughter) Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, you will be able to speak when we are at committee stage. We gave you 20 minutes yesterday. Please, respect –

MRS BIGOMBE: He is also a member of the committee. He is my friend but I have to point out that he should have told members of the committee. 

Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to clarify certain issues that have been raised regarding the environment and in particular, NEMA. I would like to allay the fears of Members and also help them go and spend a peaceful weekend knowing that NEMA is doing a lot of work in the oil and gas sector. I also want to promise you that next Tuesday, I will be bringing a fairly detailed paper on the various interventions that NEMA has made as far as oil and gas is concerned. 

Maybe before I do that, I want to educate you a little bit; wetlands are in a different department and it is headed by a director. Although NEMA carries out environmental impact assessments and issues certificates, it works hand in hand with the department of wetlands. So we need to be clear when we are referring to wetlands; the leading agency is different from NEMA but they work together.

As far as interventions are concerned, NEMA has established a fully-fledged office in Hoima. The staff there do nothing else but work together with the various institutions and the companies conducting exploration. 

A number of tools have been developed by NEMA to ensure effective environmental monitoring and control of degradation. An atlas for the Albertine Graben has been developed and it shows the general environmental sensitivity of the graben. The atlas displays, identifies and provides the ability to analyse the relative sensitivities, including biological, geographical and social issues to petroleum development and oil fields in the Albertine Graben.

Further, NEMA has developed an environmental monitoring plan for the Albertine Graben. The tool that has been developed is to be used for continuous monitoring of changes in the environment of the graben against the sensitivities identified in the atlas. This includes studying the characteristics of water, plants, fish and even animals in the area. 

It has also developed strategic environmental assessments for the Albertine Graben area. This is still being developed but it will be launched very soon. This assessment is being carried out by a team of experts from Uganda and Norway. The objective of the strategic environmental assessment is to ensure that environmental issues are broadly considered and integrated into the major decisions connected to policy plans and programmes associated with the oil and gas sector at the earliest stage. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, honourable minister. You started by saying you were allaying our fears but contrary to that, you are heightening our fears seven times more. It is good to have the environmental assessment and all these things you have outlined - the assessment of the graben area - that is all important. However, what we are saying is, leave alone the ideal and let us talk about the practical situation on the ground. As you speak, a lot of waste has been dumped in Nwoya and in the western part of the country. On top of that, we are looking at the ecologically sensitive places; before you talk about the environmental assessment, it has to go hand in hand with the technology to be used in the oil extraction. 

Besides, what capacity are we talking about in NEMA? You said wetlands are under a director in your ministry and NEMA is a separate entity; how are you integrating all these? What practical solutions are we talking about rather than reading from text and you say this is the ideal and this is what is supposed to be? We are inquiring about the practical steps and measures on the ground to safeguard against the environmental damage as a result of that. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you let her complete her answer first? If she misses it then you can come back. First give your answer, Minister.

MRS BIGOMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I think I was speaking English, which you all eloquently speak, by saying that I will bring a detailed paper by Tuesday. What I am doing right now is giving highlights of the various interventions that NEMA has undertaken. 

Two, this is a new area and studies are being conducted and tools are being developed in the hope that by the time the actual drilling starts, all this will be in place. I just want you to know. There is a lot of panic and there is a lot of anxiety when it is work in progress.  

As far as waste management is concerned - the honourable members said I am reading a text; this is a prepared paper. Waste management has emerged as the biggest - 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, please allow the minister to respond. Minister, respond to the issues, which were raised in the debate.  

MRS BIGOMBE: It is true that waste management has emerged as the biggest challenge of the oil and gas sector to date. Following extensive studies and laboratory analysis of the waste so far generated by the oil and gas activities, NEMA has issued interim guidelines for oil waste management to oil companies and lead agencies, and these cover liquid waste as well as solid waste.  These guidelines will be in operation until comprehensive oil and gas waste management guidelines have been developed after some studies. 

It is also important for you to know that it is true there are challenges, and this is not only in the oil and gas sector but in NEMA as a whole. A study has been carried out for the critical institutions managing the environmental aspects of oil and gas. This study has identified manpower skills gaps and logistical needs of the institutions to fulfil their mandate with respect to oil and gas activities. 

On the shortage of staff in NEMA, we have written to the Ministry of Public Service to be able to recruit more people but we have not got a response yet. Of course, it is not just understaffing but also resources are not adequate. The rest of the details will follow by Tuesday. Thank you, Madam Speaker.   

6.09
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Committee on Natural Resources for the two good reports they have produced that are guiding our discussions. The Oil and Gas Policy was produced in 2008 and it had been anticipated that legislation would follow immediately thereafter. However, Government realised that there was need to carry out extensive consultation and because of that, we are only debating the Bills today. 

I am highly encouraged by the discussions and by the debate that we have had here. It brings to fore the issues that must be clearly attended to if we are going to have a good law that will guide the sector. It also brings benefits to bear to the various Ugandans that have been eagerly waiting for the country to go into oil production.

I would like to allay the fears of those who think that when we go into production and the oil refinery is established here in the country, the country will be faced with serious problems. One, we have had a good policy. Two, we have had extensive consultations on the legislations that we have had. I am also confident that we are likely to have good pieces of legislation to guide the sector. More importantly, the country has had the benefit of having good leadership, and I would like to believe that this will help to steward the sector and the country so that the resources that we shall be able to get from our oil resource will be put to good use.  

Madam Speaker, there were serious issues and many issues raised in regard to land. I would like to say something about physical planning. Land in the Albertine Graben has been a sensitive issue to all the stakeholders that have something to do with oil but also the people who have traditionally lived in that area. 

The view of Government was that it was extremely important that we come up with a special plan for the Albertine Graben and the oil producing areas so that the land in this area can be put to optimal use. There are many competing activities that we have already had; there is oil, there are the game parks, and the ecosystem is extremely rich. So, there are so many competing needs. Our view as Government is that we should go out and produce a clear physical plan or spatial plan of this area so that activities can be put, can be located, can be allocated in an area where there will be maximum gain for all of us who would like to gain not only from the oil industry but also from the existing land in that area.

Our view is that this plan would address activities that must be carried out, resettlement patterns and the infrastructure that we must develop in this Albertine Graben. These physical plans ought to have taken place way back. However, due to financial constraints, we were not in a position to move at the pace and the manner that we should have moved, such that oil production activities would start when the physical planning of the area would have already been completed.

On a reassuring note, Parliament and Government have now provided Shs 2.0 billion so that we can be in a position - (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)- Madam Speaker, you had already guided hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi that on top of the amount of time he had been allocated, he will still be allocated a lot of time at committee stage to move through the various amendments that he had already proposed -(Mr Ssekikubo rose_)- Madam Speaker, I would like to be protected  even from my own good friend, hon. Ssekikubo, whom I know has very valuable points to put across.

THE SPEAKER: Members, for the other points you want to raise, you will have time at committee stage, please. Let us get the responses and then move on.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I was thanking Government and Parliament for the Shs 2.0 billion, which hon. Mukitale was talking about yesterday. This is to enable us move expeditiously on the physical planning of this Albertine Graben. 

There were issues of land acquisition, which were raised here on the Floor. Land acquisition in the petroleum areas, I would like to assure Members, will be in accordance with the law of this country. As an example, Government is in the process of acquiring land in this area for the planned refinery - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is bothering the chairperson?

MR TASHOBYA: I am very much obliged, Madam Speaker. I just stood up owing to the interest many of us have in this subject matter. I am not going to say anything about what my senior friend, hon. Migereko, is submitting on but the matter you have ruled on, that we should bring up some of these issues at committee stage.

The issues we are discussing are very important and many of them are of a policy nature; the matters, for example, of NEMA and what my friend, hon. Migereko, is talking about land. When you go to the committee stage, we shall be dealing with the Bill and yet, Madam Speaker, you have expensively sponsored us and made us know this area in depth and we think some of the policy issues they are bringing forward are not very clearly explained. The guidance I am trying to seek from you, Madam Speaker, is that at what point shall we get these policy issues explained to us and the country?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tashboya, you are inviting me to speculate on the policy issues. I do not know which ones you want them to answer.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If I may go back to the honourable Minister of Environment; she was talking about - in fact, her suggestion was half empty, with due respect. This is because many of the issues that were referred to her, she said she would respond to them on Tuesday when she comes up with a comprehensive paper. There was the issue of capacity and ability of NEMA to do the job. These are policy matters that should be explained but she is postponing her responses to Tuesday. How fruitful will it be to the discussion of this Bill?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, there are other experiences where we need to draw from; for instance, people who own land continue in possession of land and it is just leased out to the companies and to Government. This is missing. When we talk about our local situations - and hon. Migereko has been a minister in this government, in the Eighth Parliament and Seventh Parliament - there has been mass displacement of the people in those areas. Up to now, there has not been a plan for resettlement and even for engagement of those very people who are involved.

Lastly, the minister was blowing his own trumpet saying, “You know, we are lucky we have a good government.” Yes, but governments come and go. What if tomorrow we have a bad government, what necessary measures and laws and policies are we putting in place to ensure that even after the current situation changes, there shall be continuity, our people shall continue to benefit from their land and from their environment as it is with other countries?

THE SPEAKER: Actually, when the minister was submitting, I had expected him to respond to the queries raised on land and on acquisition, but you start by a preamble about good government! People want to know who has acquired the land, how is it going to be managed. That is what they want to hear about. Who is going to make the roads and when? That is what people want to hear.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are two issues on which I thought if we went to the committee stage, we would probably not be helping ourselves. 

The first issue was raised by hon. Odonga Otto in regard to the possibility of oil being shared between Uganda and the DRC, and we raised this matter previously in the committee. I think this is not a matter that is going to be handled by this Bill. It does not make provisions for it. The commitment we would like to enlist from Government is a commitment that gives this House an assurance that they will work out a joint exploration arrangement or a joint development arrangement. It happens in other countries. It happens in Nigeria between Nigeria and Sao Tome. Why should it be left to speculation when it comes to Uganda and the DRC because those are crucial matters that even lead to conflict? So, we hope that by the time the minister leaves, she will have assured this House that this is what is going to happen or they will commence on that and it will be brought to this House, and we all know what happens to those jointly shared resources.

The second issue is really my discomfort with the response given by my senior sister, hon. Betty Bigombe. It does not have to do with her as a person. It does not even have to do with NEMA. It does have to do with the positioning of NEMA in this oil exploration business. The National Environment Management Authority has the intellectual capacity and they have tried to do something, but let us be honest, they are on the sidelines, on the periphery of this whole thing. There is nothing to demonstrate that NEMA has been anchored in the activities that are going on. 

I will give you an example. She just pointed to a sensitivity atlas. Throughout committee work, we were struggling with hon. Irene Muloni and her team on matters of sensitivity of the ecological zone, and they have declared the entire Albertine Graben an exploration zone. So, what is the relevance of the sensitivity atlas that has been given by NEMA? Nothing! They are proceeding. 

Actually, the honourable minister in charge of environment also told us “when drilling starts”, but she knows that hon. Irene Muloni recently signed production agreements and some drilling is going on. Where is NEMA? It is not NEMA at fault. Maybe the capacity of NEMA has to be addressed. The House must deliberately position NEMA at the core of this, otherwise we risk having the tragedy of the Niger Delta as we watch with NEMA at the periphery as exploration, drilling and production are going on and with all those stories. We have to be deliberate.

Lastly, maybe the NEMA Act has to be brought here because I think by the time it was passed nobody envisaged intense oil activity or production of petroleum. Maybe we need to agree. Let them bring back the Act and we reposition NEMA legally. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Madam Speaker, yesterday when you gave me an opportunity to contribute - with the honourable Minister of Lands on the Floor - I stated that the issue of land in the Bunyoro region, which he is trying to assure us about, begins with implementation of the Ruth Mukama Commission of Inquiry Report. Without that report being implemented, there is no assurance which can be given. This is because it prescribes how the issues of land should be managed. So, what I want to hear is that the recommendations of the commission of inquiry will be implemented before we move on. 

On the issue of the environment, I am very worried because the minister said wetlands are not under NEMA and so on and so forth, but that there is this directorate of wetlands. Is the minister aware that many wetlands in Bunyoro region are being encroached on? The forest cover is going. Before these issues are addressed, you say we are having an atlas and environmental assessment. I thought we should first deal with these issues and stop the degradation which is taking place before the oil comes to compound the problem. Before you do them, you are talking theoretically. We want practical issues.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will die well if I am to die. I am raising three points of great importance. One is that Uganda, globally, is known to be a tourist paradise. The area where we are going to get oil, the Albertine Graben, is also a home to a number of wildlife species which are also endangered. I speak about the greater kudu, the flanked duiker and even the mountain gorilla. Under the doubtable circumstances of NEMA, what guarantee do we have that as we reap and harvest oil, wildlife will not go, once and for all?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, those points were raised eloquently yesterday by three other members. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the second point; before we went in for oil exploration, I was one of the people who attended the public hearing in Hoima to discuss the environmental impact assessment. If it necessitated an environmental impact assessment for mere exploration and production, what assurance do we have that we will have an environmental impact assessment to direct oil refinery, knowing very well that akaveera law was outlawed in 2009 and we have not implemented it? What guarantee do we have that by allowing the scenario to remain as it is manufacturers will not be on the increase in the production of kaveera? 

Lastly, I have travelled to many parts of Africa. I have also read many constitutions where oil is produced. There is a problem. An oil refinery in Uganda is a new phenomenon. The two laws we are passing are supposed to operationalise what is already in existence constitutionally. I do not see any clause in the Constitution –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you said that yesterday. Please, stop wasting our time.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I have not got any response. 

THE SPEAKER: You said that yesterday and even the issues of – the safeguards that you want, you can put them in the law. That is why we are here to make the law. Stop wasting our time. 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I also had three concerns. One of them is related to what my brother, the chairman of legal, Tashobya, has raised on the question of land. We are wondering why land is being acquired outrightly instead of leasing. This is something we have to agree on. You are talking about an atlas, a spatial aerial map of that area; are we outlawing agriculture there? We have to discuss all these issues regarding the environment. Why are environmental impact assessments and social impact assessments being done after licensing and not before? This is what is going on. Related to licensing, why is it that it is not NEMA which is doing these assessments but private companies funded by those oil companies? Some of these issues –

We have not seen anywhere proposals or discussions about oil spillage and management of oil spillage. Let us not be fooled, honourable members. Oil spillage is almost as obvious as anything. It has happened. There is nowhere in the world where it has not happened where oil is being extracted. Let us not be fooled. Who is going to manage this? How are we prepared to do that? 

On issues of cost, these are issues which are not raised. What happens if a company goes for foreclosure? What happens if a company decides to be liquidated? What happens if a licence of a company is cancelled? Who is going to be responsible for the waste generated and for the commissioning? These are things we need to come up with before we go to the crux of this. Thank you.

MR WERIKHE: Thank you for giving way, my colleague. Some of these issues are well articulated in the report, even in the proposed amendments. If we cared to go through the committee stage, you will realise that many of these issues are covered but I think we are really – (Interjections) - a good number of them. 

I plead with the honourable colleagues that if issues are not adequately covered, let us see how we get to the committee stage and we -(Interjection)-  That is why we are here. This law is for the people of Uganda. Let us make a good law. If we stop at the report, we may not be able to cover ground in order to make the proposed amendments, which are going to make this law as palatable as possible. So, I am pleading with you, honourable colleagues, let us move on. Let us get to the committee stage and we can even recommit many issues.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister for Lands respond to the issues, which were raised? Please go straight to the issues members raised. No preambles. 

MR DAUDI MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, you know I was associated with this sector as a Member of Parliament and minister; I thought I also had a duty to make a few comments before I respond and I want to thank you for having allowed me. 

Madam Speaker, there were many issues raised in regard to land. Yes, I took note of the observation made by hon. Dr Kasirivu Atwooki in regard to the Ruth Mukama Report. Ruth Mukama produced a very good report covering many issues in the Bunyoro area and land is just one of them. I want to assure my colleague, hon. Kasirivu, who was also Minister of Lands, that I will be consulting him on issues of land in Bunyoro and see to it that the good points brought out in the Ruth Mukama Report can be implemented.

I want to assure Members that land in the oil area is only being leased for a specified number of years. We can provide documentary evidence to that effect. The companies are not being given freehold titles on this land. Twenty-nine years, 49 years - those are the lease offers which these people who are operating in this area are getting. 

There is also the issue of agriculture. Agriculture will continue taking place in the Albertine Graben. I want to assure Members that though it is true these are oil producing areas or there is good oil in these areas, this oil is underground and a myriad of activities can take place on top of the areas where the oil is. You need only a small area in order to be in a position to extract that oil from underground. So, in our planning, much as we are taking into account the production, refinery and pipeline areas and so on, the bulk of the land will remain for other activities such as agriculture, tourism and so on. 

Madam Speaker, I was required to explain how land will be acquired. Acquisition of land will be in accordance with our law; for example, Government is in the process of acquiring land in the planned refinery development area of Buseruka Sub County in Hoima District. A resettlement action plan has been produced and has got to be followed. This determines who the owner of the land is. We also carry out sensitisation in regard to the acquisition process, in regard to what is going to be done, the various mitigations that are going to be put in place so that those in the neighbourhood are not affected by the activities of the oil industry, and other activities that Government intends to undertake in that area. A survey of the land is also undertaken, valuation of the land is undertaken for these various pieces of land and recommendations are made in regard to those various activities over which the resettlement action plan has been carried out. All this is being done in all the areas where oil production is going to take place. 

There are issues of compensation, particularly the rates being given. The compensation rates are determined by the district land boards and approved by the Chief Government Valuer. Oil companies are required to use the approved rates and have local leaders, petroleum companies and the oil production department monitoring this exercise. It is true we are having a problem; some of the rates, which the districts have set, appear to be low when you take inflation into account. However, we are trying to see how this can be professionally addressed. 

We have also had a problem where compensation is not paid instantly and by the time compensation is paid, the parity that has been set as valuation cannot be easily realised. This is a problem and we are trying to deal with it as Government under the chair of the Prime Minister – (Interruption)

MR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, from my recollection, the figures that are provided by these land boards are for crops and not land. Those who go there to value land actually give the values of the crops and do not take cognisance of the land; that is why there is a problem. Land should be valued differently and the crops that are on it should also be valued differently. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for letting me seek this clarification. Our concern in regard to resettlement, including the team from UWOPA, is that if you carry out resettlement and compensation the way you are doing, within the next three or four years, you are going to run into a situation where there will be so many landless people yet they were compensated. We are thinking about the recognition that was made when the Land Act was amended to provide for matters of co-ownership. I do not think it was just co-ownership in matters of the worth of the land but in matters of the livelihood. Honourable chairman, I would be happy if you let the minister listen to me; thank you very much. 

I think that the spirit in the amendment of the Land Act had to do with livelihood rather than the value or the worth of the land that this woman and children were sharing. I think it was for this family to continue to have sustained livelihood when a decision is made in regard to their land. Now, what is happening in the areas where you are compensating? You get a few local council people and those from the district and they set the rates with the men, who own the land, then they walk to the neighbouring bar and they rent a house in town. Where are all those women and children going to go? 

We hoped that Government would play a central role in matters of compensation, to the extent of ensuring that land is acquired in bulk somewhere so that some of these people are compensated materially, in terms of land, so that their families and the orphans have somewhere to go. Now you have left it to the business of anybody. We are very worried, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issues you are raising can be raised by amendment. When we reach that stage, you can stand up and say, this is want we want - “Ring-fence land elsewhere for these people”. It can get into the law. That is how we got co-ownership in the Land Act; we had to struggle for it and to ensure that it went into the law. 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The concerns being raised by members are being actually attended to because traditionally, land is owned by men. When our teams go on the ground, family issues are going to be addressed so that men do not get money and simply disappear from their families. There should be consent from the wife and consent from members of the family. We know that this is a very explosive issue at the end of the day, if you do not attend to it. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, we would be very happy if you put that into this Bill.

MR MIGEREKO: Fine, we have no problem with it. I also want to assure members – (Interruption).

MR TODWONG: Madam Speaker, unlike Bunyoro, the oil in Nwoya is in the park but my people who are bordering the park are being faced with serious danger from land grabbers. Even government land within such a boundary is being issued out in such a manner that I do not know if Government is aware of. Already, Uganda Railways Corporation land has been leased out to business people. Land that was initially occupied by my people has been issued out without consultation from them. The district has written for clarification and up to now we have not got any information, yet there are already investors on this land that we do not know and they have evicted people.

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Lands. How are we going to help the people who are being evicted by investors who have been sent through individuals in Government?

Two, Tullow Oil, before they sold their shares in Nwoya to Total, had during this exercise used an area in Pabit Parish in Purongo Sub-County for dumping. As I speak now, a lot of oil waste has been dumped in my area. We went to Total but they have denied responsibility. We tried to follow Tullow but they are saying that they have sold their share in that area. So we are held up with that dangerous item and anybody can verify with my people. We do not know who should help us with this and I pray that my people should be rescued as soon as possible.

THE SPEAKER: I hope that the Minister for Environment has captured that. It was also raised by hon. Jalia Bintu that there is already waste. We need to address this. I do not think it is being degenerated; it is just there affecting the ecology, gardens and the water sources.

MR WERIKHE: Let me help. As a committee, we did actually raise some of these critical issues, especially on the environment. We interfaced with various groups, including NEMA and wildlife. 

In our report, we actually recommend strongly that there will be need to revive the current laws pertaining to managing the environment, and probably even wildlife, to make sure that tourism is heavily protected. Short of that, even if we debated endlessly, there is no way we can effect change – (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: I was reluctant to rise on a point of order particularly against a colleague and an ally. However, when he states that even if we debate over and over, there is nothing we can do, well aware that it is the prime duty, role and function of Parliament to debate - if this Parliament cannot debate and address such matters of national importance, how else are we going to address these issues? We are aware that it is through debate that we generate consensus and we come to inform policy.

The matter on our hands is that there is already littering of waste in the open. What the member has not talked about is that even the animals like elephants, due to the seismic tests, are running out of the park and they are on their way to their old routes into Sudan. This is a fact. It is a fact that wild animals and habitat are already falling into the waste. 

Now, is the honourable member in order to state that even if we debate over and over, we have no way forward, and yet it is the prime duty, it is our cardinal role as Parliament, to legislate for the wellbeing, good order, progress and development of this country? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, making laws and taking the interest of our people is our responsibility. So there should be no one to think that we should stop talking. We shall talk until we solve the problems.

I want to encourage the Members to stay here throughout, even at committee stage, so that any matter you feel has not been addressed by the report or through the debate, you jump up and add something. Let us do that. Please finalise.

MR MIGEREKO: Hon. Kasirivu has raised a pertinent point in regard to the value attached to land. We are discussing this within Government so that we can be in a position to provide the necessary policy guidance, so that our people do not lose value for nothing. 

We are also pursuing a policy whereby when people are affected through such developments, we can resettle them by getting them alternative land and developing the necessary shelter and other amenities for them. My ministry is working on this, and you will be seeing some work that I will be doing in Karuma, Buvuma and also in the Albertine Graben. 

The view that we now hold is that the traditional pattern of settlement can no longer be sustained in light of the exponential population growth that the country is experiencing. We need to come up with a clear urbanisation programme so that when people leave the rural areas, they have proper settlement places in form of apartments, well planned areas where they stay without necessarily having to occupy so much space but having other areas of engagement that can permit them to survive within urban areas. I am sure we shall be sharing this programme with Parliament at an opportune moment.

There were issues of land grabbing and speculation that were raised here on the Floor. These are issues of serious concern to Government. As a result of that, at some stage Government was forced to provide administrative orders to stop the issuance of land titles in the Albertine Graben. This is because there was an influx of people from Kampala and all sorts of areas ready to take advantage of the local people and acquire land in the oil producing areas. We shall be reviewing this so that the pressure we are currently faced with in regard to issuance of land titles in these areas, particularly by the local people, can be attended to. 

There are other issues that we should be in position to deal with at the committee stage. In my view, I have tried to respond to some of these issues in a manner that leaves all of us well informed in regards to how we are attending to land and physical planning issues in regard to the oil producing areas. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you, Minister. In respect to Purongo, the Minister for Environment, I think it is not fair that nobody owns the waste. I think it is dangerous for our people. Can we task you to find out who has the responsibility to remove that waste and report to this House because it cannot be that everybody does not know who brought it and is responsible for removing it.

MR MIGEREKO: I wanted to give information –

THE SPEAKER: On Purongo?

MR MIGEREKO: On the issue of waste. There is an inter-ministerial committee that regularly meets with oil companies and one of the things that we are dealing with in our meetings is to make sure that we clear such issues. One of the problems we have had in regard to waste management is that the capacity to clear oil waste arising out of the oil production programme is being developed and companies are just being licensed and they are bringing in equipment right now.

I am sure that the ministers for environment and energy will be in position to come here and speak authoritatively on the programme of clearing waste from all these areas. I am sure that by then, the companies will have been licensed and would have become operational and started to work on the oil waste from all these areas. They are a point of major concern to Government. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is a government assurance. Let us hear from the Minister for Works.

6.52
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): I thank you, Madam Speaker. There were issues touching my sector. In conjunction with the stakeholders involved, my ministry has already identified and prioritised the roads to be worked on. As I speak now, Hoima-Kaiso Tonya is being tarmacked. Those of you who read adverts will also know that there are some roads among those that are going to be handled under contract financing. We are expecting the expression of interests submitted back to us by the 8th of October. I am also glad to report, Madam Speaker, that when we are working on these roads we carry out an environmental impact assessment and we strictly follow it to the dot.

The other issue that my ministry is handling are the pipelines, which will be carrying oil from the wells to the refinery. We are also working on the aerodrome, which is likely to be built in Kabale under a PPP. My sector has already assisted in getting the best site for it. This is going to be an aerodrome with over three kilometres of runway. We are working on it, and it is necessary for the importation of the heavy equipment to be used in the refinery; they are so heavy and may damage our roads if brought in by road.

My sector is also handling the railway, just in case there emerges a need to use it. Government, together with RVR, is going to start on the rehabilitation of the line from Tororo to Pakwach. We will also work on the landing site.

We are also handling the water transport. In Lake Albert, unknown to many of you, there are some spikes that were put there by the colonialists to defend Uganda from the Germans who were in DRC then. We are looking for ways to remove them – (Interjections) – Yes, they were put there to protect Uganda from the Belgians. We are also working on the water transport along River Nile.

In brief, that is what is my sector is handling. As you have been told, there is an inter-ministerial and technical committee on the Albertine area, which regularly meets; they also met today. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Does the Attorney-General wish to respond on anything?

6.55
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I have just one or two things to say. The two reports of the committee are very commendable and the contributions are fantastic.

Sometime back, when we were passing the Companies Act, you were in the Chair. At one point in that process, it had to be deferred because of one simple thing – there was total opposition to the concept of a one-man or one-woman company. The Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee had to travel extensively to be convinced that that would be workable and tenable under modern times. They came back with the agreement that, yes that was the way to go. That is how the Bill got to be passed into law. 

So, all the time, modern technology innovations and modern competition in the areas of mobile investments expose us to so many challenges, which we have got to come to terms with. Why do I say that? I have seen in the committee something to the effect that the concept of international arbitration is alien and should not be tolerated, that we should apply our laws within our jurisdictions and so on. I find it very difficult to sustain that. So, I want to ask my colleagues to go and reflect on it before we come to the committee stage. 

Arbitration essentially arises in the context of international contracts. People compete for these mobile investments. If you do not actually attract them under certain international norms, they will go to our neighbours or somewhere else. We may not have the capacity here – for instance, in our local investors - to invest in these very huge and expensive projects. 

Essentially, the practice of international arbitration has developed so as to allow parties from different legal and cultural backgrounds to resolve their disputes, generally without the formats of their respective legal systems. The reason is normally to avoid the uncertainties and local practices associated with litigation in national courts, the need to obtain a quicker and more efficient decision, relative enforcement of arbitration agreements and arbitral awards, the commercial expertise of arbitrators that may not even be available locally, the parties’ freedom to select and design the arbitral procedures, confidentiality and other benefits. So, Madam Speaker, as we get into the committee stage, I would like to move that we reflect a little bit more on that. 

Secondly, this is in respect of our institutional set up; I have heard – and by the way, I agree with you because if you do not question those practices, who would actually question them. You talk about the excessive powers of the minister and so on but at the same time you have got to be mindful of the fact that, for instance, Parliament has to play an oversight function. If, for example, Parliament gets involved in licensing or the implementation of these projects, how are we going to audit them? We are supposed to be watchdogs.

As Parliament, we should be mindful of ensuring how best we can strengthen those institutions by giving them the necessary expertise to do what they are supposed to do transparently and to our satisfaction. That should be the challenge, but not to say that Parliament should actually do it.

Finally – (Interruptions)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Attorney-General. I think we seem to be on the same page. Our intention is not really to be at the operating stage but to legislate, to create an institutional framework and a conducive environment within which the oil business can be conducted. Indeed, we cannot refrain from our cardinal role of oversight. 

However, the issue we are raising as Parliament is that despite the good intentions that you seem to exhibit, our concern is that as we legislate, already harm is underway or is already being done. As we try to put a legal framework in place, the environment is being degraded and destroyed. Our fauna and flora is in danger to the extent that we shall be really arm strung to appear to be legislating retrospectively. That is why in our resolutions made last year, we called on you, Government, to halt until we get the necessary legal framework to enable you proceed so that the country is protected. We wanted to be exactly on the same page with Government.
 
However, what is happening on ground is that activities are already taking place ahead of the legal framework. We are now in a dilemma. What do you want us to do? The environment is being degraded, the contracts are being signed and the tests are being carried out, and there is land grabbing and so on. Can you please help us to be on the same page with you, to walk the talk? If you want Parliament to remain in its position, enable us to remain in that position rather than appearing to react to the damage that is already being caused. That is my position, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe I could ask the Attorney-General; when we had the oil debate, one of the things the government agreed to do was to join the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). I think if you had done that, a lot of things would be in the open by now. Can we know when you are going to join the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative?

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I can give information on that. As we explained earlier on, joining the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative is already enshrined in our national policy. What we have done is to ensure that the principles upon which EITI is formed are actually enshrined in the law. So, many of these clauses that are in the Bill are based on the principles upon which EITI has been formed. Once we finish these laws, we are going to join EITI. There is no problem with joining EITI.

Further to that, if I can clarify on the issue that hon. Ssekikubo brought up on operating without existing laws. We all appreciate that there is an existing law but we appreciated that it is inadequate given the new developments. That is why we are here, so that we can make better laws.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the environment, when Heritage sold its shares to Tullow, Tullow recently sold part of its shares to CNOCC and Total. Now, the area which hon. Todwong is talking about has been taken over by Total. When Total bought the shares, it took on both the assets and the liabilities and it is in the process of making good what has been –(Interjections)- They took on; they are not refusing. They cannot as there are heavy penalties. Madam Speaker, that is the clarification I wanted to give.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I am very happy that hon. Ssekikubo said we are on the same page. It may be the method of reading or writing that may not be in harmony, and I think we can do that, but I am happy he said we are on the same page and I concur.

Finally, my sister and friend, hon. Betty Anywar, always talks of halting the process until we put this and that in place. I do not know when you will ever draw the line that now we are there, we can proceed. It is a difficult challenge because this law, which is being repealed, the Petroleum Exploration and Production Act, Cap 150, was drafted when I had just joined the Ministry of Justice as a state attorney in the drafting department. It was drafted by a gentleman by the names of John Gara. From there, he went to UNCTAD, UN, Commonwealth, and now he is the Executive Director of the Rwanda Development Corporation.

By that time, what we were doing and what we were actually trying to exploit was just a dream but here we are now. My advice is that we do not have a vacuum, and I can tell you that even if we make these laws as we are doing, very soon we shall be here either amending or adding more laws. This is a legislative law making process. It will not end today or tomorrow. Our children will come here and they will still amend the laws on petroleum but let the process continue. That is my advice. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a lot of issues have been raised for the Minister of Energy so we want to give her time to organise her responses. Since we have heard from the other policy makers, I want to adjourn to Tuesday next week so that the minister responds and then we go to committee stage.

May I ask Members to read the report on production and exploration because that is what we are going to start with. Also, look at the amendments and if you have some proposals, please ask the clerk to help you draft them so that your issues can be addressed. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.08 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 25 September 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
