

Wednesday, 21 September 2016

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, today at 3 O’clock we will proceed under Rule 34 to the Prime Minister’s Question Time. When that time comes, you will raise the policy issues that you need to raise to the Prime Minister. For now, we shall go straight to the Order Paper. Thank you.

2.04
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 45 (1) on a matter of national importance. This matter concerns the continued loss of people’s lives and properties to wild animals in my constituency, areas like Kasese and Rubirizi, among others, that share borders with national parks.

Mr Speaker, while I appreciate the benefits of national parks in terms of contributing revenue to our national economy, I am concerned that the same wild animals that contribute that money to our national economy have also continued to kill our people, and to destroy their property. Just this year alone, in my constituency, we have lost more than five people. One of them was torn into pieces by a hippopotamus, two of them were killed by elephants and others lost their lives to lions. Also, the crops of these communities that share borders with the national parks continue to be destroyed on a daily basis.

Mr Speaker, our people are living in fear and I think they should not continue to live like that or even lose their property. The only way our people can protect themselves when these animals attack them is by drumming. They spend a lot of time outside drumming and clapping to scare the animals. However, when the animals see them, they attack them even more. A majority of them spend sleepless nights and they cannot even attend to their gardens any more.

Mr Speaker, this is a very worrying situation and our communities cannot and should not continue to live like, this while our Government looks on. I pray that the minister concerned and Government urgently provide a system of compensation to all Ugandans who lost their property and dear ones. 

Government should also institute a system of fencing off the national parks, because this is the only way that our people can be protected. The families which I have mentioned, and which have just lost their dear ones, should urgently be compensated so that their livelihoods can be restored.

Mr Speaker, I humbly beg to submit, and I thank you very much.

2.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by passing on condolences to those people whose loved ones lost their lives. 

Secondly, regarding border demarcation, which I think can offer a lasting solution to this problem, the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, during hon. Maria Mutagamba’s time had started the process of demarcating and marking the borders. She had a budget whose figure I cannot remember right now –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Demarcating or fencing?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Both; there is demarcation because in some areas the communities are claiming parts of the land that belong to national parks. So, we need that opening up of the borders, clear demarcation and then fencing –(Interruption) 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, honourable Government Chief Whip, for giving me this opportunity to inform you. I sit on the finance, planning and economic development committee and I know the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can bear witness that, there was some money passed to help the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to dig trenches. I remember the matter was brought up here by hon. Lilly Adong and other members of Parliament who border national parks.

Mr Speaker, when these complaints came up, – Agago District is one of those that were affected - Parliament actually agreed that we give money to some districts. This is because Government said it is very expensive to fence at once. Parliament and Government agreed that they would do trenching for the time being. That is the information I wanted to give.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes, I was going to come to trenching because it was done in some parts of the country like in Kasese. However, I remember the minister reported that the elephants had developed a method of filling the trenches and going round looking for food. Therefore, this is a process. Mr Speaker, what I can do is to liaise with the ministry and find out what they have in place to cure the problem.

Regarding compensation, that is a process in itself. You cannot expect Government to immediately compensate without doing investigations. After doing investigations, probably the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, because he is the one in charge of compensation, - like the word goes - will come and tell us whether those people qualify to be compensated.

However, what we can do in the meantime is to see which kind of support we can give to the communities whose crops have been destroyed by these animals. This can be done through the Office of the Prime Minister, probably –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you. Mr Speaker, in the Eighth and Ninth Parliaments, a lot was said about damage caused to the people by the wild animals that we protect. How long should the compensation take? Can you clearly come out with a timeframe? 

Recently, a person was killed in Gulu by a hippopotamus, which came from the park. So, we need the timeframe clearly spelt out to our people because we keep on saying it is a process. Give a timeframe to that process. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Chief Whip, I would like to give you information regarding the matter raised by hon. Betty Aol Ochan. 

The fact is that, we do not have any clear policy that guides compensation of people, whose crops and lives are lost due to actions by animals. We do not have any policy and guidelines that permit Government to do such compensation. A question was asked in the Ninth Parliament in that regard and indeed, the minister then, Agnes Akiror, informed this Parliament that there is nothing like compensation, and we require a law or policy that guides Government to start such compensation.

Perhaps, what districts could do is to make use of that money they get. There is some money called “revenue sharing”, which is given to districts for that purpose. That is what some districts have done. Otherwise, as we speak, there is nothing; so we request that Government comes up with a policy that provides for compensation in case of such loss. 

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, thank you for allowing me to give this information. I remember in the Ninth Parliament, we travelled to Katwe-Kabatoro and we were told by the community that, annually, over ten children are eaten by crocodiles when they go to fetch water. We had gone there as the water forum. 

Actually, the revenue collection that is supposed to be shared by the communities neighbouring the game parks, is not remitted and yet that is supposed to act as compensation to such families. There is no clear policy in place to ensure this money is utilised by the communities neighbouring the game parks. This has continued to affect the neighbouring communities, and people are dying silently.

In the previous Parliament, we debated this particular issue, and now, it is high time we took this as a serious matter and pronounced ourselves on it, so that there is a solution.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much. I would like to add some information. You realise that Lira does not border any game park, but animals still sneak into the district. Although there is some money that is sent to the districts and subcounties, which could be used for compensating people for such losses, Lira does not get such money.

Just last year, a leopard sneaked from wherever and wounded three of my people. When I reported to the then Minister of Tourism, she said we should compile the bills and bring them. However, this was somebody who was treated at the regional referral hospital where there are no charges. These people are wounded and they still have the scars; how do we claim for such money? We feel there should be a clear policy on such issues, so that when animals sneak into our gardens or wound our people, Government takes responsibility. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the Members who have contributed to this debate. This rotates around the policy on compensation – Is there a policy that can guide the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to compensate? I had indicated to you that compensation is a process, and that process also involves interrogating the existing legislation.

Therefore, I come to my point that I will liaise with the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to see how we can save our people and animals, because we need them both. I cannot promise that we can compensate immediately, like the honourable member has said. However, the Office of the Prime Minister can come in to help, in terms of offering assistance to the families that have lost their crops. I will liaise with the Minister of Disaster Preparedness.

2.22
MS SYLVIA RWABWOGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. 

In Kabarole, there has been violence. I believe you have been watching it in the media and other reports. The violence there is likely to turn into a serious tribal conflict. On 13th September, four civilians and four policemen were murdered in cold blood at Bukara. Four other policemen sustained serious injuries and are being treated at Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital.

The incident originated from a small conflict between a Mutoro and a Mukonzo. However, it is likely to become tribal, and yet, it is originating from a militia group, which has been training in the region and are believed to be called the “Royal Guards”. The same group is connected to another group called Kirumira Mutima Militia.

Mr Speaker, the people of Kabonero sub-county in Bunyangabo County walk 20 kilometres to access a police post, which is situated at Kibiito sub-county; from this point of Kabonero sub-county. There is no detach in the vicinity of Mt Rwenzori and some people were displaced after this incidence. Although the police have responded to this violence, the people are still living in fear, because it is likely to become a tribal conflict, since the origin of the problem was between people of two different tribes.

Mr Speaker, there is a force which is operating parallel to the other forces in Uganda. The Royal Guards have been causing problems and actually violating human rights in most of the cultural institutions, including Toro Kingdom and the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu. There is this group which is notorious and is causing violence in the region. 

Mr Speaker, I would like the Government to pay attention to the following –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, we are Members of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, and we represent the people of Uganda, not just mere constituencies. It would be fair that if you are a Member of Parliament, before you report about anything here on the Floor, you do thorough groundwork, so that the information you come and present here is not contested.

This is the situation, Mr Speaker: On Eid day, one man, who happened to be a Mutoro, went to the mountains and was found in the house of a Mukonzo trying to rape his wife. When the neighbours found him red-handed, they took him to the police and left him there. After the complainants had left, the police released the suspect. When they released this man, he rushed to another police station and alleged that the Bakonzo had fought him in the mountains.

The police, without even linking up with the other police post which should have detained this guy, went straight to the community to hold a meeting with them, but actually, they went to arrest the people. The people who had taken this gentleman to the police saw him coming with armed people to try and arrest them. Therefore, these people resisted the arrest and that is where the scuffle started -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of order.

MR NZOGHU: The point of order I would like to raise is: Is it in order for the honourable member to give false information to this Parliament, when she is aware that she has not mentioned the origin of the problem? She is misguiding this House that it is a tribal issue involving a militia group, yet, this is a person who wanted to rape the wife of a Mukonzo and they resisted him. Is she in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a set of facts have been articulated by the member for Kabarole District; another set of facts have been raised by the member for Busongora North as a point of order, but giving information. The information is now clashing and the Speaker is not privy to any of this information. I cannot rule on the point of order. I can only see that this matter might not be resolved one way or the other. However, I would like the Government Chief Whip to say something on that, once you finish. Please, finish.

MS RWABWOGO: First of all, I did not say that there is a tribal conflict - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, just finish your issue. 

MS RWABWOGO: Okay, I did not say there is a tribal conflict, but it is likely to ensue because the two sides are now clashing. I attended a meeting with the police and the Assistant Inspector General of Police (AIGP). The Inspector General of Police (IGP) has also been in Fort Portal. I have a police report on all the incidents - how they started, how six people have died in the conflict and how this is likely to cause a bigger problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now you can see that both of you have conflicting information; the other one has information about rape. We need to bring it all together.

MS RWABWOGO: I am the area Member of Parliament, Mr Speaker. I am more informed and I have been in the meetings. I am calling for the attention of Government to this national problem, because security personnel need to be deployed on Mountain Rwenzori to avoid bloodshed in future. These very attacks are like the attacks that we had in Bundibugyo and Kasese in the past, because that is how they started and escalated into bloodshed.

Serious investigations also must be done to establish the intention of the Royal Guards that are being trained in Kabarole. They have been seen carrying knives and other weapons. 

There’s need for local councils to be elected. People do not get quick attention from the authorities and not they end up taking the law in their hands.

Urgent relief must also be identified for the people whose houses were burnt down. Also, to protect Uganda from an eminent attack, we need a police –(Interruption) 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I think -   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, it is also okay to smile. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker; I can now smile. As Members of Parliament, we should strive to cause and strengthen the unity of Ugandans. That is our role as leaders. The area that she is talking about is just a few metres from my home. I am even closer to that area than she is. Most of the people she is talking about are my relatives. I even know the woman who was raped. 

Is it procedurally right for the honourable member to continue making insinuations that are baseless and not researched, and yet, I gave information that she has not given on the Floor of the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The procedural point is that the Member rose on an urgent matter for the attention of the House, and the information she is giving does not seem to tally with what you know. There must be a way of resolving this. I was going to ask the Government Chief Whip, after she finishes, to make some comment on how we move forward on this matter.

MS RWABWOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your protection. I hope that the Member does not have a conflict of interest since these people are his relatives. I am not against anyone in this, because I represent the people of Kabarole and not any particular tribe.

Mr Speaker, we need protection on Mountain Rwenzori because we have had a number of clashes in recent times. We need a police post and a detach in this particular sub-county, and also along the mountains, to monitor the security, and to make sure that our sovereignty is not interfered with. Thank you.

2.32
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. The incident is indeed regrettable. Any incident which involves destruction of peace and loss of life cannot go without any attention from Government. As I speak, and as the Member has ably informed this House, Government is on the ground, because the Inspector General of Police is Government; he is on the ground right now and he has held meetings with the leaders. I am sure he is going to act, especially on the need to do further deployment of security. 

However, I will also make sure that I get in touch with my colleague in the Ministry of Internal Affairs, to crosscheck and inform him that the matter needs very urgent attention. I am sure investigations have started. I know this from the experience I garnered when I was Minister of State for Defence. Whenever an incident happens, if it is multi-sectoral like now, we may need the assistance of UPDF because they have a brigade, the Alpine Brigade, which is suitable for mountainous terrain. Therefore, we straightaway instruct for investigations, and I am sure the minister will come to this House to tell us what they have done.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Government Chief Whip has said investigations into the matter have started. I listened carefully to hon. Rwabwogo. She said that she had a document that she was referring to, with facts about the case including the role of what she called the Royal Guards. Hon. Nzoghu was contesting those facts. However, hon. Rwabwogo has a document which could assist in the investigations. Procedurally, should she not be required to lay it on the Table?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Member is not confident of the authenticity of the document and that is why she has not requested to lay it on the Table. Let us not force documents on the record of Parliament, which we are not sure of. She might be having just reference notes that she prepared. We are not sure what it is. Therefore, I cannot ask her to lay it on the Table; I do not know what it is. 

The Member says the Deputy IGP and the IGP were there; therefore, we expect some action to be taken and some reports compiled and the House can be briefed at an appropriate time about what is going on. Thank you.

2.35
MR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira East County, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

This morning in the Daily Monitor, there was a screaming headline to the effect that Government admits that 80 per cent of teachers cannot read or count. I would like to quote from the above mentioned newspaper: “Eight out of every 10 primary school teachers, who qualified last year, can neither read nor solve basic primary-level mathematics questions according to a new Government evaluation, re-confirming a systematic decay in the quality of the country’s education. 

The Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB), which conducted the nationwide assessment, reported that tutors at primary teacher colleges were not any better. Less than 20 per cent of them could interpret graphs in similar exams, while only 5.7 per cent final-year students managed to pass.”

Mr Speaker, this is a very serious situation, which I believe this House would be extremely concerned about. When we are aspiring to ensure that we graduate as a country to that club of nations that are prosperous, stable and progressive, we should be having in this Parliament –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable member is referring to a newspaper; I thought he had gone a step ahead to investigate and get an official document of Government. Since when did our Rules of Procedure permit debate on a matter based on a newspaper article? Procedurally, should he continue? We should request him to bring some more authentic document.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Member who raised the matter said the Government admitted; it is a Government statement that it is true that 80 per cent of the teachers cannot read or count. Therefore, he is saying that it is a serious matter for this Parliament to consider. He may have used a newspaper, but that is what he is saying and we all read the newspapers.

MR MAGYEZI: With due respect, Mr Speaker, I totally take your guidance. However, he made the statement in reference to a newspaper article. He did not give an affirmation that this is a stand of Government, unless the Leader of Government Business can stand by that. The statement the honourable member read on the Floor was what was written in the newspaper. Mr Speaker, do we entertain discussions based on a newspaper article? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question is, are newspapers a source of information?

MR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling. I brought this matter to the attention of the House, and for the minister to come out and refute what the newspaper wrote about -(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give is very suspicious. About three to four days ago, on the front page of the New Vision newspaper, they said that 40,000 teachers had not received their salaries for the last two months. I think that such information is urgent and raises issues of national concern. 

However, I would not like to believe the authenticity of this information because when we were growing up, joining PTCs was for failures, but now people who are admitted to become teachers are those who passed with second grade. It is now a question of choice and merit. The information I would like to give is, I hope these findings are not diversionary – diverting us from what is owed to the teachers by Government. 

One, Government should pay teachers their two months’ salary. Two, we can then question the credibility of such information that a teacher cannot read and count. Maybe we need to rethink education, just like we had a workshop in France about rethinking education. Otherwise, the thematic system is destroying us and that should be a wakeup call.

MR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, that is diversionary information. (Laughter) What I thought should come to the attention of the Members is that this matter should be investigated by the appropriate authorities because it is important. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, is it true or not?

4.42
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, it is true that our teachers were found wanting in the areas of arithmetic and English. It was found out because Government introduced a programme to give teachers exams and this is when it was discovered.

What the Ministry of Education is doing now is ensuring that there are programmes that assist the teachers who are already teaching to improve. I am not in a position to give the details of the programme but the Minister of Education informed Cabinet that they have a programme, which is targeting the teachers, so that they can improve –(Interjections)– We are not talking about small numbers –(Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think that it is important that this House only entertains information that can easily be verified. The reason is, the minister is more or less telling us a story. This House should never at any one time allow storytelling. I would be interested in the minister making a citation over an article, because her submission can be interpreted to mean “rumours”. I expected probably a research or study which was sanctioned.

Secondly, concerning the tools and methodology and the findings –(Interjections) - Mr Speaker, if she is not in position to do so, I would rather, procedurally, that you rule, if you can, -(Laughter)– rule her out of order because there has to be information that we can quote in terms of articles. If it is an article, Mr Speaker, it has to be a reviewed article and not storytelling. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Bukonjo West, I will rule whether you let me or not. I think this matter was not included on the Order Paper but came up as an urgent matter. To expect the minister to come here, especially when she is not the docket minister, with statistics, methodology reports and all the professorial things that go with it might be a tall order for this House to ask of her right now. 

I think that she is just giving preliminary information about what took place in Cabinet. A report was given to Cabinet concerning this matter and this is what she was briefing the House about. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Concerning the issue of 40,000 teachers who have not got their salaries, I direct the Minister of Finance to come to the House now and tell us why the teachers have not got their salaries, if at all that is true, because it was quoted again in the New Vision newspaper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since you have directed the Minister of Finance to come now, can the minister come to the Floor and answer?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: The reason as to why I said that the minister should come now is because he was seated next to me and he told me that he was going out shortly. Now that we have screens, I was communicating to him so that he stops whatever he is doing and comes and answers the questions being raised by Members. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, we will expect a brief response from the minister on that subject.

2.47
MR GUTOMOI ABACANON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter of national importance. 

During the past war in northern Uganda, Lango sub-region lost over one million head of cattle and also over one million goats and sheep. They took Government to court through their lawyers, Bashasha and Company Advocates, and Kibwanga and Company Advocates. They won the case. The concern now is: when will Government pay these war victims and beneficiaries or how soon will payment be made available to them? This is because most of them are elderly people - Mr Speaker, last Monday -(Interruption)

MR AKOL: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The situation the Member has brought to the House is not only in Lango sub-region; the issue is the same in Acholi sub-region. To date, my people have been coming for meetings and despite the intervention of the Ministry of Justice, everything has failed. To date, no payment has been made to the people of northern Uganda. 

Unfortunately, if you read yesterday’s newspapers, the highest poverty stricken area in Uganda is the north, and that is partly due to the cattle that we lost to the NRA. This is an important issue that I would like to bring to the attention of the House. Thank you. 

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you, honourable colleague, but I was still going to add that too. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to what happened on Monday, 19 September, when the war claimants decided to take a group of people called Lango Reparations Agency Limited, headed by former Member of Parliament, hon. Krispus Ayena, to court. That organisation was started and it has about 50 members. According to the court, the first respondent is the Attorney-General and the second respondents are about 22 people, who include two Members of Parliament - hon. Betty Amongi and Col Innocent Oula. 

These people started this organisation to ensure that when payment is effected, it is passed through their accounts and they are the ones to pay the war claimants. The people in the local communities under the leadership of Akello Betty and Bashasha and Company Advocates are saying no to the new organisation and method –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the urgent matter?

MR GUTOMOI: The urgent matter is: when are the war claimants going to be paid? They would like to know because some of them are dying without receiving their benefits. What is wrong with Government or the Attorney-General; why should they allow another body to be paid so that the affected people access their money through them? What is wrong with Government paying them directly through their accounts?

I am glad to see the Vice-President in the House because the war claimants are expecting the President to meet and assure them about what is happening. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.        
   
MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Every financial year, Shs 5 billion is allocated to the Office of the Prime Minister for restocking in Northern Uganda. I thought that that is inclusive of the programme; to target the people who lost cattle. However, we will have to revisit the programme and see where this money is allocated every financial year.

Regarding contracting of another body to pay, that will require me to liaise with the minister in charge, and get back to you as soon as possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. It is 10 minutes to Prime Minister’s Question Time, and usually, he would be here by this time.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural point. Yesterday, NTV showed how our animals are dying in Lake Mburo National Park. Some of the most beautiful animals that I admire are antelopes and I saw them lie lifeless. I am one of the animal rights activists, and self-proclaimed at that. I also saw zebras, beautiful zebras - most women are now wearing zebra print clothes in Kampala. 

Mr Speaker, if possible, I request that you rule that the Government Chief Whip asks the line minister to give us a concrete explanation on what is happening in Lake Mburo and tell us how many animals have died. Secondly, how many are in immense danger or suffering death soon – (Interruption)

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I was planning to bring that up as a matter of national importance. 

Lake Mburo National Park has open access to pastoralists who graze their cows in the national park and they compete for pasture and water with our wildlife. This is happening as our wild animals are dying in the national park. Government should act swiftly to ensure that if those pastoralists grazing cattle in the park were granted permission, they should be withdrawn from the national park. Otherwise, we will lose that park.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, honourable member. Mr Speaker, the third point that Government should be informing us on is the gravity of the drought that is killing these animals. Can it be contained or not? Why specifically Lake Mburo and yet Rwenzori National Park is closer -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a procedural point and now you are debating and accepting information. Is it still a procedural matter? 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, it is a procedural matter that needed some concrete preamble and it is a national concern. (Laughter) Thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, I think this matter is very current and there is probably something you can say about that. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will definitely instruct the minister in charge to come over and give some clarification. However, I know for a fact that there is no group that was allowed to graze their animals in the national park, so they are doing it illegally. Our laws do not allow that. You are right, honourable member, that we need a statement to inform us of the gravity of the matter. Anything concerning our tourism - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the minister here? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: If the minister was here, he would be standing up to come here and help us. I thought when I instruct, they come quickly.

2.58
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. Yes, there has been drought across the country. In fact, it is not only in Uganda but the situation runs across the entire East African Region and this affects wildlife grazing as it affects livestock generally. 

I can promise to give details of the degree of gravity of the situation, and I can give you a written statement, instead of an imprompu response, as I have done. However, I can say right here and now that the national parks are protected by law and no de-gazettement has been allowed. In practice, some animals also cross out of the game parks and graze in some farms neighbouring these national sites. In the same vein –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the minister prepares to bring that statement before this House, I would like him to also include the interventions that the ministry is undertaking. This is because they are already aware, as he has alluded to. Since he is not able to provide the information now, let him ensure that it is provided in that response. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: I intended to do that anyway. If I am going to come to this House to address the situation, I should also give you the measures the ministry is taking to address the situation. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have teachers of Kyatoko Hillside High School represented by hon. Winifred Masiko, Rukungiri District. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) The notes only say hon. Winifred Masiko; I did not want to include something that I did not know about, but also hon. Roland –(Laughter)– That is for you to prove from that side. 

We also have pupils and teachers from Kalongo Girls Primary School represented by Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo and hon. Judith Franca Akello of Agago District. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

We also have students from Kampala University, Luweero campus, represented by engineer Lillian Nakate. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

Honourable members, it is just two minutes to Prime Minister’s Question Time and I do not see the Prime Minister here. I wonder what has happened, and I do not have any information on this. 

THE GOVERNMENMT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Apologies Sir, but I thought the information was forwarded to your office, that the Prime Minister travelled and Gen. Moses Ali is holding the portfolio. Much as we were ready, I think our rules do not allow us to represent the Prime Minister during the Prime Minister’s Question Time. The Prime Minister is not available, Sir. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, there were Members who had been advised to raise their matters with the Prime Minister - the member for Bulambuli District and also member for Nwoya County. I will now ask the member for Bulambuli District to raise the matter she intended to raise with the Prime Minister now, if she is here.

3.02
MS SARAH WEKOMBA (Independent, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister a question. The Ugandan borders have a problem, mostly with customs. I know that when you are clearing goods, it is mandatory to pay taxes. However, the borders have clearance firms owned by Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) staff, which keep the goods for more than three days, and yet, they are supposed to be cleared within three hours. They also charge them inspection fees of Shs 30,000, parking fees of Shs 50,000 and bond fees of Shs 50,000 per night. With parking fees, they part with Shs 130,000 per night. 

We are, therefore, finding it so hard. The goods being transported to the business premises are getting there late. I would like to know what you are doing to help the importers who are key in developing this country. Thank you. 

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, Rule 14 of our Rules of Procedure is about whips. The role of whips and party whips are clearly stipulated here. To save time, I would like to say that, there is a distinction between political party matters and Government matters. The matter of national importance raised here is a Government issue and not a party issue. 

Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa is a party whip. The Government here is made up of different parties such as UPC, DP, and NRM. She, therefore, is not a Government whip but she is the NRM party whip. Is it, therefore, in order –(Interjections)- Yes, there is a difference between a Government and a party. The Leader of Government Business is the Prime Minister, not the party whip. We also have a Vice-President who in the hierarchy is higher than the chief whip of Government. Is it in order for the party whip to masquerade here as a Government leader? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, “There shall be in Parliament a Government Chief Whip appointed by the Government from among Members of Parliament representing the ruling party.” The Government Chief Whip is a Cabinet Minister of Government who sits in Cabinet. 

We are talking about the Government Chief Whip who is appointed as a full Cabinet Minister and attends Cabinet. She is responsible for making sure that the attendance of the members of the party and also of the Cabinet is enforced in this House. I do not know who else I could call upon in circumstances like these, unless the Member for Obongi would like to help me to call him to answer some of these questions. Therefore, would you like to speak on the issue of the dying wild animals on Lake Mburo?  

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, the role of the party whip in this case is to bring the minister. If the minister is a party member, the party whip should bring him to speak here. The whip is not supposed to answer the questions for the Prime Minister. Rt Hon. Moses Ali is there; why don’t you bring him to answer?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is important that you listen to the Chair; it helps. I said that there were Members that I had advised to direct their questions to the Prime Minister when he comes during Prime Minister’s Question Time. Now that the Prime Minister is not here, I have asked them to raise them under urgent matters, because they were actually quite urgent, and they could have been easily addressed by the Prime Minister. The two Members were the honourable member for Bulambuli District and the honourable member for Nwoya District. 

We had agreed with them that their issues be directed to the Prime Minister. However, now that he is not here, I have used my prerogative, under the Rules of Procedure, to allow them to present them as urgent matters so that the ministers can deal with them directly because they are urgent, and we cannot wait for next week. I thought that I had that prerogative. (Laughter)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for inducting the honourable member, who probably missed the induction –(Interruption) 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am Fungaroo Kaps Hassan, Member of Parliament for Obongi Constituency, and a person who has been inducted here three times. The Rt Hon. Speaker, who is sitting in front of me, is one able person who has ever inducted me; he is here as a witness. Is it, therefore, in order for the Rt Hon– 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are making me feel as if I did not do a good job -(Laughter)- but let us proceed, please.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, goods are not supposed to delay to that extent at the customs. I was not aware that this is what is happening. Therefore, I promise to liaise with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that we check at our borders and harmonise. We will check to see whether the taxes that are being charged are in line with our law, and if they are not, that will be rectified with immediate effect.

3.11
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise issues of urgent public importance. At the beginning of this Parliament, the Woman Member of Parliament for Nwoya District raised an issue regarding human rights abuses, which are being carried out with the support of the UPDF, and they concern land wrangles. 

Unfortunately, the person commanding and deploying the UPDF is a civilian, who is well placed. We appreciate her position and we love her so much, unfortunately, she is abusing the privilege she has by deploying soldiers to destroy people’s property, burn huts and chase people from their land, covering averagely 15,000 acres. This person is not here to respond, but permit me to mention her name. She is Aber Harriet, the wife of our beloved in-law, Gen. Salim Saleh. 

When you directed the Minister of Lands to intervene in this conflict, she did her best in responding on time and gave a directive. She directed the RDC to head the committee instituted to sort out the matter. Unfortunately, when these people went on the ground, the well-placed, privileged lady, told them that none of them can talk to her. As I talk, from the other day up to now, the soldiers are actually terrorising the community, burning huts, destroying crops and nobody has taken any action.

Therefore, I would like to bring it to the attention of this House that, the people of Nwoya County, especially Nyamokino and Lungulu sub-counties, urgently need a timely response to this situation. It is actually reminding us of the situation of the LRA, which is very unfortunate; nobody would like to be reminded of those bad days. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit and call for a timely intervention to this crisis. Thank you. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, hon. Oyet, for raising this matter of urgent public interest – 

MR FUNGAROO: Honourable Speaker, I know that you know that I did not study law, but this does not make me an ignorant person about the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The rules are here and I would like to read them verbatim. Rule 14(1) reads, “There shall be in Parliament a Government Chief Whip appointed by the Government from among Members of Parliament representing the ruling party.” This is about appointment.

I would also like to read the roles and functions: “The role and functions of the Government Chief Whip is to ensure due attendance, participation in proceedings and voting in Parliament of Members of the ruling party” - to mobilise members of the ruling party. 

“The Government Chief Whip shall also perform such other functions as provided under Sub-Rule (10) of this Rule”- I am going to read them: “Other functions of the Government Chief Whip, Opposition Chief Whip and Party Whip shall include-  

(a) 	organising party business;
(b) 	keeping Members informed of Parliamentary Business…” - Members of his or her party.
“(c)	supplying lists of Members to serve on Standing and Sectoral Committees;
(d) 	co-operating with Whips in putting into effect and coordinating agreed parliamentary business;
(e)	acting as intermediaries between leaders and other party members;
(f) 	arranging representation of party members on official Parliamentary delegations.” These are party members. 

I know that the lawyers know the difference between a government and a party. We are operating by these Rules of Procedure, which we hold in our hands. Is it, therefore, right to insist that a party whip should continue answering questions directed to Government even when the Prime Minister is here? Is it in order, Mr Speaker? 

The Vice-President and the First Deputy Prime Minister are here; is it in order for a party whip to answer on behalf of the Government when the Leader of Government Business and the Vice-President are here? It is very clear that the whip does not have business other than Government. Which rules are we using? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes we come to this House from different situations, so we might import them to the House, which is unfortunate.

I said that the Government Chief Whip is a Cabinet minister and a Cabinet minister has schedules given to him or her by the appointing authority, besides the other operational things that might be in the rules that you have so eloquently read to us. It might have been in the docket of the minister, from her instrument of appointment as a Cabinet minister, to deal with some of these things. That is what we have been doing all this time. The Government Chief Whip has been coordinating all these things when the Prime Minister was not here. It could be part of her schedule, from her appointing authority, besides those which you have seen in the rules. 

She is a Cabinet minister and the rules do not prescribe what a Cabinet minister does. What we use here are our Rules of Procedure. However, as a minister comes here, we do not know what their schedules are in addition to what the rules might have given them. Please, let us take this the way it is. She is the whip of Government not the whip of the party. She is the Government Chief Whip and a Cabinet minister. She has a double role in this House.

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, with due respect, I know everybody comes from a different background and environment; this is what you said in your statement. I come from a different situation just like any other Member. However, this should not be imputed to mean that I am speaking the way I am doing because of where I come from. 

We are guided by the laws stated here and not presumptions. Your ruling is presuming that this is the way it is always done. Which law are we using? Can it be tabled here? Is it, therefore, in order for us to continue being ruled on presumptions not laws that are tabled here? Where is the evidence of delegation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, when you were being inducted, which I am sure has been done thrice, they did not only induct you on the Rules of Procedure but also on the rules and practice of Parliament. Therefore, whatever might not have been contained in these rules is contained in the practice of Parliament - How have we been doing it? What has been the operation of the House as we understand it? We are not reinventing the wheel here, are we? We are doing what we always do. 

I am not talking about your background or the village where you come from. Where you entered the House from could have influenced why you are behaving the way you are behaving this afternoon, because the way you are doing things now is not normal. Please, let us go to the way we normally handle business in this House. This is not a matter for debate. Let us proceed with business. We have matters to discuss on the Order Paper. Can we go to the Order Paper?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON YELLOW FEVER VACCINATION IN UGANDA

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Mr Speaker, I stand here to present a ministerial statement on the Floor of Parliament on yellow fever vaccination in our country.

Mr Speaker, yellow fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease that is transmitted by infected mosquitoes. An estimated 15 to 20 per cent of patients develop a severe form of yellow fever disease. Yellow fever is difficult to diagnose, especially during the early stages. It can be confused with malaria, typhoid fever, dengue fever, hepatitis and other diseases, as well as poisoning. 

There is no cure for yellow fever. The treatment is symptomatic, meaning that we treat symptoms as they present. The goal of treatment is aimed at reducing the symptoms and handling complications that might result from the yellow fever.

The earliest recorded outbreak of yellow fever in Uganda occurred in 1942 in Bwamba County, Bundibugyo District. Since then, three other outbreaks were reported in the 1970s, and in 2010 the outbreak was in northern Uganda where 13 cases were confirmed from the districts of Agago, Abim, Kitgum, Pader and Lamwo. The most recent outbreak was in April this year where eight cases were confirmed in the districts of Masaka, Rukungiri and Kalangala.

In order to prevent the risk of yellow fever transmission, World Health Organisation (WHO) recommended vaccination of the population. The model of vaccination can be in any form; it can be for international travellers, it can be during mass campaigns when there is an outbreak, or vaccination as routine immunisation in young children after carrying out a risk assessment.

Mr Speaker, yellow fever is not yet included in the national routine immunisation schedule in our country and, therefore, access to yellow fever vaccination is limited to international travellers only. The reason is that globally, vaccine stockpiles are limited because there are only two World Health Organisation prequalified manufacturers in France and Senegal.

Mr Speaker, WHO has set criteria of at least two or more outbreaks in order for a country to introduce yellow fever vaccination into the routine immunisation programme. Therefore, following the outbreak that I have mentioned, Uganda qualifies and has already initiated the process of introducing yellow fever vaccines into the routine immunisation. Hopefully, by 2018, we will be in a position to have this in the schedule. The proposal is currently before the National Immunisation Technical Advisory Group (NITAG) for technical review and recommendation.

Mr Speaker, the revised WHO Position Paper states thus: “A single dose of yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to confer sustained life-long protective immunity against yellow fever disease; a booster dose is not necessary.” 

Under the International Health Regulations, vaccination is required for any person leaving an area with high risk of yellow fever and it should be given 10 days prior to the day of travel. After obtaining the vaccine, the client receives an International Certificate of Vaccination completed, signed and validated with the official stamp and seal of the Ministry of Health.

Mr Speaker, since 1978, Kampala City Council has been issuing the International Certificate of Vaccination and Ugandan citizens have been accessing the vaccine on a pay basis. As the procedure for introducing the yellow fever vaccine into the routine immunisation schedule is ongoing, the Ministry of Health has undertaken interim measures as follows: 

The following health facilities have been assessed and accredited to offer the yellow fever vaccination to international travellers- These are the facilities that have been accredited to offer these services: We have about fifteen clinics in Kampala and other health facilities and hospitals up to Entebbe, Kabale, Tororo and Busia.

The Ministry of Health has now adapted and tailored the International Certificate of Vaccination as per the requirement of the International Health Regulations, 2005 for our use in the country. This is one of the measures that the ministry has undertaken. There is a logo of both the Ministry of Health and World Health Organisation as per the recommendation. The certificate will also bear the seal of the Ministry of Health with some unique features to make it difficult to forge.

Another measure that the ministry has taken is that we have already started the process of procurement of the printing services for the International Certificate of Vaccination. However, this is going to be a continuous activity and discussions are ongoing with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to allow for a revolving fund to enable the Ministry of Health supply the certificates. The Ministry of Health will also enter into a memorandum of understanding with health facilities on who will get the vaccination certificates. 

The Ministry of Health will, as an intervention, closely supervise all the health facilities that will get the vaccines from National Medical Stores (NMS) to ensure zero charges and to ensure that only a nominal fee is charged for the vaccination certificate.

Mr Speaker, one of the measures taken by the Ministry of Health is to ease access to those health facilities that can afford to privately procure their own vaccines from prequalified suppliers. They will in turn charge for both the vaccines and the vaccination certificates.

Due to current largescale outbreaks of yellow fever in Angola and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and the high population to be reached in these two countries, the global stockpile of yellow fever vaccines is at a bare minimum due to limitations by manufacturing companies. Based on this situation, WHO advises that whatever stock that is available be used cautiously and for outbreak situations only.

As I conclude, let me reiterate that Uganda has made a decision to introduce yellow fever vaccination into the current immunisation schedule, which will be free of charge. Uganda is currently following the GAVI and WHO set of procedures, which include the National Immunisation Technical Advisory Group reviewing the proposal and approving before the vaccines can be made available to the general population. We hope that this will be possible before 2018. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, this is a ministerial statement and it attracts a debate. Going by the numbers, it looks like I am going to have to give very limited time to our submissions. I will right away start from Bukwo.

3.35
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): I would like to inform the minister that Bukwo has a border town called Suam. Before you cross into Kenya, it is one of the requirements that you must have a yellow fever vaccination card. However, I do not see Bukwo on the list for consideration.

Secondly, they have been charging Shs 100,000 per person before one can cross to the Kenyan side. I do not know what is going to happen now that you have not included the amount and the districts. Thank you very much.

3.35
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this information on yellow fever.

Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that we are getting this information and yet the population is complaining. Just last week, we got a call from the constituency where a team, who were supposed to travel to Kenya, arrived in Lira, but they needed yellow fever vaccines. Each time they are to travel for evangelism, they first have to come to Kampala at a cost and then travel to Kenya.

On this list, Mr Speaker, there is no upcountry hospital. It is unfortunate. We feel that if you are putting this in Kampala, Entebbe, Kabale and others, at least designate one upcountry hospital as well, so that our people can access the vaccine.

Mr Speaker, the minister is saying that if you are vaccinated, it is for a lifetime. However, I have a card here and it shows that after every 10 years, you have to go back for another vaccine. Can I have clarification on that?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, there are charges associated with that. We would like the minister to clarify why you are putting those hospitals and –(Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way. 

Mr Speaker, if you look at the list, you will find that all the regional referral hospitals are left out. I do not know the criteria that the minister uses to select these hospitals. We have Gulu Regional Referral Hospital with very high standards and so many medical doctors. We have district hospitals like St Mary’s Hospital Lacor and other hospitals. Honourable minister, you need to clarify on the criteria you used in selecting these hospitals.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, honourable member. Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the minister because she said they are soon going to include these vaccines in the national schedule of immunisation. However, I need clarification from the Minister of Health because we are told that even hepatitis B, which is so rampant in Uganda, especially upcountry, is as a result of late vaccination or immunisation –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Gulu Police Primary School represented by hon. Lyandro Komakech and hon. Betty Aol Ocan of Gulu District. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

3.39
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to congratulate the minister for her appointment. I knew her before her appointment and I believe she will do a wonderful job in the Ministry of Health.

Mr Speaker, I would like some clarification on the side effects of double vaccination. The minister said you need it once, but one time when I travelled to South Africa and I did not carry my certificate, I was forcefully vaccinated at a cost before I entered South Africa. What would the side effects be as a result of that? I was even vaccinated before the 10 years had elapsed.

Secondly, I know that when you were considering this, you were looking at areas of travel. A majority of Ugandans now travel to South Sudan, not Kenya or other countries, and there are two spots that are very important - Gulu and Arua. I have not seen anything here about them. Maybe you should consider those areas. (Ms Aol rose_) The problem with points of information is that people would like to contribute; so we can do it after. I really want to get clarification because a lot of business is going on in the north and it would be important to have some points in Gulu and Arua to facilitate that. (Member timed out.)

3.41
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru North County, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My understanding is that we are dealing with a very serious problem. In paragraph No.1, the minister says yellow fever is an acute viral haemorrhage disease transmitted by a mosquito. You know that in this country we do not have a shortage of mosquitoes and there is no cure for yellow fever. However, the approach and the methodology being proposed here by the minister do not address a critical situation like this one. 

We are already attacked; we need to move very swiftly on this problem. I propose mass immunisation. What she is proposing - providing vaccines to hospitals - is not going to work because people go to hospitals for treatment; they only remember to go there when they are sick. What we want to do is to immunise the population. Therefore, this should be a mass immunisation campaign. We need to contract someone to do this immunisation. 

She has mentioned that vaccines are very difficult to come by. I do not know what we are going to do in this situation, because we are already in trouble and we need to move swiftly on this problem. However, the way we seem to be moving is very casual- the same way we are moving on hepatitis B. Last year, we were informed that they imported vaccines without test kits and the vaccines have expired –(Member timed out.)

3.43
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi West County, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very critical issue that we need to address urgently. 

Mr Speaker, I represent Kinkizi County West, which is near Congo, and it is also mentioned in point No. 1.7. We are endangered. My appeal to the minister is that this is taken seriously to all hospitals so that mass immunisation is done. 

Mr Speaker, what I have seen here is that, they are going to charge some money called a nominal fee. How much is it, so that our people are not cheated? Thank you very much.

3.44
MS FLORENCE WAMALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for opening our eyes. In her point No. 1.3, she says that WHO has set criteria of at least two or more outbreaks. However, when you look at what she has presented, we have gone into the fourth outbreak. 

She goes on to say, “Uganda, therefore, qualifies and has already initiated the process to introduce yellow fever vaccination, hopefully before 2018.” Is it really fair for this to still be a proposal, and yet, we are looking at words like “Uganda qualifies” and “hopefully before 2018”? Thank you.

3.45
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to talk about the minister’s statement that says, “The Ministry of Health will closely supervise all the health facilities that will get vaccines from the National Medical Stores.” 

Sometimes I do not understand the way we work here in Uganda. We have three to four ministers in a certain position but when we went to the NMS, we found that KCCA get their supplies from NMS and yet they are charging for this vaccination. If they have failed to supervise here, how are they going to supervise my constituency in Kasambya when they are seated here?

Again, Mr Speaker, the Government is trying to concentrate on only printing certificates and they are telling us that they are doing us a good service because of printing certificates without providing vaccines –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, hon. Mbwatekamwa. It is unfortunate that we print certificates, and yet, we do not have the vaccines that go together with the certificates. 

I would like to let the honourable minister know that, even in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital, the certificates are there but without the vaccines. How are you going to ascertain that those with certificates have been vaccinated? Why do you give certificates without the vaccines? Why should we have certificates in some hospitals and yet the vaccines are not there? Are we not deceiving ourselves? 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you for the information. Finally, when shall –(Member timed out.)

3.49
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for bringing this statement. 

On the face of it, this statement looks like the minister recognises that the outbreak is an emergency and needs urgent attention. However, I get disappointed that three years or more is set as the period of response - by 2018; we are not yet sure if we have the capacity to respond to an emergency. It is only here in Uganda, and certainly here with this Government, that a response to an emergency will take three years and the minister is proud to come and tell the House.

Secondly, I would like to speak for the poor people. If you look through the list of these hospitals, we all know them. Nakasero Hospital, where for consultation only, you need to pay more than Shs 50,000 or even Shs 100,000; who is this poor Ugandan who can travel from Lira, use Shs 50,000 for transport from Lira to Kampala, to consult a doctor or to be vaccinated? Are we really working to ensure that we meet the demands of our people? (Interruption)

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. The information I would like to give you is that according to this statement, in 2010 there were many cases in the districts of Agago, Abim, Kitgum, Lamwo and other districts in northern Uganda -

3.50
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for her report. 

The minister has told us that the ministry is in the process of procuring printing services for printing the International Certificates of Vaccination. Honourable minister, you are aware that some Ugandans, including Members of this House, have yellow fever cards. As you prepare to procure those certificates, what will happen to those Members? Shall we bring those certificates back to the ministry so that the seal can be put on?

I would also like to find out if it is okay to be vaccinated before the expiry time of the dosage. I am asking this question because in the Ninth Parliament, we went to Ghana with some Members and two Members had forgotten their yellow fever cards and they were subjected to vaccination. Was it okay for them? Wasn’t that an overdose? Thank you.

3.51
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for the statement that she has issued. 

I would have loved to see a health centre in Malaba also included as one of the health centres to issue these certificates. Recently, at the border, we had a crisis and this became one of the businesses at the border. People were charging up to about Shs 200,000 for cards and it caused a lot of alarm. People were calling me to find out what exactly the cost of being immunised and acquiring this card is. Therefore, as you have said that a nominal fee will be charged, can you clearly specify what the nominal fee will be? This will help our people at the border –(Interruption)

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister. I happen to sit on the equal opportunities committee of Parliament and from the issues raised, there is no equity compliance here as per the regions. I thank you.

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much for that information –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is two minutes. If you accept information, you cannot use two minutes.

3.53
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. 

In paragraph 1.4, you said that under the International Health Regulations, vaccination is required for any person leaving an area with high risk of yellow fever. Honourable minister, what can you say about the influx of refugees? There are over 200,000 of them in the whole of West Nile region - in Adjumani, Moyo, Yumbe, Koboko and Arua - and sooner or later, these refugees will spread out, thereby affecting the whole of Uganda. What can you say about this? Thank you very much.

3.54
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the efforts made by the minister. However, it is 74 years down the road since this epidemic was first recorded in Uganda and the ministry and Government of Uganda are now coming up with the printing of certificates. It is really not fair.

Mr Speaker, looking at the accredited centres, in Kabale alone we have three health facilities, but in greater Bushenyi, where we have five districts, in Mbarara and Ibanda, there is no accredited centre. Is it fair for the honourable Minister of Health to include all those districts and leave out the districts of greater Bushenyi and greater Mbarara? Thank you.

3.56
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Madam Minister, I happened to travel in May and I misplaced my yellow fever vaccination certificate. I was told that there are people who sell yellow fever vaccination certificates at the airport in Uganda for Shs 80,000. This means a risk to human life. I opted not to travel. This is an issue you need to settle in your ministry.

Secondly, when you mentioned the places where yellow fever outbreaks occurred in Uganda, there is no place mentioned in the city; why are you interested in vaccinating people in KCCA? Also, why are you vaccinating travellers only and yet the people who were affected by the disease were not travellers?

Thirdly, you are talking about 2018. Health is wealth and it is an emergency. We have experienced the problem of Hepatitis B and as I speak, two people in my family are suffering from Hepatitis B. Today, in my constituency, in Pabbo, we have buried somebody who died due to Hepatitis B. Why should we wait for 2018 to start vaccinating people? I think that these are issues of concern that need immediate response, because health is wealth. Thank you.

3.57
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the minister. One, in my view, this statement is not clear because the statement is on yellow fever vaccination in Uganda but capturing which period? If we knew, then we would be able to assess ourselves and say yes, within this period, these are the number of people we have vaccinated. In addition, by considering the period, we can easily estimate the amount of money that will be required to vaccinate a given number of people and this could be phased. 

What is interesting is that Bundibugyo District, where the first case was identified in the 1970s, and which also has a border point with DRC called Lamia, is not among the districts that have accredited centres. Bundibugyo District hospitals should have been among those accredited for yellow fever vaccines. Actually, Lamia border is busy, and when you track the genesis of Ebola, you will realise that there is a fundamental problem there.

Mr Speaker, I would wish the minister to categorically state the period and also be able to find clear strategies. In my view, massive immunisation would mean that the honourable minister tells Parliament that they are considering a certain total amount of money that the vaccines would cost. I have not seen that in your report. 

Therefore, what have you not highlighted here? The population is not indicated and neither is the number of those who have been vaccinated, dating back to the 1970s. The gaps herein are alarming. Can you also be clear on the period?           

3.59
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement that she has made. I would like to commend the effort of Government, although little has been done. 

My complaint is about the minister’s statement that this immunisation is for those who are travelling. She knows very well that in Uganda, due to the rate of poverty, people only go to hospitals when they are very sick. Therefore, does it mean that if somebody does not travel, he or she will not get access to this vaccine? This is very dangerous for our country and many people will die of this disease.

Secondly, she said that the disease is very acute, which means that every Ugandan is vulnerable. Surprisingly, when a Ugandan goes to a foreign country, these countries are very strict and they check whether we have the yellow fever certificates, but what happens to those who come from other countries into Uganda. There is no restriction on this. How are we going to control this disease?

Lastly, what will happen to those villages where poor people may not afford this vaccine? The minister, in her statement, has said that vaccination will begin in 2018; how many people will have died between now and that time? Thank you so much.

4.01
GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable minister, for the presentation. 

My request is that our health institutions be included as vaccination centres because we handle a lot of Ugandans both in uniform and not in uniform. It would do us a good service if we could be used as outlet vaccination centres. We are offering the facilities and I hope that the honourable minister will take up that offer and enable us provide the service.

However, I would also like to inform the honourable minister that restricting this vaccination to only travellers is dangerous. I can tell you that when you go to Entebbe and you have forgotten your yellow fever certificate, I do not know whether you are aware that you can pay $50 and get one in 10 minutes. I do not know whether that is a vaccination outlet or there is abuse. It is given without vaccination; you just get the certificate.

4.03
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is common knowledge that prevention is better than cure. I would like to thank the minister for her statement, especially her focus on vaccination. 

The minister vividly mentioned that yellow fever is a viral disease, which is very infectious and is caused by mosquitoes. Mr Speaker, 75 per cent of the disease burden of this country is preventable; I wonder why since 1942 to date, no assault has been launched against these mosquitoes. There are countries in the world where mosquitoes were fought and you cannot even trace one. Although she has given a very brilliant statement, nothing has been mentioned about an assault to be launched against the infected mosquitoes. This means that we treat symptoms and hardly look at the causes. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.04
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Lubaga North Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is the fact that yellow fever is not curable and not easy to detect when it is in its early stages. 

Mr Speaker, I looked at the list of health facilities that have been mentioned by the minister as having been assessed and accredited to offer the vaccination; not even the national referral hospital, Mulago, is included on that list. We all know that certain drugs are not in Mulago. There are no vaccines in Mulago and yet it attracts many people from different areas of the world. 

In addition, Mulago is situated in Kampala City, where there is congestion, but it is not included on the accredited centres for yellow fever vaccination. This is in spite of the fact that Kampala has been importing several diseases through people from different areas. A survey indicated that the most affected districts in Uganda are Masaka and Kalangala. However, on that list, there is no medical facility in Masaka and Kalangala. 

Is it the ministry that is failing to assess and accredit, or are these health facilities not willing to offer yellow fever vaccination? In the whole of Uganda, with a population of about 35 million people, we hardly have 20 facilities listed to offer such vaccination services. As I indicated, in Kampala, the KCCA clinic is charging Shs 100 –(Interruption) 

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order, with all due respect to my colleague, hon. Moses Kasibante. I have been listening to his submission and I thought at an appropriate time, he would withdraw his statement but he has not. He said that we, the people, are the ones bringing diseases here in Kampala. It is unfortunate for him to make such remarks on record. 

It is actually on record that we have so many cases in Kampala, which are being “exported” to the rural areas. Is he in order to insinuate that the Members of Parliament are the ones bringing diseases to Kampala?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when something does not affect the House in that way, we should not import it. I do not think that is what the Member said. The Member said that people come to the city and some of them come with diseases.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. You are representatives of the people and when I refer to you, I mean those you represent because the whole of Uganda is in this House –(Member timed out.) 

4.09
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, I would like to start by thanking the minister for making this statement on the Floor of Parliament. However, the issues of yellow fever should not be taken lightly. Yellow fever, as it was earlier on stated by the minister, is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease.

As the Shadow Minister of Health, I would like to raise some prayers in regard to this statement. Our country receives many people from the neighbouring countries. Besides that, we also have travellers who come from different countries. All these people get to interact with the different communities around - the business community, the tourists and many others. My view is that this statement should be amended to say that vaccination centres should be evenly distributed countrywide, so that they are accessible by all the people in the entire country. 

We also need to have a plan where everybody in the country benefits from this vaccination exercise. In my opinion, since they say the vaccines are expensive and limited, if required Government should borrow funds so that yellow fever and hepatitis B vaccines can be procured at once to save the lives of the people. We should not wait for the problem to eat into our population. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask this august House to allow me propose an amendment to the statement by the minister, to incorporate a detailed plan that captures the entire country so -(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, under our rules, debates on ministers’ statements normally take one hour, but we have exceeded this because of the importance of this subject. Therefore, I am not going to allow that longer than this. I have three Members who are going to contribute and after that, we shall ask the minister to respond. 

4.11
MR MICHAEL TUSIIME (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, the Minister of Health was in this Parliament and she made a statement regarding hepatitis B immunisation. Today, the same minister has given a statement regarding yellow fever immunisation, and I do not know what to expect tomorrow. However, it is apparent that Ugandans have accumulated issues on immunisation. I would wish to state categorically, that it would be prudent for the Minister of Health to compile a comprehensive report regarding immunisable diseases – the status of these diseases and the strategic interventions they have - for purposes of addressing this particular problem. 

Yesterday’s issue seemed to rotate around finances while today’s issue seems to be about immunisation cards. For purposes of clarity, may I, therefore, request the minister to come with a report that will enable us give a thorough explanation to our constituents regarding immunisation of all diseases, which is actually a requirement for their health status to be improved? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.13
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also want to thank the honourable minister for giving us this statement. 

When you read this statement, it gives the impression that our Government is non-existent. This is because this issue became a problem in 2010 in northern Uganda, and according to the WHO criteria, if two incidences occur in a country, then that country qualifies to give mass vaccination. So, I have been wondering why our Government did not carry out mass vaccination in 2010 among the people of Uganda when there were clear outbreaks in northern Ugandan districts. 

I also want the minister to clarify as to why out of the 15 health facilities, which have been accredited, only three are Government facilities and the rest are private. In the minister’s statement, she talks about signing a memorandum of understanding with those health facilities. At the same time, the minister talks about getting into a revolving fund to enable the Ministry of Health supply the vaccines. This issue is not very clear to me. I would like the minister to clarify why they would go in for a memorandum of understanding with private health facilities and yet you have health facilities under your ministry. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.16
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, my request to the Minister of Health is that the Government health facilities at the borders be given a provision to carry out this immunisation. I am happy that Masafu Hospital was one of the hospitals that were mentioned in the statement, but it does not offer this facility at all. I do not know whether it was included by mistake. However, my request is that all the health facilities at the border benefit from this service. 

Many times, when our people cross over to Kenya, they are stopped and yet they do not have access to these services. On the other hand, many times Kenyan citizens are allowed to come to Uganda without the yellow fever vaccination card. These double standards make our people lose their money, especially those that import goods from abroad. I, therefore, request that we should have a good relationship between the Kenyan Ministry of Health and our ministry so that we ease movement of people across the border. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition, you have four minutes, please.

4.17
THE DEPUTY CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ronald Tugume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. 

I would like to know the current situation following the recent yellow fever outbreaks in Masaka, Rukungiri and Kalangala districts that took place in April 2016. Secondly, we need to sensitise our people, now that we know these outbreaks can occur at any time. You are not clear on this, honourable minister. This disease is confusing; sometimes people mistake it for malaria, typhoid or even hepatitis. Therefore, we need to sensitise our people so that they know exactly how they can treat themselves once they contract the disease. 

The minister has not fully elaborated on the issue of fake vaccines. You know the situation we are facing, especially in our setup; sometimes, there is an outbreak and you find fake vaccines on the market. How are you addressing such a situation? 

Lastly, there is a border between Uganda and DRC; what measures have you put in place to address those border interactions between the two countries? Thank you very much.

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I would like to appreciate your contributions. This shows the importance of the yellow fever issue. Some of you have rightly said that health is wealth, and I am happy that we are looking at the health of our population, which is a pillar of all our economic and social transformation. I want to begin by responding to some of the issues you have raised. We will seriously look into some of them as a ministry. 

Some Members have said that most of the facilities and hospitals that have been listed here are within Kampala and they are overcharging people for the yellow fever vaccination. Others have stated that upcountry districts do not have facilities that provide this service. When you look at all this critically, I will agree that this is true. However, some of the facilities, like those in Kabale, Tororo and Busia, are at the border and they have been brought on board to handle cross-border infections. 

A Member asked why greater Bushenyi and other upcountry facilities were left out. I would like to say that as a ministry, we are going to review the list of these facilities and see how best to include other facilities, especially those upcountry and at the border. (Applause) I have not promised that yet but we are going to review the list- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Members have already cheered you and now you are retracting your statement. (Laughter)

DR MORIKU: Thank you. On the issue of charges, most of these facilities are private and they purchase the vaccines from private places. However, it is very important to regulate their charges, I agree with you. Therefore, we will take up the issue of regulating the charges. I cannot state a specific charge in this paper because, as we said, they purchase the drugs.

Side effects of the two doses that have been taken- (Ms Joy Atim rose_) - Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, allow me to complete my response. Thereafter, if there is anything else, we can probably clarify. Most of the facilities that we listed are private facilities and their charges vary accordingly. 

Mr Speaker, concerning the side effects of the drug -(Ms Joy Atim rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, she has not accepted your point of clarification. Let us respect the rules, please. She has not given way. 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are in Parliament and the minister has brought for us very important information that Members have got to understand. 

Madam Minister, we are not here to fight you but we just want clarification. We had said that most of these vaccines are in the private hospitals. I would just like to know whether it is the Ministry of Health that is giving out these vaccines in the private hospitals or they are purchasing their own drugs. 

The other time, the Minister, Sarah Opendi, was on the Floor here and she said it is the ministry that is giving these vaccines to Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) and she wondered why KCCA was charging for vaccination. Can I get a clarification on that? Members, let us cooperate. 

DR MORIKU: Mr Speaker and colleagues, in my presentation, I made it very clear that these facilities go through an accreditation process. First of all, they are inspected and then later accredited. You realise most of them are private facilities.

Secondly, on the issue of charges, as per the presentation I made, these facilities purchase these drugs. As far as I know, we are not yet giving the vaccine free of charge. However, if it is not yet clear, Mr Speaker, I request that you give us more time to give feedback to the Members. If my colleague came and said earlier on that the drugs are given from the National Medical Stores free of charge and yet on the other side, in the private facilities, they are charged, please allow me to reconcile this position and bring the right position to the Members.

Colleagues, concerning the side effects of the –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker and my colleagues, I have a lot to respond to; in the interest of time, let me go ahead. Concerning the side effects of the two doses, as a colleague raised, previously the World Health Organisation recommended another dose after 10 years. However, the reviewed guidelines of the World Health Organisation, as I presented, state that a single dose of yellow fever vaccine is sufficient to confer and sustain life-long protective immunity. Concerning the side effects –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As members of Parliament, we normally get our information from the ministers. Our voters normally ask us questions and we need to relay correct information to them. I am so surprised that whenever the honourable ministers, who are supposed to feed the honourable members with the right information, are asked to give way, they always reject points of clarification and information and yet they should be the source of our information.

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the honourable ministers to keep on rejecting points of clarification from the honourable members and yet they should be our source of information? Are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you raise questions with the ministers and a minister is responding, it is only proper that you allow the response to be completed and then have supplementary clarification so that it is organised. You cannot have an end to a debate where a minister is mid-sentence and there is clarification. It cannot be orderly. 

Let the minister respond to what she has to; if there are gaps, then we can have supplementary points of clarification. It would be neater that way. So, we are proceeding very well. (Applause)  

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your protection. Honourable colleagues, on the issue of side effects, there are no adverse side effects for people who have taken two doses. However, side effects like mild headaches, muscle aches, low-grade fevers can occur but they are not so adverse to cause problems to individuals.

There was an issue that was raised about cross-border infections, especially in the districts of Gulu and Arua, among others, and why these districts have not been considered for facilities to be accredited to provide this vaccination. As I said, this is one piece of information that I have to take back to the ministry and we review it. Also, we have the Committee on Health in Parliament; together, we can work this out.

About being too late since 2018 is far, I would like to say that this was not declared an epidemic, as one of us said. It was not declared as an epidemic and that is why we had to wait for a recommendation from WHO. As I said, WHO has now recommended that Uganda incorporates this vaccine into their routine national immunisation schedule.

There was an issue raised that the Ministry of Health is only printing certificates and not giving vaccines. The issue of certificates has been raised repeatedly. Yes, I want to say that the issue of certificates was brought on board in this paper because a memorandum of understanding was supposed to be made. You will realise that some of the certificates are not authentic; they are fake. This, therefore, is to try to regulate the process of vaccination and offer the right certificates to the people.

Issues concerning capacity were raised. This is an issue that we cannot exhaust right here, but I believe that as a ministry we are really committed to ensuring that we try our best to offer services to the people. 

An issue on equity compliance has been raised in terms of facilities, which are not in other upcountry places. I will not comment on this one.

On the issue of the influx of refugees and high demand, I would like to agree with Members here. You are all aware that due to the influx of refugees, there is a high demand for healthcare services. We will try to work closely with the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to see how best we can handle the issue of high numbers of refugees.

I would like to condemn the illegal issuing of certificates without vaccination. That is illegal and it is not acceptable. We have a Government of Uganda clinic that has been accredited at the airport, which gives the services.

A Member asked why we are vaccinating travellers only and not the entire population. As I said, this is not an epidemic for now. The epidemic we have, as I said before, is in countries like the Democratic Republic of Congo and Angola. This is where the mass vaccination has been done. However, in our situation, where we do not have an epidemic, mass vaccination is not recommended. That is why we are going to include the vaccine in the national vaccination programme. 

Some of the issues that were raised here, for example providing funds and budgeting for funds, are good ideas and I agree with you. At the right time, I think that will be brought aboard. 

Issues were again raised about the vaccination centres, which I have been responded to. As for prevention, I agree with the honourable member who raised it; sensitisation of our people is very important. It is also important to sensitise our people about the mosquito.

There was an issue that was raised about the need to come up with a comprehensive report and strategic plan on how we can handle all the diseases for which we are able to vaccinate. I would like to agree to that because it is a good idea. However, that is probably something that we can look at in the long run. 

Mr Speaker, I want to comment on what the Leader of the Opposition said about the recent outbreak in April this year. This outbreak was contained. If you have been reading newspapers and press releases from the Ministry of Health, you will know that it was contained.

Mr Speaker, most of the issues that have been raised show that this is a very important matter. I would wish to agree with all the honourable Members of Parliament; I will take this issue back to my ministry and we look at it critically. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to seek further clarification from the minister. I would like to seek clarification in regard to the facilities that have been accredited. Are they limited to these that you have highlighted here? 

MR WALUSWAKA: From the views I have got from Members on the issue of regional hospitals, I do not know whether the honourable minister is going to consider Gulu and Arua. That is the clarification I seek from her, because this is the centre. At least for Mbale, we have Tororo. However, if you can include Mbale, there is no problem, but at least from Mbale to Tororo is 45 kilometres. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we know that there are only three referral hospitals in eastern Uganda - Soroti, Mbale and Jinja. Is my colleague in order to refer people to a clinic in Tororo, and yet there are referral hospitals in Mbale, Jinja and Soroti? Is he in order to refer us to a clinic in Tororo when we have three referral hospitals? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now he has the right information. Honourable minister, are you noting those clarifications?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, in relation to the introduction of yellow fever vaccination into the routine immunisation, I am wondering about the cost that this will attract. I want to know whether it is achievable. Also, given the high burden of yellow fever amongst our neighbours in DRC, what precautionary measures are we putting in place as a country, to avoid a spill over into Uganda?

MR SEMATIMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I would like to seek clarification. Reading through these five pages here, it is all about information from WHO and then finally, the ministry makes some commitments on pages 4 and 5. However, these commitments do not directly state the vaccinating of Ugandans. 

What I see is commitments about vaccinating Ugandans going outside Uganda. I have not seen any solution about vaccinating Ugandans. How is this going to be taken care of? How can we help you fast track this thing so that it can begin now instead of 2018, which is two years from now? Thank you.

MS KAJUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for her response. However, from the contributions in the House, you will realise that there is still demand.

The problem, according to page 5, is that there are limited global stockpiles of the vaccine. I would like to know from the minister what they have done, especially in collaboration with WHO and our neighbours that are affected, to negotiate with the manufacturers to increase the stockpile of these vaccines. For the manufactures, it is business. I know when countries collaborate, especially in conjunction with WHO, they can increase the amount that is being manufactured because they can - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are debating now.

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. She said there is no cure for yellow fever and that the treatment is nothing but symptomatic. Honourable minister, since you mentioned some cases here, I would wish to know whether we have lost lives or some lives have been saved using this symptomatic treatment. Thank you very much.

MR DULU: I am happy that the honourable minister is condemning the illegal acquisition of vaccination certificates. However, this information will not only remain here on the Floor of Parliament; it is already outside as we are debating here. How is the ministry going to clear our name in order to avoid embarrassment abroad? We will be known to be acquiring certificates without even vaccination!

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I want to start with the facilities. I have said before that we have criteria that have been put in place. Once a facility is able to meet these criteria, then the right bodies assess it and Ministry of Health gives accreditation for the facility to be able to give the service. The facilities we have indicated here are not the only ones accredited to give the vaccination. Other health facilities that will meet the set criteria will be in a position to give the service.

We have 14 regional hospitals in the country and of course, I cannot just say that Arua and Gulu should be accredited to give the service; that is something I said the ministry has to review. Otherwise, in total there are 14 regional referral hospitals in the entire country.

In case of an outbreak near the border, especially from cross-border infections, as we have outbreaks in our neighbouring country, DRC, I want to say that as a ministry, we have a surveillance system. Our system is always vigilant to detect any outbreak of disease across the country. As we speak, in case of any outbreak, measures will be put in place to see how best this information can come out and the ministry can come on board to contain it.

I talked about the countries that manufacture this vaccine; a Member asked what measures the ministry has put in place to negotiate with the manufacturers. We have the African Centres for Disease Control (CDC) that is based in Addis Ababa and Ministry of Health sits on that board. It is an African board that regulates, advises and gives recommendations. I would like to, therefore, say that the ministry is not sitting. In case of such problems, the ministry is always able to advise and see how best some of these problems can be solved.

A Member asked if we have lost lives since the outbreak of this disease. Mr Speaker, we have lost some lives, especially in Masaka, although not many. It depends on the presentation; when people present late, certainly since there is no cure and the treatment is symptomatic. So, lives have been lost, and may their souls rest in eternal peace.

My brother, the honourable member for Adjumani, rightly mentioned the issue of regulating what is happening in the clinics. I condemn what is happening, but of course, as a ministry, we need to be vigilant and regulate some of these practices, so that people get the certificates after vaccination. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Chairperson of the Committee on Health, Dr Bukenya, you are going to have to pick up these matters again, look at them at committee level and see if they can come back here and we finalise with these issues. There are still issues that are sticky. So, you should follow this up in your committee.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal by Government to borrow up to $91 million from the African Development Bank (ADB) and $60 million from the African Development Fund to support the multinational Uganda/Rwanda Busega-Mpigi and Kagitumba-Kayonza-Rusumo roads project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that particular request. It is committed to the appropriate committee, the Committee on National Economy, to examine and report to the House and advise us on how to proceed.

Honourable members, this is one matter that I think needs to be referred to the rules committee - how we handle these requests. Should they come as documents to be laid on the Table and they are sent to the committee like that, or are they substantive motions to be moved and then referred to the committee for examination and then brought back and debated? Right now, it is just a document going to the committee and yet it is a substantial document and the House does not know anything about it. 

At this moment when the document is going, the minister should be able to speak to it briefly before it goes to the committee. Now we are all quiet and yet a request of $64 million is being made and is going straight to the committee. So, the rules committee should pick this up. In all these requests, there is a motion attached; why don’t we move the motion and then send it to the committee to examine and when it comes back, we debate the motion and proceed? Therefore, at an appropriate time, the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline should pick this up and see how we can improve on our procedures.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.50
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the following reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for local government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2014:

i)	Mayuge District Local Government
ii)	Bundibugyo District 
iii)	Kayunga District
iv)	Namayingo District
v)	Masaka District
vi)	Adjumani District
vii)	Bugiri District. 

I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those seven reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the local governments’ accounts for that period. They stand referred to the appropriate committee, the Committee on Local Government Accounts, to handle expeditiously.  

4.52
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the following local governments financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 by the Auditor-General:

i) 	Kabwoya Subcounty, Hoima District
ii) 	Adekwot Subcounty, Lira District
iii) 	Alero Subcounty, Nwoya District
iv) 	Lwabiyata Subcounty, Nakasongola District
v) 	Kikatsi Subcounty, Kiruhura District
vi)	Kitura Subcounty, Kiruhura District
vii)	Sanga Subcounty, Kiruhura District
viii)	Nkungu Subcounty, Kiruhura District
ix)	Nyakashashara Subcounty, Kiruhura District
x) 	Kyabigambire Subcounty, Hoima District
xi)	Budhaya Subcounty, Bugiri District
xii)	Nyamarebe Subcounty, Ibanda District
xiii) 	Arapai Subcounty, Soroti District
xiv)	Kamuda Subcounty, Soroti District
xv)	Akura Subcounty, Alebtong District
xvi)	Wairasa Subcounty, Mayuge District
xvii) 	Nyantungo Subcounty, Kyenjojo District
xviii) 	Bulange Subcounty, Namutumba District
xix)	Busiisi Division, Hoima Municipal Council
xx)	Karita Subcounty, Amudat District
xxi)	Paya Subcounty, Tororo District
xxii) 	Mulanda Subcounty, Tororo District
xxiii) 	Rubongi Subcounty, Tororo District
xxiv) 	Nagongera Subcounty, Tororo District
xxv)	Bulegeni Subcounty, Bulambuli District
xxvi) 	Kalongo Subcounty, Nakasongola District
xxvii)	Kyanaisoke Subcounty, Kibaale District
xxviii)	Wesswa Subcounty, Bududa District – (Interruption)

MS KHAINZA: I rise under rule 69 (1) (c). Bududa District has 16 subcounties. I am the Woman Member Parliament for Bududa. Wesswa is not a subcounty in Bududa District. Let us get the records clear. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What does it say on the document?
 
MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, maybe we shall look at the records and then – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what does the document that you have say?

MR OGWANG: Here, the document says, “Wesswa Sub County, Bududa District.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us just withdraw that and deal with it later. They will lay it on the Table later not now.

MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, I beg to withdraw Wesswa Subcounty, Bududa District. We shall lay it on the Table at an appropriate time when the record is clear.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the financial statements for Buhanda Subcounty, Kamwenge District. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in this House, we are privileged to have the former LCV Chairperson of Bududa District. Councils are the ones, which pass subcounties, not MPs. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the former Chairman LCV of the district to tell us whether Wesswa exists or not?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you see, just like hon. Khainza rose to present, the honourable member for Manjiya has the liberty to rise, but he did not. 

MR NAMBESHE: I rose.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you? What did you say?

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, I rose to raise an objection. I sharply disagree with the Commissioner that Wesswa is among the subcounties in Bududa District. It is not there.

MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, the reports from the Auditor-General’s office are part of Parliament. We shall correct the record and report back to the House.

Mr Speaker, can I proceed? I beg to lay on the Table the reports for the following subcounties:

xxix) 	Bulesa Subcounty in Bugiri District
xxx) 	Buhanda Subcounty, Kamwenge District
xxxi) 	Biguli Subcounty, Kamwenge District
xxxii) 	Lake Katwe Subcounty, Kasese District
xxxiii) 	Olio Subcounty, Serere District
xxxiv) 	Bugongo Subcounty, Serere District
xxxv) 	Pingire Subcounty, Serere District
xxxvi) 	Mukujju Subcounty, Tororo District

I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture those reports that have been laid on the Table with the exception of report No. 28 -

MR OKABE: Mr Speaker, I disagree with the Commissioner; what is written here as Bugongo Sub-county in Serere is Bugondo. It should be corrected here. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the record will reflect what is actually here because they will write down the names as they are on the reports.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Also for record purposes, Lira has got Adek Okwok Subcounty and not Adekokwot Subcounty. The record should be corrected.

MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, I need to correct the record. We have looked at the document; it is Wesswa Subcounty, Manafwa District, unless a colleague from the district is here to challenge the name of the subcounty.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I was asking you to look at the report itself.

MR PETER OGWANG: I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture all those reports, financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 by the Auditor-General. They are referred to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for its information and action. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENT IN THE IMPLEMETATION OF THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS

MS AMODING: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to inform the House that the motion was presented in the last sitting and debate ensued. However, the Leader of Government Business requested that he appears before the House to make a formal response, regarding the recommendations that we had made in the motion. Therefore, we are expecting a response from Government on the recommendations that were before us and any other clarification, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I called you up because you are the owner of the motion and you know how far it had gone. 

5.02
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, as you may recall, on Thursday, 15 September 2016, Parliament debated a motion on the role of Parliament in the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Two issues arose during this debate: One, which agency of Government co-ordinates the implementation of SDGs? Two, the Speaker directed that Government presents a progress report on the SDGs. 

This statement, therefore, is in response to the above. The co-ordinating agency is the Office of the Prime Minister, which was also responsible for the co-ordination of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which preceded the SDGs. 

Progress Report on the SDGs

Mr Speaker, you may recall that in September 2015, when Uganda was holding the presidency of the United Nations General Assembly, UN Member States adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, of which 13 Sustainable Development Goals universally apply to all countries.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development requires us to set targets of delivery on social, economic and environmental standards for sustainable development over the next 15 years. As Government, we have taken ownership and established national frameworks for the implementation and achievement of these ambitious and yet very relevant goals and targets.

Uganda already has a 30-year vision which provides a long-term planning framework for the integration and implementation of the SDGs within the ten-year and five-year medium term plans.

Uganda volunteered to undertake a country review on the readiness to implement the agenda. Uganda presented a readiness report to the UN High-Level Political Forum held in New York in July this year. The report highlighted the progress made so far, the gaps and the challenges identified, the lessons learnt from the process and the next steps to further localise and ensure implementation of the SDGs - the 2030 agenda.

Progress Report

From the onset, I must emphasise that the SDGs are integrated in the National Development Plan (NDPII). The implementation of SDGs will, therefore, be realised through the existing structures. What I am presenting is a summary and the detailed report is on the website.

Since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Uganda has achieved a number of milestones that demonstrate progress in the implementation of the SDGs.

1. 	Uganda is among the first countries to integrate the agenda in its national planning frameworks particularly NDPII.

2. 	Localisation of the agenda is accordingly being cascaded to sector and local government planning and implementation frameworks.

3. 	The manifesto of Uganda’s re-elected ruling NRM party for the 2016 to 2021 term of office is aligned to the second National Development Plan (2015/2016-2019/2020) and has also embraced the principles of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

4. 	In recognition of the importance of review and follow-up mechanisms, Government is strengthening the implementation, coordination and communication strategy for the current NDP and the SDGs.

5. 	Government has developed and operationalised a SDGs coordination framework in conformity with the national coordination policy to streamline and ensure a coordinated effort in the implementation of the SDGs.

6. 	To enhance national awareness and ownership, the Government, in collaboration with development partners and civil society, has held a series of localisation events at national and local level; high-level policy dialogue engagements; institutional capacity development; and revitalised engagement with the private sector and civil society.

7. 	To ensure that no one is left behind, the Government of Uganda has initiated implementation of a number of programmes targeting inclusion of vulnerable populations. Notable among these are: Operation Wealth Creation; the Youth Livelihood Programme; the Higher Education Students Loan Scheme; the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment for the Elderly; the Legal Aid Programme; the Women Entrepreneurship Programme; Community Tree Planting Programme; and the Skilling Uganda Programme.

8. 	To improve institutional functionality, coordination and implementation of national development programmes including SDGs, Government has enacted a number of new laws and undertaken subsequent reforms. These include: 

    a) The Public Finance Management Act (2015), which provides for the issuance of certificates of compliance of national and sector budgets to the NDPs, and certificates of compliance of sector budgets to gender and equity by National Planning Authority and the Equal Opportunities Commission respectively; 
    b) The Public Private Partnerships Act (2015), which provides for Government’s binding partnerships with the private sector in implementation; 
    c) The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act (2014); 
    d) The Financial Institutions (Amendment) Act (2015); 
    e) The Registration of Persons Act (2015); 
    f) The NGO Policy; 
    g) The National Coordination Policy, to ensure effective implementation of Government programmes.

9. 	In line with the above, Government established a delivery unit in the Prime Minister’s office, a Government evaluation facility, and is gradually shifting from output-based to programme-based budgeting.

10. 	To harmonize monitoring and evaluation, data capturing and management, Government has developed a national standards indicator framework to track progress towards attainment of a middle-income status. This framework builds on the national monitoring and evaluation policy and integrated NDPII monitoring and evaluation strategy. Through these instruments, the implementation of SDGs will be monitored, evaluated and reported on.

That notwithstanding, Uganda still has significant challenges to address, including:

1. 	Diversifying the economy as it is still heavily reliant on agriculture;

2. 	The current demographic structure propagates a high dependency ratio;

3. 	Low domestic savings;

4. 	Limited access to modern forms of energy, putting pressure on the forest cover;

5. 	Income inequality, though declining, still remains high. 

6. 	Vulnerability among different segments of the population is also still significant; and 

7. 	The economy remains in need of deeper and broader economic integration, especially at regional level.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, as a way forward Government intends to enhance means of implementing the 2030 agenda by- 

    a) strengthening institutions and reforms; 
    b) increasing domestic revenues as a proportion of GDP; 
    c) increasing investments in public infrastructure and technological capabilities for innovation; 
    d) reforming public procurement; 
    e) rallying the private sector, civil society, citizens, academia and other partners towards implementation; 
    f) enhancing public private partnerships; 
    g) empowering local governments to deliver services and mobilise the population to effectively participate in the development programmes.  

Other steps include: 

    a) enhancing multi-sectoral implementation planning and coordination of SDGs; 
    b) strengthening data production, quality and use;
    c) monitoring and evaluation systems; 
    d) establishing concrete public private partnership strategies to harness the demographic dividend and human capital development.

Role of Parliament

Honourable members, Government recognises that successful implementation of SDGs requires concerted efforts and partnership to facilitate the attainment of the desired development goals and targets. As a first step, there is need for SDGs platform for Members of Parliament to be established and this will play a pivotal role to:

1. 	Create awareness among honourable Members of Parliament on their role and regular progress of the implementation of SDGs;
2. 	Ease coordination between Parliament and Government; and
3. 	In addition, during its oversight role, Parliament will ensure that sector plans and budgets conform to the requirements of the SDGs.

Conclusion 

Mr Speaker and Members, I wish to reiterate the relevance of the 2030 Agenda for sustainable Development to Uganda’s development and confirm that it fits within our national vision. The 15-year agenda provides us adequate time to articulate and implement the medium-term development goals and targets.

Government will continue to provide annual and semi-annual assessment reviews including progress of the implementation of the SDGs during the retreats of ministers, permanent secretaries and local government representatives. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of Government Business, for this response to the issues. The House had sought to obtain the commitment of Government in supporting this motion and supporting the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. 

My brief is that this motion was debated and what was remaining was to seek Government support and commitment on those issues that have been raised by the motion. In the circumstances, therefore, can I put the question to the motion, since the debate was completed and we now have the commitment of Government? Can I put the question and then we adopt the motion and proceed from there?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There were some amendments to the motion; for example, where the mover wanted a committee and the whole House said, “No, the respective committees will handle each SDG.” So, if you just put the question to the motion and we adopt it wholesome, it will mean we must form committees. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; what I mean is that when I put the question, then we can process the specifics and that will be our decision. This is not the usual motion of only a prayer; it has several prayers and so we have to process them one by one but I have to put the question to reach there. Is that okay?

Honourable members, the specifics of the motion can be adopted one by one, but for now can we adopt the framework of the motion? Okay, I now put the question that the motion for a resolution of Parliament to reaffirm the role of Parliament in the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That means the resolutions contained in the motion become resolutions of this august House. We can now go specifically to the resolutions as I put the question to them, one by one.

Resolution 1

That Parliament takes cognisance of the theme of the International Day of Democracy

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that resolution. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution 1, adopted.

Resolution 2

That Parliament urges Government to adopt the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as the blueprint for Uganda’s social, economic and political development in the next 14 years

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The way that resolution is phrased presupposes that Government has not yet adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. However, from the presentation of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, particularly on pages 3 and 4, it is very clear that the Government has been part of the process and has already embraced the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 

Therefore, we may need to change the phrasing of this resolution. Maybe we could say, “Parliament commends the Government for adopting the 2030 Agenda” because we have already adopted it. Thank you very much. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a seconder of the motion, I would like to plead with Government to take the spirit of this motion in good faith. It is a fact that by the time this motion was moved on the Floor, Government had not briefed Parliament about anything that was happening.

Therefore, it would be done in bad faith if we started amending the motion of Parliament, which was drafted in good spirit, by saying Government has already done this. It is like saying that the motion was not necessary. So, can I plead with the Prime Minister and Government side to take this resolution in good faith?

There are areas I also recommend should be amended like the area of creating committees, which we had earlier mentioned, because Government has come up with intentions to handle that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not have a debate on this. If they are already adopted it, is it confirmed that it was adopted? If there are doubts, then we can just, for the avoidance of doubt, say that Government should adopt - the way it is phrased in the motion. It does no harm; does it?

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it is already adopted, then they will just say “no, we have done this one”. That will save on us spending time on the wording.  

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we have already adopted this. Parliament is an arm of Government; it is part of this country. As hon. Baryomunsi said, we can say, “Commend Government for adopting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Goals.” I think that would be better. I propose to amend it that way.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, from the response that the Government has presented through the Leader of Government Business, are there any indications that this particular matter has not been adopted? If at the time we are passing this resolution, we are fully told that it has actually been adopted, do we still need to say that Government should adopt it?

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and I also thank the Prime Minister for the information he has given to the House.

We are not going to change the resolution because Government has given us information. This is work that should have been done even before the motion came before the House. Actually, we can say that as we pass this resolution, part of it has been implemented. Otherwise, we are not going to remove the bit that has been implemented just because information has been provided in that regard. 

What we can do is to leave the resolution as it is so that in future, we can still refer to it. Therefore, Mr Speaker, at the time the motion was being presented, no Member of the House knew about it. That is why even the progress –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about at the time Parliament is taking the actual decision?

MS WINFRED KIIZA: At the time we are taking the actual decision, I do not see why Parliament should amend the resolution because we have just received the information. There is no bad faith in the wording of the resolution –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I was in the House when this motion was being debated and I submitted on the Floor that Government had been involved in the processes that led to the formulation of the declaration of the SDGs. The African Group met in Addis Ababa and also met in New York in September where our President and a huge Government contingent were present. They were part and parcel of the declaration, and that information was provided. It was from that submission that the Speaker said the Rt Hon. Prime Minister should come up with a statement to confirm what had been given.

When you read page 3, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister says, “Since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Uganda has achieved a number of milestones that demonstrate progress in the implementation of the SDGs”. Unless the House wants to say that it doubts what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has presented, otherwise if we believe what was presented, then we should acknowledge that maybe by the time the motion was drafted, this information was available. 

However, we also need to know that Government is represented in Parliament to provide information. So, there is no harm in amending a resolution based on information that has been supplied by Government.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, this motion was moved on the Floor of Parliament as one of the activities for Parliament to commemorate International Day of Democracy. Even before Government had briefed Parliament on what was happening with these SDGs, you all know that we had a full day at the Parliamentary Conference Hall where Parliament discussed this. This motion came in as one of the activities. Therefore, we are discussing a Parliament motion and not a Cabinet motion. 

At this point in time, it would be fusion of the highest order, Mr Speaker, for us to allow motions moved by Parliament to be amended by the Executive and yet they had the latitude to present this as a Government document –(Interjection)– I am raising on a point of procedure. How do you move a point of order when I am raising a procedural point?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Buliisa, for the record, let me state again that to interpret our Rules of Procedure by saying that when a Member is speaking to a point of procedure another Member cannot raise a point of order brings absurd results. Why the rules say that points of procedure take precedence is simple; if they are raised at the same time, priority is given to the person raising a point of procedure. However, while a Member is still speaking on procedure and any order is violated, certainly any Member has a right to raise on a point of order. The precedence is only in relation to when they are raised at the same. 

To think that once a Member has already risen on a procedural point then they have the prerogative to violate the rules of the House and have immunity, is to lead to absurd results. Nobody could have thought of it that way, otherwise it would not make any sense in terms of procedure and it would violate the order of the House. So, let us know it and respect the fact that if there is a point of order and a Member is speaking to a procedural matter, we can take the order before such a Member continues. For now, let him finish with the procedure and we see if we can process those things at the same time.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am only trying to protect the independence of Parliament. When the Executive has not found time on the Order Paper to brief Parliament on such an important matter and the Legislature moves, in good faith, with such a motion, we need the protection of the Speaker so that such business is not usurped by the Executive. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, this Parliament counts on you to protect this well-intended motion moved by a Member of Parliament as part of the full-day activities to commemorate the International Day of Democracy. We accepted that the Executive brings a response and we take it in good faith. However, what we do not want to see is an amendment being made to a parliamentary prayer. Mr Speaker, we are at your mercy to protect us; otherwise, we shall seem to be part of the Executive.

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural issue. Parliament made two directives during the debate; one was that Government should give information to this House about which office is the coordinating office, and the second was for Government to provide a progress report. Today, 21 September 2016, I have a copy of a progress report and in it there is a date attached; it says that in September 2015, the UN Member States, where Uganda is a member, adopted the SDGs.

Mr Speaker, the motion was premised on the basis that they needed to know this. The pain I have, and this is the procedural issue, is whether we can still leave the resolution as it is even when we know that the adoption was done a year ago but this House was not given the report. Now that that report has come, how do we procedurally reconcile this?

Mr Speaker, these two issues do not appear to be a contradiction. We needed the information but now that information has been given to show that there was an adoption, do we still maintain the resolution saying that Parliament urges Government to -(Interruption)  

MS KHAINZA: Thank you, hon. Oboth. The information I would like to give is that right now on my iPad, I have a soft copy of the review report on Uganda’s readiness for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. I had actually read it before but even as the Prime Minister was presenting it, those are the very issues I was following.

I would, therefore, like to propose to colleagues that if Government has already adopted this, we have to amend the motion. I do not see why we should speak to that when it has already been adopted. Why should we tell them to again adopt what they already adopted?

MR OBOTH: I think we were reading the same thing and I was saying the same thing. Resolutions of Parliament should not be seen to be – (Interjections) – Let me finish this, Mama; I will give time for information. 

Before I forget this, I want to say that resolutions of Parliament are decisions of this House and so they are not made in futility. That is an exercise that will defeat the purpose - You make a decision while questioning it. If you are resolving on a matter where you are wrestling a person who is down, would you thump your chest and say you have wrestled? May I take information from the Member from Rukungiri? 

MS TURYAHIKAYO: Thank you very much for giving me an opportunity to give you some information -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I actually thought the Member was speaking on a procedural point, but now he is accepting information. This is further procedure, possibly. (Laughter) 

MS TURYAHIKAYO: Mr Speaker, I also want to inform my learned friend here, that there is already a Parliament. We have received policy statements and they get their mandate from the National Development Plan II, which is premised on the Sustainable Development Goals. In essence, we have already started to make reference to the Sustainable Development Goals. Therefore, the information I want to give is that, we have already started and so we do not need to urge Government because as Parliament, we have already started using them. Thank you. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you. As I conclude, Mr Speaker, if there is need to amend the wording, we can say, “Parliament urges Government to maintain the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.”  Otherwise, we cannot urge Parliament to adopt what was adopted one year ago. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think adoption is just a one-day function. That is why I want to also agree with my colleagues who are now saying that we now have information that it was adopted long ago. 

My problem, however, is that the National Development Plan was brought here before the SDGs were designed, that is if we are going to go by dates because I come with institutional memory. Therefore, how did the Prime Minister put the SDGs in the National Development Plan (NDP), which was brought earlier? That is where I raise my reservations, unless at that time we were talking about the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 

The reason they became SDGs was because MDGs had been exhausted and we needed to focus on something new –(Interjection) – You see, if you want to learn, you have to listen. Please, do not just make noise for the sake –(Interjection)– Yes, because you are now learning from what I am saying. As I was saying, MDGs had ended; so the Prime Minister should help me understand how they incorporated the SDGs in the NDP, when by the time it came here SDGS were non-existent. 

Secondly, the amendment - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we are on resolution No. 2. Can you help us with it? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mr Speaker. I would like to agree with my brother, hon. Oboth, that we phrase it thus: “Parliament urges Government to continue with the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.” We should just amend that because adoption was already done. 

MR ANTHONY AKOL: Mr Speaker, I happened to be one of the persons who participated in the review of the Millennium Development Goals for Uganda. Now we are talking about Sustainable Development Goals. However, when you look at the brief from the Prime Minister vis-à-vis the Sustainable Development Goals, there are many things, which need to be included in our National Development Plan. 

I want to take the example of the goal to end poverty in all its forms everywhere. We have been talking about poverty here. Yesterday, the World Bank released a report indicating that our poverty levels are going up. That means there is need for Government right now to go back into their documents and look at how to end poverty in all its forms everywhere. Let me take on the example of education - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I can understand where you are going with this but how would that help us with resolution 2? 

MR ANTHONY AKOL: That is very good. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue is that Government has already adopted it. Are we, therefore, going to say that Parliament urges Government to remain committed to agenda 2030 for transition, or are we going to adopt what has already been adopted? 

You have heard the points that have been raised. Whether they are implementing it properly or not does not amount to not adopting it. Can we finish with this matter, honourable members? What was the proposal from the honourable member from Budadiri West? He said that Parliament urges Government –

MR ANTHONY AKOL: Mr Speaker, the reason as to why I personally think there is nothing wrong with leaving this resolution the way it is, is because it does no harm. It will help us in crosschecking the relevant documents to find out whether they are in line with what is in the Sustainable Development Goals. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In resolution 2, the question being asked is: Has it been adopted or not? If it has not been adopted - Adoption means signing on it and agreeing that you are going to do it. It does not mean that you are now going to say, “We have implemented it”. So, if it has already been adopted, is that paragraph still necessary in the form it is in? 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I just want to make a proposal. Having realised that Government has adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we can just suggest that this paragraph be deleted because it is already catered for. I, therefore, would like to move that resolution 2 be deleted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the agenda is there now, but even though it is there, I can sign it and go to sleep. What this paragraph is saying is that, if we are now aware it has been adopted, we can then say that Parliament urges Government to remain committed to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development - that is what we are saying - as a blueprint even in the years to come. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I actually proposed the deletion because I knew that there was resolution No.3, which would sufficiently cater for that. As we encourage Government to continue with the agenda, here we had even suggested that we ask for a report on the progress, which they have given.  So, the proposal that has been given by my colleague, the hon. Nandala-Mafabi, can come under resolution No.3, if you so wish. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I do not want to disagree with my Leader of the Opposition. Just for the sake of simplicity, let us guide our House. Resolution No.3 says, “In two months from the adoption of the resolution…” but the agenda is already adopted. That means we need to rephrase No. 3.

What we are saying is that the first point should be for Government to remain committed to the 2030 agenda. If Government remains committed, then we shall say that after every six months or even a year, we shall need a progress report. That is where we are heading. So, the first thing is to make Government committed. That is all.

MS AMODING: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There has been a process to this. What has come to our notice is that Government has been in a process, in terms of implementing the SDGs. So, if we delete this proposal or this recommendation, it will mean that we will lose institutional memory of what has been going on.

That is why I buy the idea that perhaps, – to add value to what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying - we commend the Executive or Government for adopting this in the past and for attempting to implement and mainstream the SDGs and remain committed. The other recommendations will then make much more sense, rather than deleting.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I hope you remember the Maputo Declaration. We are a signatory to that declaration in regard to the agriculture sector, but have we got the recommended 10 per cent on agriculture? No, we have not got it. Hon. David Bahati, you were a good person before you went to that Frontbench. The problem is that you are making even more mistakes.  

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is progress in the quest to attain the SDGs, to the extent that both the Executive and Parliament seem to be agreeing. However, I would like it to be put on record that by the time Parliament moved this request on the Floor of Parliament, we did not have this information, much as the matter was on the Order Paper and Government is represented in Parliament. 

I do not want Parliament to start speaking up for complacency on the side of Government. A lot may have been done but in this Parliament, when this matter was on the Order Paper, nobody offered to let us know. We thank Government because when we brought this motion, information has now come out to Parliament. However, what is the intention of saying that whereas you did not have the information, now that Parliament has proposed a motion that has prompted an answer, you start deleting what was submitted four days ago? In the processing of this business, that is where I find a fusion and an anomaly. Remember, there are 17 goals and the Prime Minister has ably answered about five, out of the 17. 

The other concern, which was not earlier in our request, is that of the reporting mechanism or the focal person. The Prime Minister has attempted to answer that by saying it is the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM), but the OPM is vague. Who is the person accountable? If you talk of NDP, the interest would be: do we tax the minister in charge of planning? So, Parliament would like to know about the reporting mechanism. 

I would like to request that we still take a win-win situation between Parliament and the Executive. What I do not want to buy on this Floor is the issue of members of the Executive moving as if to say, “Even if you did not bring this motion, everything was okay”. The spirit of co-operation is then killed, and I can see that attempt to delete certain things. That is why I am requesting that –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rarely rise on a point of order. However, Mr Speaker, while I happen to be a minister in Government, I also represent the people of Kinkizi East Constituency, Kanungu District. Is the hon. Mukitale, my friend, in order to insinuate that I cannot speak for the people of Kinkizi East, who voted me to be in this House, simply because I am in Cabinet?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have collective responsibility; there may be some things that you cannot say as freely as the hon. Mukitale can. Let us not go into those things, please.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are handling a very important issue, which our country has already adopted. On Monday, I was in Gulu attending the budget consultative meeting. In that meeting, all the local governments in the region were represented. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development Goals were ably debated in that meeting. So, to this effect, I can confidently say that the Government has already adopted the agenda and is now implementing the SDGs. 

In the spirit of the Executive and Parliament working together and in harmony, I propose that we go with the proposal that hon. Nandala-Mafabi submitted, to the effect that we do not completely delete No.2, but we say, “Parliament urges Government to remain committed to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.” This will help us to move in one direction. If we begin saying that if Parliament brings up a motion, the Executive should not amend it, it will mean that even when the ministers bring motions, we should also not amend them. I find that not very good for this Parliament and the Executive. I thank you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If Government has adopted the agenda, I do not see why we do not commend them for adopting it. I think we are debating because there are other resolutions which Members have not read. If Government has adopted, let us commend them for adopting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 

Further down, if you look at No.3, we are going to task them to account. After urging them, it is only human to commend them for the work so far done, and that is the way we do things; we commend you for doing the work, which is fine, but we also demand for accountability. 

Therefore, I think that we should go with the earlier recommendation moved by the hon. David Bahati and say, “Parliament commends Government for adopting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as a blueprint for Uganda’s social, economic and political development in the next…” No, I think “in the next 14 years” should be deleted. We have already adopted, so we cannot say “in the next”. We can also improve on the proposal moved by the hon. Nandala-Mafabi when working on No. 3.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the proposal is that in No.2 we say, “Parliament commends Government for adopting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as the blueprint for Uganda’s social, economic and political development”, and it stops there. Is that what you are proposing? Is that okay, honourable members? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution 2, as amended, agreed to.

Resolution 3 

That Government presents before Parliament, within two months from the adoption of this resolution, a report on:

(i) 	The compliance of the laws of Uganda with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
(ii) 	The mainstreaming of the Sustainable Development Goals into the national planning frameworks; and
(iii) 	The progress achieved by Uganda towards the implementation of the SDGs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay, honourable members? It means that two months after the adoption of this resolution, which we are going to pass today, they come back with an update on those items.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to second this, but I want us to look at No.3 (iii), which says that Government should give us the progress achieved by Uganda towards the implementation of the SDGs. 

I have been reading something here on the website. The President was making a presentation at around midnight at the UN General Assembly, and there was a report of the World Bank saying that, the level of poverty in northern Uganda has increased, especially accessibility to finances. I want them to tell us in their report, the progress on northern and eastern Uganda. What are they doing to help this situation? 

This is a report and we need it, but as an additional statement, it should come out clearly so that we see what they are doing. We know that there is Operation Wealth Creation. We also know that there is –(Interjection)– Yes, the Youth Livelihood Programme is there but we want to see -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought that would be an interrogation of whatever would have been presented under No. 3. When they present it, you interrogate it with those specific issues.

MS JOY ATIM: No, let them be clear on what they have done for northern Uganda; we want it to come out clearly on that day.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But do you have to put it in the resolutions? You will then have to list the rest of the -

MS JOY ATIM: I just gave it as an amendment to this. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, my role is also to guide on the decisions that this House takes. If we now say that the resolution should specifically mention northern Uganda when we are talking about the Sustainable Development Goals for the country, what are you suggesting?

What I was proposing is – because this is not a World Bank Report – that when that report is presented, we can interrogate it with figures and facts about what we know. We can say, “Yes, you have presented this report and we have seen it, but look at this particular statistics for northern Uganda”, so that we do not look like -

MS AMULE:  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. According to recommendation No.3, Government should present a report to Parliament within two months. However, according to me, I think it would be procedurally right if Parliament recommended that Government presents this report on a quarterly basis. This is better because most of the activities that are implemented by Government, even at local government level, are on a quarterly basis. So, when you recommend for two months, I do not know whether that is going to be achievable or not. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, instead of two months we say quarterly reports? Let us understand where we are first; otherwise, we are going to end up with too many things that we cannot process.

Can we talk to the mover of the motion? Is it two months or quarterly? Please, we are not taking issues of procedure but we are processing what has been proposed, and that is the procedure we have adopted. So, we cannot rise on procedure over and over.

The Member for Amolatar District has proposed that instead of saying two months, Government should report quarterly, which is three months, and that is within the Government disbursement system. Can I hear from the mover of the motion on this?

MS AMODING:  Mr Speaker, it is not quite clear, given the budgeting cycle, what this would imply. I am thinking about the minister and how possible it would be for him to report quarterly on all these issues. I think they are quite a number of issues - laws and details - that we need; so quarterly reports would be a little too much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you had proposed two months. 

MS AMODING: The two months will take care of the first year. In Recommendation No.3 (iii), we talk about the progress achieved by Uganda towards the implementation of SDGs. Therefore, we are proposing that the minister comes before this House to report on the progress annually. I think that is feasible because it gives us time to reflect on the year and also highlight some gaps. Quarterly would be too much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what becomes of the two months in paragraph 3?

MS AMODING: Mr Speaker, this would mean that Government is coming to report to Parliament on the previous year, since you know SDGs took effect in September last year and this year in September, it will be a complete year. So, every September of a year, we can require the minister to appear before the House to update us on annual progress.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the first report will be given within two months and thereafter annually; is that so?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I want colleagues to look at the report I have read and go to the conclusion. This issue is categorically stated there. We have tasked ourselves to report, without anybody’s insistence. I would like to read the last paragraph, which says that Government will continue to provide annual and semi-annual assessment reviews, including progress reports on the implementation of the SDGs during the retreat of ministers, permanent secretaries and local governments. I think we have already tasked ourselves. I do not think it is -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you missed out Parliament in this one. Now we want to include Parliament.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: We can then improve and say we can report to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are only interested in Parliament.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Okay, we are going to include a phrase to say that there will be a report to Parliament annually or semi-annually.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we now relate this to Parliament and take a decision, Members? This is something that should not take us long, really.

MS AMULE: Mr Speaker, the time I presented this proposal, I considered continuity, the sequence of monitoring, evaluation and also putting in place corrective measures. What I mean here is that, at the time the report is given to Parliament in one year, how much can we do to correct things that have already gone wrong? 

As we amend this, therefore, we should include something that will ensure that in between the one year, Parliament is updated so that we will be in a position to correct what we feel or think has not been done according to what Parliament expected. Otherwise, I do not have any problem with the annual report from the Executive. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They said annual and semi-annual. I do not know - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, No.3 is basically going to do the baseline. We wanted the Prime Minister to allow No.3 to stay as it is because in two months, you will come and say, since we adopted the SDGs –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the resolution, not the SDGs. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, since we adopted the resolution - but we are also putting into consideration the time from September 2015, because here it talks about compliance, how far you have gone with implementation and what the issues are. So, that is what they are going to report on. Therefore, within two months, Parliament should expect the Executive to come here with a report on those issues. 

Our colleague has raised the issue of quarterly reporting. I would like to confess - If you go to your pigeonholes, you will get huge books of quarterly reports. I do not know how many of you have already read the accountability report on the performance of the other quarter of the budget. If you ask for quarterly reports, Government will produce them but you may not be in a position to read them.

We also do not want Government to just produce reports; sometimes they can copy and bring them to you but you may not be in a position to read them. However, after one year, one can be able to read the report carefully, and this has already been catered for under No.6. Therefore, No.3 is proper and we should adopt it as it is, and also adopt No.6. 

We need to also comment on what the Prime Minister has raised. When you talk about local governments and permanent secretaries, we are not part of those. You can go and sit in Munyonyo with those people but after your tea and coffee, you have to report to us. 

Mr Speaker, what we are saying is that there must be an agreed reporting mechanism to the House and it should be annually, and we must agree on the date here. That is what I am looking for. Is it every September, every December or every month? I would like to propose every end of October.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can this be part of documents that we will request the Government to submit when they are presenting the budget documents? Would it make more sense to do that, so that it is analysed within those documents, instead of seeking for a parallel system of reporting which might have a conformity problem? Can someone work this out, please?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I have looked at Resolution No. 3 and realised that if we process it systematically, 3(iii) will collapse. This is because, by the time they were framing this, Government had already done the needful. Here, we were asking Government to bring a report on progress achieved by Uganda towards the implementation of the SDGs, and they have done that in that report. Therefore, in my humble view, this collapses. 

What now remains, if we go systematically, is No. 1 and No. 2. However, we can amend No. 3 to say, “Government presents before Parliament, within two months, the first report and thereafter, makes annual reports.”

Mr Speaker, we have got the commitment and we are now adopting a resolution of Parliament, to which we can hold Government accountable. We can say the Government did not abide by our own resolution and we can even demand a memorandum on this. That is why we are doing this. Your report is not going to be adopted; we are only adopting these resolutions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me just say this: On the 31st of December, by the Public Finance Management Act, we received the Budget Framework Paper. Can we then ask that as Government presents the Budget Framework Paper, it attaches to it this report on these other aspects, so that we do not have to go with two months, biannually and etcetera? This will then be a routine, that when they are preparing the Budget Framework Paper, this particular document gets to be part of it. Would that make more practical sense, honourable members?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, in support of that spirit, I would like to say that Government has a reporting mechanism. If you read the Hansard, when we were discussing this motion, we said that we need to pronounce ourselves on the reporting mechanism. We do not have to have parallel reporting periods; we need to work within the Government’s reporting framework. 

Quarterly reporting was a bit ambitious, but I buy the proposal moved by the Leader of Government Business as improved by the Speaker. At the time Government brings the other documents that accompany the Budget Framework Paper, - the compliance to NPA, gender, and some other resolutions we have made in Parliament requiring Government to lay documents before Parliament - I think that would be the right reporting time.

I do not want us to focus on this reporting time alone, without concluding on the reporting mechanism. This is because we are not only discussing our motion; we are also processing this based on information provided by the Government. I would, therefore, like to ask Government to be slightly more categorical. I remember the Speaker even wondered who would be reporting. Therefore, I would like to add the issue on who will be reporting. 

Will it be the Prime Minister’s office to be reporting to the House or we are going to task someone else. The request then, during the debate, which was also my plea as a seconder of that motion, - it is now on Hansard and could be part of what we are discussing – was that the Prime Minister’s Office or the Leader of Government Business tasks a minister. We were looking at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which provides the resources. This is because however much you task other small ministries, – sorry for using the word “small” but they are small in terms of budgets – they will need the will of the Ministry of Finance and the Prime Minister’s office to make sure all targets are given priority in terms of financing. 

Therefore, I agree with that time of reporting but I would want in particular to know which minister is going to report. We do not have to leave it as Government or the Prime Minister, but – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As the seconder of the motion, what was your intention in No.5?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I do not want to go into -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In paragraph No.5, what was the intention?

MR MUKITALE: The issues are partly covered here, but in the debate there were some grey areas that arose. 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are all aware why we have international agendas. It is an international standard that those agendas need to comply with the laws of a particular country and not the laws complying with the agenda. 

Mr Speaker, I request to submit an amendment to 3(i) so that it reads as follows: “The compliance of the 2030 agenda with the laws of Uganda for sustainable development”, not the laws complying with the agenda. If this is maintained, it means we submit our laws to the agenda and yet it should be the other way around, that we align the agenda to the laws of the land.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Uganda already signed the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in New York last year and it has agreed to it as an international framework for implementation. That is why it is framed that way. So, as we review our laws, we are guided by the principles we agreed on internationally. That is why it is framed that way.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with the presenter who said that we use No.3 as a baseline. However, having agreed as such, we are talking about the Sustainable Development Goals. To attain a goal, you must have targets that could be established periodically, and which you monitor periodically, to make sure you are on track towards the attainment of the goal.

The first goal, for instance, is about ending poverty in all forms everywhere. What we should ask Government, as we set the baseline, is to identify the indicators and targets that we shall be monitoring. That will set the baseline, and the subsequent annual reports would be indicating how far we have gone towards the attainment of that periodic target. I do not know whether we are together.

In other words, I am proposing that we introduce an item in No.3, which could be (iv), on the identification of targets against each of the Sustainable Development Goals. I do not know whether I am clear? There is no way you are going to assess whether Uganda is doing well or progressing unless you know the target you would like to achieve.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the SDGs are a planning framework, which we are integrating within our development plans and our planning framework as a nation. The process that we are going through is also to attach targets to each and every goal. 

As a House, we are probably better off looking at these broad issues and directing the Executive in a certain direction. However, if we want to go into the details - the targets and the output - I believe that is probably taking this resolution too far. I do not see it necessary and, anyway, we are already doing that.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, can I support my argument? It seems the minister is watering it down to a micro detail. It is not a micro detail. When you set a long-term goal, you set targets and to attain those long-term goals, you have to periodically look at the targets as you implement. How shall we be able to say that Government is on course or it is not when we do not have indicators against each target? If you have the targets, why don’t you present them?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, the SDGs are a global framework and even global targets have been set - actually, they are 63. What happens at a country level is that the Government has to domesticate these targets. Therefore, in No.3, when you say that Government should report on the progress achieved, definitely, you measure the progress based on the targets. You say in 2015, the poverty levels were at 19 per cent and then, there is a target which we set by 2030 and progressively, you can report, say after five years, to show where we have reached.

You are correct but that is a detail which 3 (iii) already caters for. When you say “progress achieved”, that progress is measured using the indicators.

MS KHAINZA: I would like to give the minister some information. It is true, as hon. Lugoloobi has said, that some of the Sustainable Development Goals do not have targets. However, there are some which have; for instance, goal No. 3 on health where the target on maternal mortality is reducing the ratio by 70 deaths per 100,000 live births. At least I know that target on maternal mortality, but there are some which do not have targets. However, as he also has said, Government needs to come up with some targets to domesticate them. 

MR ABACANON GUTOMOI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What we are discussing was ably discussed last Thursday when we attended the International Day of Democracy. This issue came out very clearly. Unfortunately, very few Members attended the function; otherwise, this House would not have got into this situation.

There was a graduation from eight to 17 goals now. So, when you look at paragraph No. 3, I believe the framers are saying that Government should give us their report on (i), (ii) and (ii) within two months. My concern on this is that these two months are not enough. However, everything has been covered in Nos 5 and 6, because we must also comply with our budgets. Money is given out quarterly, when you talk about two months, will Government be able to do so?

Therefore, I think the mover of the motion should be able to see the reality in this. Otherwise, we discussed the targets for all these and as a Member said, some of them are there. We are just going forward and backward for reasons that I do not understand. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been able to process recommendations No. 1 and 2. Please reflect on No.3 and the remaining paragraphs of the resolution. This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.24 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 22 September 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
