Thursday, 4 September 2014

Parliament met at 11.12 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Please, accept my apology for starting late today. We should have started at 10 O’clock but I had meeting that was not planned earlier, which has just ended. That is why I came late. Because I came late, there will be no more communication from me; let us just proceed with business.

11.14
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is an issue of national concern that I have been told to raise by the people of Kisoro. The road from Kisoro to Bwindi National Park has become a death trap even when the Government of Uganda, through UNRA, signed a contract over a year ago to have it worked on. It has become an issue and the district has organised a demonstration. We want the Government to tell us why this road is not being worked on even after signing a contract with SBI. Thank you.

11.15
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague who has raised this matter. Since he has said that the road is a death trap, and everybody fears death, let me call the Minister of Finance to come and give us a response before the close of business today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Finance here?

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: I meant the Minister of Works. (Laughter)

11.15
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. In a spell of two weeks, we have had two buses from Arua robbed at gun point. Sometime last year, a Gaagaa bus was also robbed around Bombo. 

The most recent cases, however, were of a scary nature because the robbers were dressed in full military fatigues and armed with rifles that we do not expect robbers to have. The KKT bus was driven to the bush and all the passengers were stripped naked. They had to spend almost the whole day in the bush since all their phones and other property was taken away. The most recent incident happened on Tuesday night at Ayago in the Murchison National Park, and a similar thing happened to all the passengers. The bus was driven to the bush, passengers were stripped naked and robbed of their money.

Mr Speaker, I am raising this matter for Government’s attention because in the transport sector, the buses are allowed to travel at night on the premise that there is some semblance of security. However, as we have witnessed, since last year it seems that there is no security along Arua-Kampala Road to allow these buses to ply these routes at night. 

I therefore, appeal to the Government, particularly the ministers of security and defence, to take this matter up and see how they can beef up security along these routes where these buses operate at night. Thank you.

11.18
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague for raising this issue. This is an issue of internal security and so it is supposed to be addressed by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I request that you give us at least up to tomorrow so they can come and respond and tell us what has been done so far. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us move to the next item.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2013/2014

II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

11.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe Kafabusa): Mr Speaker, I would like to present a report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2014/2015.

Before I proceed I would like to lay on the Table a copy of the report and the minutes of the committee proceedings.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes and the full text of the report.

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, I present this report in accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The committee considered the ministerial policy statements and examined the budget estimates for the financial year 2014/2015 of the following votes:
Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development 
Vote 123 - Rural Electrification Agency 
Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment 
Vote 150 - National Environment Management Authority 
Vote 157 - National Forestry Authority

The report covers the following aspects:
i) 	Sector mandates;
ii) 	Budget performance (financial and output) in financial year 2013/2014;
ii) 	Planned activities and programmes for the financial year 2014/2015;
iii) 	Funds requested for to implement the planned activities;
iv) 	Committee’s observations and recommendations.

Mr Speaker, from page 3 to 57, the report contains the budget performance of the above sectors in the financial year 2013/2014. It also indicates budget proposals of the sectors for the financial year 2014/2015 as enshrined in the policy statements, and most of these are on the iPads. Therefore, I would wish to move on to page 57, where the observations commence. 

1) MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

(i) Regulatory Framework for Oil and Gas Sector 

The committee observed that Parliament considered and passed the Petroleum Exploration, Production and Development Act in 2013 and the Petroleum Refining, Conversion, Transmission and Midstream Storage Act, 2013, which were enacted in June 2013. However, the necessary regulations required to operationalise the Act have not yet been made. The committee was informed by the ministry that draft regulations for the upstream were ready and a technical committee has been put in place to develop standards for the ministry. 

The committee, therefore, recommends on page 58 that Government fast-tracks the implementation of the upstream and midstream regulations in order to streamline the operations of the oil industry and operationalise the petroleum laws.

(ii) Institutional Framework

The committee observed that Parliament considered and passed the Petroleum Exploration, Production and Development Act, 2013, which established the Petroleum Authority, the National Oil Company and the Directorate of Petroleum to manage the oil resources. The committee was informed that the process of putting in place boards for the Petroleum Authority and the National Oil Company was underway and nearing completion.

The Petroleum Exploration, Production and Development Act, 2013 does not provide a mechanism through which the budgets for the National Oil Company and National Petroleum Authority will be funded. Therefore, the committee recommends that Government operationalises the National Petroleum Authority and the National Oil Company so that they can carry out their mandate as provided for in the Petroleum Exploration, Production and Development Act, 2013.

The committee further recommends that a provision be made under the Public Finance Bill, currently before Parliament, to provide for the funding of the National Petroleum Authority and the National Oil Company.

(iii) Refinery Development

Government, with assistance of a transaction adviser, is working towards identifying a lead investor who will partner with Government to develop the oil refinery. The refinery will be developed on a public private partnership, with the public contributing up to 40 per cent and private partners 60 per cent. To date, 1,370 out of 2,615 Project Affected Persons (PAPs) who opted for compensation have been paid. This accounts for about 52.45 per cent.

Another payment for 598 PAPs is about to be made and this will bring the total number of those compensated to 1,968, equivalent to 75 per cent. Payment for the land for the resettlement of the 93 PAPs who opted for resettlement is being made following the approval of the contract by the Solicitor-General.

The committee recommends that Government fast-tracks the compensation and resettlement of PAPs so that construction of the refinery can commence according to the schedule.

(iv) Distribution Lines

The committee observed that Government is investing funds in the generation of hydropower and as well as energy from geothermal and solar. The new proposed power projects have provisions for evacuation lines to the national grid. However, there is no corresponding funding in the transmission and distribution lines to supply power to the final end users.

The committee recommends that Government provides funds for construction of transmission and distribution lines so that power is distributed to the intended users.

(v) Rural Electrification Rate

The committee recommends that Government provides more funding for output based aid in order to increase electricity coverage. This will encourage investment in value addition and reduce on the rate of environmental degradation. Funding for overall rural electrification should be provided for as a priority in the 2015/2016 budget.

(vi) Geothermal Exploration

The committee recommends that Government develops the geothermal policy to enable the development of the sites where geothermal power can be generated and improve on the energy mix. This will reduce the current dependence on hydropower.

(vii) Use of hydropower Plants as Tourist Centres

In Uganda, the public is not allowed to access the hydropower plant. In China and other countries, hydropower plants are used as tourist attractions, which is a source of income to the power generation companies. This will contribute to the much needed revenue to run the power plant and subsidise on the cost of electricity. Private tour companies are also encouraged to take tourists around the plants, which is also a source of employment to the public.

The committee recommends that Government changes its policy on access to hydropower plants and uses them as tourist attractions. This will help to raise funds for the energy sector by subsidising the cost of generation hence reducing the electricity tariffs.

(viii) Amber House

The committee observed that Amber House was transferred from Amber House Ltd to Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. This is aimed at providing enough space for Government agencies. It was further observed that parts of the building are occupied by private tenants while some of the agencies in the energy sector are housed in rented premises.

The committee recommends that all the tenants in Amber House whose tenancy agreements expire should not be renewed. This space should be availed to other agencies in the energy sector which are currently occupying rented premises.

(ix) VAT on Transmission Projects

The committee observed that Value Added Tax (VAT) is charged on electricity transmission lines. The cost of power transmission lines and related infrastructure is increased by VAT charged and yet its mechanism is such that funds are released by the Treasury, passed on to URA and transferred back to the same Treasury causing unnecessary administrative expenses along the way.

Value Added Tax on imported services, consultancies and contractors is a cost on power transmission lines and not recoverable under the VAT mechanism while at the same time, Government of Uganda delays to remit the VAT on normal VAT flows. This attracts penalties and interest from URA.

The committee recommends that Government removes VAT on electricity transmission projects as this increases the cost of energy infrastructure. This eventually transforms into high tariffs, which increases the cost of production in Uganda.

(x) Policy on Way Leaves

Uganda is currently undertaking large infrastructure projects in an effort to move to a middle level income country by 2020. This has necessitated investment in large hydropower plants, roads, railway lines as well as power transmission and distribution lines. However, most of these projects require land, which is in the hands of the public as per the 1995 Constitution. Acquisition of way leaves for these projects has become very expensive, which has in turn increased the cost of these projects.

Way leaves acquisition delays Government projects due to the current legal regime, which requires compensation to be upfront and prompt. The committee recommends that the Article relating to land ownership in the Constitution be reviewed to provide for compulsory acquisition –(Interjections)- This is in as far as compulsory acquisition is concerned; we are not saying land should be removed from the people. There is a provision in the Constitution which mentions prompt and upfront payment, which is the issue we considered and we are saying could be looked at. We are not saying that land should not belong to the people. I want this to be clarified. 

The committee therefore recommends that the Article in the Constitution relating to land ownership be reviewed to provide for compulsory acquisition of land for Government development projects, and a policy be developed to provide for way leaves acquisition in this regard. 

(xi) Energy Fund

The energy fund was established to enable the mobilisation of financial resources for planning and development of power projects related to electricity generation and transmission. The fund is operated under Statutory Instrument no.16 of 2009. The proceeds from the fund have been used for Karuma and Isimba hydropower projects. Other projects that are being packaged to benefit from the fund are Ayago, Oringa, Kiiba and Uhuru. According to the statutory instrument establishing the fund, it does not form part of the Consolidated Fund and the receipts, earnings and accruals of the fund at the end of the financial year are not repaid to the Consolidated Fund. 

For the past two consecutive financial years, no money has been deposited in the energy fund. This is affecting the above planned energy projects as Government has to contribute to the development of these projects. The committee recommends, therefore, that Government provides Shs 1 trillion every financial year to replenish the energy fund to stop the delays in the construction of energy infrastructure. 

(xii) Mining Leases

The Mining Act, 2003 states that mining licences should be issued on first come, first served basis. This has led to issuing of licences to individuals and companies who do not have both the technical and financial capacity. There is no requirement for conducting due diligence to ensure that the applicant has the capacity to carry out the activities they are applying for. 

The committee therefore recommends that the Mining Act, 2003 be amended to provide for competitive bidding for mining leases, due diligence on the applicants, and possession of both technical and financial resources to develop the mining area allocated. 

(xiii) Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited (UEGCL) Shareholding 

Currently, UEGCL has only two shareholders, the Minister of Finance and Minister of State for Finance (Privatisation). While determination of the composition of the governance team is supposed to be a joint activity between Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, over time it has evolved into only Ministry of Finance determining the governance team. As a result, there is lack of appreciation of the long-term impact of actions and decisions on capacity development in the company as well as consequent long-term effects on the plants developed, which manifests itself as design or construction defects. 

The committee therefore recommends that Government reviews the shareholding of Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should hold majority shareholding since it is the most competent Government entity to manage the sector. 

(xiv) Generation Planning Role

At the unbundling of UEB, the role of generation planning was not allocated to any of the unbundled entities. As a result, each of the entities engages in some form of generation planning. Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, UEDCL, ERA, UEGCL – all these do their own generation planning. While Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development retains overall responsibility of the sector, in most instances they lack the capacity to carry out the activities in the sector. However, for any unallocated activity, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development temporarily takes up the activity. 

A generation planning model was developed by Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development but it was never put into use. Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) has been licensing private developers of power plants especially in the small mini-hydro category. The process is such that the interested developer carries out a feasibility study, determines what the potential and hence eventual installed capacity at the site would be and then goes on to develop the site. This is against a backdrop of the current law, which says that any plant below 10MW does not have to be taken over by the government after the expiry of the licence. The Electricity Regulatory Authority does not have the in-house capacity to determine what the actual capacity at a site should be. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development streamlines the generation planning role among its agencies according to their mandates and competences and reports to the committee within six months. 

(xv) Project Implementation

The committee recommends that there should be a clear separation of roles of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the generation company. The ministry should handle oversight, ensuring adherence to meeting project milestones, and the generation company should handle supervision and monitoring of day-to-day project development. 

2) MINISTRY OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT

(i) The National Meteorological Authority

Parliament considered and passed the Uganda National Meteorological Authority Act in 2011. The Authority is supposed to inform Ugandans on the status of the weather. Farmers are particularly faced with challenges of unpredictable weather, which has affected agricultural output. This challenge necessitated the establishment of an authority to provide relevant and accurate information. Up to now, however, the Authority has not yet commenced operations. The board was appointed but there are no operational funds. 

The committee recommends that Government grants the Authority a vote status and provides funds to enable it start operations. Funds should also be provided to enable it recruit the necessary staff required to run the Authority. 

(ii) Understaffing in the Ministry

The committee observed that Government put a ban on new recruitments in all government ministries, departments, agencies and local governments except on replacement basis. The same message has been re-echoed in the budget call circular for financial year 2014/2015. This has made it impossible for the ministry to fill vacant positions in its structure. 

The ministry has only 203 positions filled, leaving 215 vacancies. It is not possible for the ministry to fully fulfil its mandate when it has less than half of the required staff to fully operate. Some of these vacancies are senior positions such as assistant commissioners, principal water officers, principal hydrologist and principal water analysts, among others. 

The committee recommends that Government considers lifting the ban for the water sector because it is very critical to the development of the country. The ministry will not be able to improve the current water coverage, with the country’s population growing at 3.2 per cent, without the necessary personnel or manpower. 

(iii) Rainwater Harvesting

The committee recommends that Government puts in place a policy where all plans for construction in gazetted planning areas shall not be approved where there is no rainwater harvesting facility. Also, all public buildings for schools, hospitals and churches should have rainwater harvesting facilities. 

The Ministry of Water and Environment should carry out sensitisation so that people can use rain water from safe water roofs. Government should also provide incentives to enable the poor acquire rainwater harvesting facilities. 

(iv) Mandate of the Ministry of Water and Environment, National Forestry Authority and NEMA 

The National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 established the National Forestry Authority (NFA) to manage the central forest reserves. The central forest reserves are better managed than the local forest reserves, which were left under local government under the supervision of the ministry. 

There also continues to be a conflicting mandate between the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) and the wetlands division in the Ministry of Water and Environment as roles for either department continue to overlap. This has resulted in the mismanagement of wetlands. This situation needs urgent attention if we are to stop the current deforestation in the local forest reserves and the encroachment on wetlands. It was observed that as much as authorities were established to manage the environment and forestry sectors, the ministry remained with the ultimate policy guidance in the sector. 

The committee recommends that the Wetlands Division and the Forestry Department at the Ministry of Water and Environment concentrate on policy guidance and leave matters of implementation to the two authorities, which can handle these activities, that is, NEMA and NFA. The National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 should be amended urgently to bring the local forest reserves under the control of the National Forestry Authority. This will help the country to preserve the forests and use them sustainably for future generations.   

(v) Environmental Levy

The Minister of Finance introduced the environmental level in financial year 2005/2006 on used vehicles aged eight years and above, used goods and other imported used articles. The purpose of this measure was to discourage importation of obsolete items, which are hazardous to our people who consume these products, and to save the environment. 

The environment levy was increased to 20 per cent in financial 2008/2009. Despite the collection of the environmental levy by Uganda Revenue Authority, the Ministry of Finance has never remitted the levy to the environment fund. National Environment Management Authority continues to be heavily underfunded and the various recommendations by this committee to release this money to the environment fund have gone unimplemented. 

The committee recommends that this levy be scrapped since it is not being used to fulfil the intention for which it was introduced. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should make a report to the House within a month explaining what these funds have been used for and why they were never remitted to the environment fund. 

(vi) Water for Production

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is the lead agency for water use and management for agricultural development on-farm. It is also mandated to supervise on-farm water infrastructure as primary distribution and tertiary networks for irrigation systems and other on-farm users. 

In the development of water for production facilities, Ministry of Water and Environment and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries are required to work in consultation to ensure that the facilities address both off-farm and on-farm requirements. To achieve this, Government established an inter-ministerial technical committee to harmonise policies, plans, programmes and the investment projects of World Food Programme through a Cabinet decision. However, it was observed that from the review of reports and various correspondences, there are still gaps in coordination between the key players. The coordination gaps are evident with a number of dams, including Arechet, Akwera and Longoromit, remaining underutilised after completion due to failure by Ministry of Agriculture to implement any on-farm activities and yet these are designed to be multifunctional. 

The committee recommends that the inter-ministerial committee set up by Government coordinates the development activities in this sector. This will stop the loss of funds through investments, which cannot be utilised. 

Government should also build capacity in the Ministry of Agriculture to provide water for crop farming and animal husbandry, which is largely its mandate. Government should urgently provide funding for water for production as a priority in the next budget.  
  
(vii) Ban on Polythene Bags

The Government of Uganda banned the importation and production of polythene bags for purposes of protecting the environment in the Budget Speech for financial 2009/2010. A six months’ transition period was given to the general public during which they were expected to find alternative materials for packing considered more environmentally sustainable. 

The Minister of Finance, under Section 2(2) of the Finance Act, 2009 made regulations, the Finance (Permitted Plastic Bags and other Plastics for Exceptional Use) Regulations 2010, which exempted almost all the polythene bags used in the country. 

The committee observed that all the registered factories in Uganda have complied with the regulations and all the polythene bags produced are above the 30 microns. Some of the factories have also established recycling plants, which have reduced the polythene bags being disposed of into the environment. However, it was further observed that there is a problem of smuggled polythene bags especially from Kenya where industries are allowed to manufacture polythene bags of below 30 microns for export. These have continued to infiltrate Uganda’s market. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry for East African Affairs takes up this matter and handles it at the regional level. The East African Community member states should implement the East African Community Polythene Materials Control Act in order to protect the environment for the current and future generations. 

The committee further recommends that the banned polythene bags should be added on the list of anti-smuggled goods immediately in order to effectively stop them from being smuggled into Uganda.    

(viii) Replacement of Hand-pumped Boreholes

The committee recommends that Government fast-tracks the implementation of the gravity flow water supply technology and solar water pumping systems to replace boreholes whose cost of drilling and maintenance is very high.  

(ix) Progress on Cancellation of Titles in Wetlands 

The ministry, in consultation with NEMA, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, KCCA, local governments, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional and Ministry of Finance has developed criteria and operational procedures for handling the cancellation of titles in wetlands on public land. They have submitted these criteria, known as the Criteria for Land Titles Cancellation, to PCE for comments.

The Ministry of Water and Environment prepared a detailed wetlands shape file for Greater Kampala and submitted to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for superimposing on the cadastral maps to delineate plots within wetlands and when the titles were issued. This is to support the cancellation process in Kampala and its surroundings. So far, 7,540 titles for plots in wetlands in Kampala, 970 in Mukono and 9,065 in Wakiso are due for cancellation. 

The Ministry of Water and Environment, NEMA, KCCA, local governments and the Environment Police Protection Unit (EPPU) have set up a joint compliance monitoring and enforcement team to stop further degradation of wetlands. The team comprises of officers who have now been gazetted as environment inspectors in accordance to the NEMA Act, Cap 153, section 79, to be more effective and efficient. 

The Ministry of Water and Environment, in consultation with NEMA, KCCA, local governments and EPPU prepared a draft communication plan to be used for information, communication and mobilisation of stakeholders throughout the cancellation process.  

The committee recommends that Government considers the cancellation of titles in wetlands as a matter of urgency in order to preserve the wetlands and protect the ecosystems, which are necessary for natural water purification. 

(x) Waste Water Treatment

In 2004, the National Water and Sewerage Corporation developed the long-term (up to 2033) Sanitation Development Programme for Kampala under the Sanitation Strategy and Master Plan for Kampala City, which was updated in 2008. The Kampala Sanitation Master Plan is currently being implemented in a phased approach. The Kampala Sanitation Programme aims at improving environmental sustainability of the Lake Victoria basin through reduction of pollution entering the lake through the Nakivubo Channel. 

The Committee recommends, on page 71, that Government provides funds for waste water treatment since this is a major cause of many diseases, which are related to poor sanitation. This will also reduce on the pollution of the lakes and rivers hence preserving the environment. 

3) NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY 

(i)	E-waste Policy 

The Ministry of ICT together with NEMA have developed the E-waste Policy, which was enacted in 2013, and the E-waste Strategy that was launched by the Minister of State for ICT in June 2014. These two policy documents provide the tool for all institutions to manage e-waste within their localities and specifically, define the role and responsibilities or activities to be undertaken by NEMA. 

Due to lack of operational funds, the public has not been sensitised on how to dispose of e-waste and there are no incinerators to destroy obsolete e-waste like computers, television sets, refrigerators, mobile phones and others. These have continued to be thrown into lakes and rivers thereby polluting the water sources. 

The Committee recommends that Government provides funds to construct e-waste regional centres to collect e-waste and also build regional incinerators to destroy e-waste. 

(ii) Human Resource Capacity Constraint

The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development urgently approve the structures of NEMA and funds be provided to improve remuneration of the staff of the Authority to avoid human resource flight from the Authority.

(iii) Financial Constraint 

The committee recommends that government increases the MTEF ceiling for NEMA to Shs 20 billion to enable the Authority carry out its mandate. Caution should be taken as no price value can be put on the cost of environmental degradation. The consequences are more expensive to deal with than protection of the environment.  

(iv) District Environment Officers 

All districts in Uganda have environmental officers, who are supposed to, among other things, monitor the state of the environment. They are employees of local governments; NEMA has no control over them but works with them to ensure sustainable use of the environment. Most of the environment officers are not facilitated to do their work in the districts, with some receiving as low as Shs 800,000 for an entire financial year.

The committee recommends that government centralises the appointment of environment officers under NEMA to ensure effective control over them and ensure the presence of NEMA in all the districts of Uganda. Government should also start conditional grants to the districts to support environment activities.
      
4) NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORITY 

(i) Environment Protection Police (EPP) 

I will go straight to the recommendation. We know about this issue, which has been here year in, year out. The Committee recommends that Government provides Shs 1.3 billion to enable NFA provide the much needed protection of central forest reserves. Uganda currently loses 90,000 hectares of forest cover. We need to urgently address the issue of deforestation for sustainable development and future generations. 

(ii) Afforestation

The committee recommends that:
a) 	Funds be provided to NFA to provide seedlings to be planted on all national days across the country;

b) 	All contracts by Uganda National Roads Authority should include a clause on planting trees along all the roads. This has been done in China and many other countries;

c) 	The Ministry of Works and Transport should include a clause on planting of trees along all the railway line reserves in the country. This has been done in China and many other countries;   

d) 	Kampala Capital City Authority and all planning authorities including local governments should make it a condition for space to be provided for planting trees before approving construction/building plans. This is how trees were planted in Kololo and Nakasero during the colonial days. 

(iii) Ban on Allocation of Land in Central Forest Reserves 

The committee recommends that National Forestry Authority reviews the regulation governing the allocation and utilisation of land in central forest reserves and Government should consider lifting the ban as a matter of urgency to provide the much needed land for afforestation. 

(iv) Commercial Tree Planting 

The committee recommends that during the review of the NAADS programme, a forestry component should be included under National Forestry Authority to support the forestry sector in order to develop it and make it more attractive. 

(v) Degradation of Central Forest Reserves

The committee recommends that Government provides Shs 1.2 billion annually to restore degraded natural forests and preserve the biodiversity and water catchment areas. 

(vi) Re-surveying and Demarcation of CFR Boundaries 

The committee recommends that Government provides Shs 7.5 billion in the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) for five years to enable NFA resurvey and mark the boundaries with concrete pillars. This will protect the central forest reserves from encroachers. 

Conclusion

Subject to the above observations and recommendations, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the budget estimates for votes 017, 123, 019, 150 and 157 as follows:

VOTE 017 - MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT
Recurrent (Shs 8,506,990,000) 
    a) Wage                 		Shs 4,062,809,000
    b) Non-Wage             		Shs 4,244,181,000
    c) Arrears              		Shs 200,000,000

Development (Shs 1,767,402,963,000)
    a) Government of Uganda  	Shs 1,291,104,295,000
    b) External Financing 	Shs 468,598,668,000
    c) Appropriation in Aid     	Shs 7,700,000,000
    d) Total 			Shs 1,775,909,953,000

VOTE 123 - RURAL ELECTRIFICATION AGENCY 
Recurrent (Shs 16,962,677,000) 
    a) Wage and non-wage is tagged to the ministry 
    b) Appropriation in Aid    	Shs 16,962,677,000

Development (Shs 82,080,853,000)
    a) Government of Uganda 	Shs 18,639,223,000
    b) External financing  	Shs 44,404,306,000
    c) Appropriation in Aid  	Shs 19,037,323,000
    d) Total			Shs 99,043,530,000

VOTE 019 - MINISTRY OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT	 
Recurrent (Shs 9,195,203,000)
    a) Wage			Shs 5,356,001,000
    b) Non-Wage			Shs 3,839,202,000

Development (Shs 331,547,280,000) 
    a) Government of Uganda	Shs 175,750,549,000
    b) External financing		Shs 155,796,731,000
    c) Total			 Shs 340,742,483,000

VOTE 150 - NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY	 
Recurrent (Shs 7,996,419,000)
    a) Wage	      	 	Shs 3,741,892,000
    b) Non-Wage	   		Shs 4,254,527,000

Development (Shs 1,251,469,000)
    a) Government of Uganda	Shs 1,251,469,000
    b) Total	               	Shs 9,247,888,000

VOTE 157 - NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORITY	 
Recurrent (Shs 18,934,676,000)
    a) Wage			Shs 5,400,000,000
    b) Non-Wage			Shs 133,371,000
    c) Appropriation in Aid	Shs 13,401,305,000
    
Development (Shs 2,146,719,000)
    a) Government of Uganda	Shs 1,181,047,000
    b) Appropriation in Aid	Shs 965,672,000
    c) Total	              	Shs 21,081,395,000

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that all?

MR KAFABUSA WERIKHE: There is an attachment by one of the committee members, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, who is going to present; it is a minority report. He informed me, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure, and we agreed that he goes ahead to present it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it attached to your report?

MR KAFABUSA: Yes, it is attached.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, now would be the time for hon. Ken- Lukyamuzi to proceed with his minority report. However, before you take the Floor, in the gallery this morning, we have students and faculty members from the School for International Training. They have been learning about the parliamentary process in Uganda and are here to observe how the plenary is conducted. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are very welcome. Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, the Man. (Laughter)

12.07
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, pursuant to rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure, allow me to present a minority report. 

I fully participated in the examination of the ministerial policy statements for the sectors of water and environment as well as energy and mineral development for the financial year 2014/2015. I did not agree with the majority of the committee members and in defence of Articles 39 and 245 as well as national objective of state policy XXVII, allow me to articulate the concerns that led to that divergence, especially with reference to three areas: One, enforcement of the ban on polythene materials; two, the remittance of the environmental levy; and finally, environmental impact assessment for an oil refinery.

Enforcement of the Ban on Polythene Materials

The committee’s recommendation on the way forward on the polythene materials, locally known as akaveera, in my humble view, was ambiguous. The continued use of polythene bags cannot be solely attributed to smuggling as alluded to by the majority of the committee members.

As articulated by a Uganda Revenue Authority official during a committee meeting held on 14th of August, the challenge of enforcement of the ban was attributed to the fact that the Schedule (Appendix I) of the Finance (Permitted Plastic Bags and Other Plastics for Exceptional Use) Regulations nearly exempted all polythene bags used in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, why is there need for stringent action on kaveera? Why are we saying that there is need to address this matter squarely? The Ninth Parliament recently pronounced itself on the need to ban the use and manufacture of kaveera in a resolution of Parliament, which I personally moved on the Floor of the House, on the 15th day of May this year.

Section 3(1) of the Finance Act, 2009 prohibited with effect from 31 March 2010 the importation, local manufacture, sale or use of sacks and bags of polythene materials. This is on record.

Polythene material, scientifically, is plastic in nature, non-biodegradable and reduces soil productivity due to its inability to decompose. It is an environmental hazard and its decomposition can persist in the soils beyond 400 years. It is imperative, therefore, to note that the danger of polythene materials results from their chemical composition, not necessarily thickness of the microns. All leaders in this country, including honourable members, must, therefore, be concerned about polythene material hazards as we prepare for oil production. 

There is need to enact a stringent polythene law. If we ignore that call, the unscrupulous investors, ahead of the harvest of oil, are going to rush into the large scale manufacture of the kaveera and this will be an additional catastrophe. The kaveera is a by-product of oil. We must guard our environment in advance before we face the scuffle.

Mr Speaker, the East African Community has already pronounced itself when EALA passed the East African Community Polythene Material Control Act prohibiting the manufacturing, sale, importation and the use of polythene material as early as 2012.

Finally, on that point, Mr Speaker, even the Ugandan courts of law have pronounced themselves on the need to ban the use of kaveera. In the case of Greenwatch (Uganda) Limited v. the Attorney-General and NEMA, 2011, Justice Eldad Mwangusya issued the following declaration: “The manufacture and use of polythene material undermines the rights of citizens of Uganda in enjoying a clean and healthy environment” as articulated by the contents of Article 39 of the Constitution.

That resolution is very fundamental in law and nobody should ignore it. It is now part of the books of law and should be respected, much more so by honourable members.

Recommendation

Before passing the NEMA vote, the Minister in charge of Water and Environment should pronounce himself or herself through a time bound commitment that a Bill shall be tabled in Parliament banning the use, manufacture, sale and importation of kaveera. This should be within a period not exceeding a year from 15 May 2014, when a resolution of Parliament was last moved on the Floor of the House here.

A total ban on plastic bags for conveyance of goods and liquids would promote alternatives to polythene bags such as paper, sisal, cotton bags, baskets and bio-degradable bags. This would lead to the creation of more employment while promoting clean production and clean agriculture. This is a very important point in scientific terms as we talk about modern productivity in agriculture.

Remittance of Environmental Levy

Mr Speaker, my second concern is about the remittance of environmental levy. The environmental levy had a genuine purpose when it was brought up namely, improving funding for the National Environment Management Authority so as to facilitate sustainable environment programmes in Uganda. Therefore, scrapping the levy without remitting what has been collected over the years would be a misjudgement of facts. Scrapping the levy would constrain the opportunities for boosting NEMA’s resource envelope, which is badly required in the monitoring of environmental standards in the Albertine Graben.

Even before the harvesting of oil, NEMA has been blamed over its reluctance to scientifically monitor what is going on. The principal goal of oil investors is profit generation while NEMA’s goal is sustainable environmental management during and after oil production. The National Environment Management Authority must be supported financially to monitor and regulate oil activities so as to save endangered wildlife species in the Albertine Graben. Within the Albertine Graben there are endangered animals, which we treasure by tourism standards. I speak about the kudu, the duiker and the mountain gorilla. All these are endangered and yet positively cause success in terms of economics towards our tourism industry.

The recommendation is that environment levy should, therefore, not be scrapped. Rather, it should be retained to improve funding opportunities for NEMA, which is to a large extent underfunded. A special audit should also be undertaken by the Auditor-General into the collection, disclosure and remittance of that levy.

Environmental Impact Assessment for the Oil Refinery

Finally, regarding environmental impact assessment for the oil refinery, honourable members, you know how concerned I am environmentally on matters of that magnitude. The development of an oil refinery on a pubic private partnership is too huge to be a monopoly of Cabinet. The committee report reveals that the private sector shall own 60 per cent against 40 per cent for the public sector. It further states that six bidders were shortlisted out of the two consortia that were shortlisted for negotiation. It has also been revealed that out of those supposed to be compensated to clear space for the refinery construction, 52.45 per cent had been compensated. Now you are reaching a scale where you are almost about to refine oil, but how do you refine oil without attending to the standards articulated in law concerning the environment? 

It is also on record, with reference to the State of the Nation Address by the President of Uganda for 2014/2015, that oil will be produced largely in the following ways: through the refinery and crude oil production. 

Oil production is too risky a trade to be undertaken without an environmental impact assessment as required by the Environment Act, 1995 cap 153. Instead, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development reported in its policy statement that environmental baseline studies were concluded in December 2013 to guide Government in decision-making. That is a policy area, which has nothing to do with structural scientific undertakings. Why should the country go to the final stages of the refinery before we receive an environmental impact assessment, which must also be subjected to a public hearing? If the refinery baseline study is not scientifically viable, what do we do? We cannot risk the lives of Ugandans and the environment of Uganda. This is a very important statement, which I think should not be ignored. 

The recommendation is that Members should ensure that an environmental impact assessment is carried out and subjected to public hearings as dictated by the National Environment Act, 1995 before the refinery can be constructed.

Oil refinery is a very risky undertaking and warrants serious scientific scrutiny. As people’s representatives, the institution of Parliament is equally entitled to access the environmental baseline study of the refinery project. We are just hearing about it on paper. We are representatives of the people of Uganda and we are entitled to accessing the baseline advocacy. The oil spill, which befell the Gulf of Mexico in recent years and caused massive damages to the American environment, is still fresh in people’s minds. We should therefore not risk. 

In conclusion, the recommendations contained in this report, when adopted, will improve environmental management in Uganda as dictated by Articles 39 and Article 245 and the national objectives of state policy of the Constitution of Uganda. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the chair and members of the committee. I thank the chair for articulating the main report of the committee. I also thank hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi for the very passionate appeal he has made to the House and a very high level articulation of the subject matter. 

Honourable members, the motion before us is for the adoption of the report of the sectoral Committee on Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2014/2015. That is the motion before us. I propose it for your debate. 

As you now know, there has been a minority report that has been read and articulated. It has three recommendations cutting across the sectors that are contained in this report. The key recommendation coming from the honourable member who presented the minority report is on the question of enforcement on the ban on manufacture and importation of polythene material in this country. He does not believe that it is only in relation to smuggling from Kenya and other neighbouring countries. He says that the matters are bigger than that; the committee had a different view. 

Two, he is worried about remittances of the environmental levy. The committee believed that it should be scrapped but the member believes it should not be scrapped. Thirdly, he believes that the environmental impact assessment must be done before the oil refinery venture is undertaken. Those are the recommendations that he has articulated very passionately and I now put the matter for your debate. 

The recommendations that are proposed in the minority report, as I said, cut across. Now, I want the committee chairman to guide the House before we go into this debate. Is the main report actually saying that it is only smuggling, which is affecting the ban on the presence of polythene materials in this country? Two, is the committee actually recommending that the environmental levy should be scrapped? Three, is the committee actually recommending that the oil refinery business can go on even without the environmental impact assessment and public review of the whole matter? If the chairman can articulate those issues before us, that can straighten out the differences and we see how to proceed. 

MR KAFABUSA WERIKHE: Mr Speaker and honourable members, on the issue of polythene bags, we largely observed that the problem was due to the smuggled polythene bags. We did not rule out some other areas. We were told that there could be some small scale manufacturers who do the production of polythene bags in their houses. We called the Minister of Trade and Industry, the Minister of Finance and Minister of Water and Environment. In the process, we agreed that efforts should be taken to eliminate even those small areas, which produce them. The most important source, however, was through smuggling. This does not rule out the fact that there are people producing polythene in their houses; they admitted to this. 

Most of the factories have complied because even the Committee on Trade and Industry together with the Committee on Natural Resources went around Kampala, in particular to look at the factories that are producing polythene bags. The observation was that the bags they produce were above 30 microns. So, it was on that basis that they said that the imported polythene bags are responsible for much of the problem. Nevertheless, of course, internally, we should not spare any efforts in trying to eradicate any dotted production within, if any. From the major factories, however, it was observed that most of the production was of polythene bags, which were above 30 microns. 

Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s submission is actually almost in tandem with ours because we are saying that the law must be reviewed. In the process of reviewing the current law, then all these attendant issues will come in. That is where we will have the input of honourable members. When I look at hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s submission and that of the committee, I do not see any significant difference apart from the smuggled versus the non-smuggled. I have no problem in having the law reviewed. That would also bring on board what hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi has suggested.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, does that satisfy you in relation to why you disagreed?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Yes, I do see the point he is alluding to, save that I do not agree that there are existing laws of relevance concerning the kaveera. The regulation articulated under finance was an occasional event. The time is now for the Ministry of Water and Environment to bring a law to fully address the catastrophe of the kaveera. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You both agree that there should be a review of existing laws to take care of the entire situation. Is that agreed?

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to seek your guidance. The basis of a minority report should be a disagreement from the committee level by the principal people here - the chairperson representing the rest of the committee members and the person presenting the divergent view in the minority report. So, if they disagreed there, why should they bring their debate here? Have they brought their debate here to be conducted by us? Why the ping-pong? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you see, when you read documents, you assess the extent of disagreement. I happened to have read them and did not notice any major disagreement. That is why I am proceeding this way, honourable member for Obongi. (Applause) If you had read it like I did, you would agree with the way I am proceeding. (Laughter) Please, let us resolve this issue of the minority report because I think there is concurrence on the issues. Let us go to the next issue.

MR KAFABUSA WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, I think the committee was actually emotional on this particular issue. Since the coming into force of the environmental levy, no single coin has ever gone to NEMA. So, we asked ourselves why the Ministry of Finance should continue collecting this money when it is not serving the purpose for which it was set up. 

If we can get assurances - I think I agree with hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi that if the levy is utilised for the purposes that it was intended, it should stay. However, we will need assurances from the Ministry of Finance on the Floor of the House; short of that, I think I have no problem with that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, what the committee is proposing is that because the money is not being sent to NEMA, it should be abolished. Is that a fair recommendation?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In light of the argument on the environmental levy, the committee is saying that the Ministry of Finance has failed to implement it. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, that you, sitting in your honourable chair, redirect the Minister of Finance to implement what the committee agreed on earlier to have the levy redirected to the environmental fund.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, once this Parliament passes a budget, it is ready for implementation by the different agencies; it does not need any directives from the Speaker. 

If the environmental levy is being collected by the URA and being sent to the Ministry of Finance and not to the environment fund, that is simply wrong. That is an abuse of the law because the law says that a levy should be collected and given to the environment fund for them to do repairs and environmental reparations where damage has been occasioned. So, if it is being collected and kept by somebody without remittance to the desired fund, it is simply an abuse of the process. So, you do not need any directives from the Speaker. That is not only a bad procedure; it is even bad manners to behave that way. (Laughter)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANACE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Jacan Omach): Mr Speaker, you have talked. Currently, the environmental levy is going to the Consolidated Fund and, of course, it is because it is being collected by URA. So, there is need for us to amend the URA Act to have this collection go to a special fund.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the amount collected from the environmental levy is known. So, even if it goes to the Consolidated Fund, it remains known. Why don’t you request that the money that goes to the Consolidated Fund under these circumstances should revert to the environment fund? Why don’t you make a request as Ministry of Finance? (Applause)

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, as of now, the funds that go to the environment are only those that have been appropriated by this Parliament. So, until we amend the URA Act – This is also affecting the road fund, as you may recall. That is why we need to amend the URA Act so that this is can be effectively done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When are you tabling the amendment?

MR OMACH: Within two months.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, bring the law here so that we can – 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Natural Resources. I would like to clarify that the recommendation as it stands came, in part, as a result of frustration. We expect a lot from NEMA. Look at pollution; probably, 99 per cent of the members in this House have paid the environmental levy, especially most of you who drive old cars. (Laughter) If I have not spoken the truth, somebody can challenge me. (Interruption)

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable member holding the Floor to demean Members of Parliament saying that 99 per cent of us drive old cars when he drives a Nissan Patrol 1995 model? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, by driving a car of 1995, you have paid the environmental levy and by standards of the law, that car is old and that is why you have to pay the environmental levy. So, you have just answered your own point of order. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. For the record, I do not drive a 1995 model car. The Nissan I drive is pretty new. (Laughter) For the record, it is a 2008 model and I can lay - (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, that aside, I am quite pleased by the approach because this is not a matter that we should have disagreed upon. The method you have employed is good but we need the commitment from the Ministry of Finance. The person collecting the money is not the owner. 

We have created several funds here, like the road fund and so on but we are lamenting about all of them. Now, what is this thing called the Consolidated Fund? Is it the issue of consolidation that is causing a problem in understanding? Yes, URA collects but we cannot blame URA because it is not the one to dispatch; it is Ministry of Finance. 

Maybe very soon, we should find a better word to describe Ministry of Finance, if they continue this way. The problem is not URA because they are doing a great job of collecting; knowing which amount should go to which fund is where you are failing. We cannot even change the law - the collector is there with a law and we also create another law for the disburser. 

Really, Minister of Finance, I know you; you can do better than this. The question of law is not the problem; the problem is the management of these funds. When they are consolidated, I believe that the Ministry of Finance also has a consolidated mind. (Laughter) So, I want to believe that if you gave some directive, it would be able to help us move on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish the Attorney-General was here. We have a law that created the environmental levy and the environmental fund. Now, when you have somebody that is collecting this money, isn’t it by operation of the law that if you collect that money it must go to that fund? Do you need further appropriation to take the money there or the law has already automatically appropriated it? 

The law is saying, “Collect this money, put it in this fund”. That is what the law is saying. So, why are you taking it to some bottomless pit, because the law is saying that if you collect this money put it to this fund? If it is received in the Consolidated Fund, there is a direction of the law, which is in operation, saying that you put it in that fund. I do not even know why there is an issue with the road fund, the energy fund if there are laws that give clear directives that funds collected on this line must go to these funds. I do not know why there is a problem. The Attorney-General could have helped us with this.

MR AKORA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to refer to the statement made by the Minister of Finance that it is the URA law that prohibits transferring these sums of money to their respective funds - the road fund, the energy fund, environment fund and other funds. 

What the minister has not told the House is that in the proposed Public Finance Bill, the proposal is that tax and non-tax collections should go to the Consolidated Fund. So, these agencies that collect these revenues - NEMA, National Forestry Authority, Communication Commission, Uganda Wildlife Authority - should remit all their collections to the Consolidated Fund and then they will submit all their work plans and budgets to the House under the relevant ministries. Parliament will then appropriate sums that we will deem adequate for their operations. That is the proposal in the law.

This will have the effect of constraining these authorities, which were meant to be semi-independent or semi-autonomous, to be effective and run in a business-like manner. They will have to wait for Parliament to allocate resources which Parliament thinks are adequate, and wait further for the Ministry of Finance to release the funds as and when the funds are available.

In effect, the Public Finance Bill will centralise all incomes of semi-autonomous institutions into the Consolidated Fund and those funds will be appropriated by Parliament to those institutions. Of course, those institutions would then have to compete with other priorities in terms of Parliament determining how much will be released to them. It would greatly constrain their operations. That is the information I wish to give the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the first issue of enforcement of the law, I think there is concurrence and the general overriding recommendation of the committee will take care of that with some modification. However, on this issue that the environmental levy should be scrapped, what is the position of the House so that we can dispose of this matter? – (Interjections) - It should not be scrapped? 

We will then adopt the recommendation of hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi on this matter. When we come to deal with the committee report on that subject, if you made a recommendation that it should not be scrapped, we will adopt this; or we adopt it now?
 
MR WERIKHE KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, on that one, I concede. When we get to that recommendation, we should take that of hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. We are not going to scrap it. It was an emotional decision, as hon. Oboth said, but now we are satisfied that Ministry of Finance is going to take action, so we adopt this one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Now we go to the environmental impact assessment of the oil refinery.

MR KAFABUSA WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, for every major project in this country, we need an environmental impact assessment; there is no problem. This is what has been done. This is stating the obvious; it is tautological. Let there be an environmental impact assessment when the oil refinery starts its activities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what this means is that the minority report is adopted on one aspect and the other two aspects will be contained in the main report. We have agreed that the environmental levy should not be scraped; that is the recommendation we have adopted from the minority report. Now, I open debate on the general report.

12.47
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for their report. 

I want to appreciate the output based aid initiative and I support the recommendation of the committee for Government to provide more funding to increase the coverage. I have a big concern about Government aided secondary schools that are not connected to electricity. Some of these schools have had power lines running over them for many years. 

The Government is promoting science subjects in all the secondary schools and is sending science equipment to these secondary schools but this equipment cannot be used without power. That is one reason why our secondary schools in the rural areas perform very poorly in science subjects. To add to the recommendation given by the committee for Government to increase funding for these initiatives, I also appeal and urge Government to ensure that connecting Government aided secondary schools that already have power lines is taken as an urgent matter. 

The committee also recommended fast-tracking of compensations and resettlement of people affected by the construction of the refinery. I want to say that the issue of compensation is not only limited to the people affected by the refinery. There are people who are affected by the construction of power lines. In my district, Pader, there are people who were affected by the construction of power lines from Gulu to Acholibur. People have been denied the right to use their properties and resources that could have been their only source of livelihood and up to now, they have not been compensated.

I also urge Government to compensate those who are affected by some of these projects. (Member timed out.)

12.51
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have only two issues to speak to. One concerns the recommendation of the committee on page 61 to amend Article 26 of this good Constitution, especially section (2)(b)(i), which says, “prompt payment of fair and adequate compensation, prior to the taking of possession or acquisition of the property…” 

This is a narrow path to a bigger problem and any attempt by any committee to make such a recommendation must be resisted. There is a big debate in the country as to whether people’s land and property should be taken over compulsorily by Government. The section you want to amend comes from protection from deprivation of property. In Uganda, we have a right to property and if you are going to take my property, you must compensate me fairly and promptly prior to you taking it. So, how can a committee of Parliament recommend that this section be amended?

I think Parliament must reject such a recommendation straightaway and send a warning to whoever wants to tamper with a section of the law that he will be resisted with full force. (Laughter) I heard the same thing come up in the President’s speech; he also wants that section amended. Let us pronounce ourselves and reject this and send a clear message that we will protect the people of Uganda and their property.

The other point of contention I have is also on page 56, where you are recommending a 40 to 60 per cent ownership under PPP on the refinery. Honourable members, I have had the opportunity to read a book called Economic Hitman. Countries that have discovered oil and other resources have lost billions of money to this kind of arrangement. My elementary commerce tells me that whoever owns more than 51 per cent shares controls that company fundamentally. (Member timed out.)

12.54
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion and I thank the committee for the good work. 

I am concerned about the vote for NEMA and for NFA. I was just looking at the recurrent budget for NEMA, which is Shs 7.9 billion, and this is for wages, maybe workshops or consultancies and the development budget is only Shs 1.2 billion. This is just like 15 per cent going to development! I wonder why you are allocating a lot of money for people to move around while development has little money.

The same goes for NFA – Shs 18 billion is for recurrent expenditure and only Shs 2 billion is for development. What development do we want to see in the countryside? With this type of allocation, Ugandans are being deprived of services.

The committee recommended the amendment of the NFA Tree Planting Act, 2003. The reason for the amendment was that the NFA was performing better than the local forestry bodies so they want to amend the Act so that the local forest reserves are brought under the National Forestry Authority. I disagree with this because we have not facilitated the district local governments enough. I do not see an environment office, at least in my district; I do not see any funding in the budget for the local governments. So, why don’t we empower the district local governments to implement what they are supposed to? I think this will also be against the decentralisation policy.

My next point is on royalties. We have discussed a lot about royalties, at least under oil and gas. However, I also know that there have been royalties under the Mining Act but there have been implementation challenges; for example, I think now people even do not know the polices, guidelines or even rates they should use for the cement factory. Tororo District budgeted for Shs 133 million and they got only Shs 84 million from Tororo Cement. Kasese Municipality budgeted for Shs 60 million and they only got Shs 1 million from Kilembe Mines. Tororo Municipality budgeted for Shs 30 million and got only Shs 15 million. So, what guidelines regarding percentage are being used to implement the royalties? I support – (Member timed out.)

12.57
MRS MABLE BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am concerned about vote 019, the Ministry of Water and Environment. 

The National Meteorological Authority was set up with the purpose of having relevant and accurate information passed on to the agricultural stakeholders. I agree with the committee’s recommendation seeking a vote status for this Authority so that it is able to take off. However, I would like to ask the minister to tell this House how a board was appointed knowing that there were no operational funds to help it start. This recruitment itself has costs attached to it.

Secondly, let us look at the staffing levels at the Ministry of Water and Environment; it has 203 members of staff and 215 vacancies. The committee was right to propose that Government should consider lifting the ban on recruitment for the water sector. However, I also want to say that lifting the ban on recruitment should be across the board. All ministries, departments and agencies of Government, especially the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Local Government, are all key; they are the backbone to the operations of this Government. All these ministries contribute to the points of service delivery in their respective areas. So, the government should look at lifting the ban of recruitment across the board.

I was also happy with the point on replacement of hand-pumps for water, especially in the areas where there are large gravity flow schemes and where solar water pumping technology is being developed. I had thought about this, and the committee is right because water can be treated from river points which have high altitudes, and this water can be supplied to targeted rural and urban communities in the lower areas. 

Bugangaizi East has a critically water stressed zone. However, this zone has never been considered for such a scheme and yet it has only one river called Mpongo, which has free flowing water. I have been requesting Government to focus on this source of natural free flowing water, treat it and take it to the highest altitude to enable these disadvantaged areas gain access to safe clean water. It is true we are supportive, but I want the minister to tell us when he plans to roll out such programmes to the many areas that are critically water stressed. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will be giving priority to those who have not contributed yet.

1.02
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Mr Speaker, I sit on the Committee of Government Assurances- From what we have talked about in the minority report and the main report, we have agreed that the fund stays. However, I have not got a clear way forward because there was a proposal that the URA law should be revisited. There was also information that the Public Finance Bill which is coming will perfectly cure the mess. However, there was a general proposal from the House that the Ministry of Finance has the mandate to re-direct the fund to go to NEMA; that was the conclusion from the House.

I want assurance from the Minister of Finance because sometimes when you want to take them on as a committee, they say that this was a directive; they never committed themselves. So, Mr Speaker, I want to get a way forward concerning the remittance of that fund to NEMA.

I agree with the committee on lifting the ceiling for National Forestry Authority. For us from the mountain slopes, especially Bugisu and Sebei, we have been on a massive campaign to mobilise our people to plant trees as a measure to mitigate the landslides. The challenge we get, however, is that when we go to National Forestry Authority, the seedlings are never adequate. We get only 10,000 or 20,000 seedlings, which cannot cover the acreage. So, I agree with the committee that the budget be increased and the ceiling lifted. The nursery beds at National Forestry Authority are poorly managed and the reason they give is that resources are not enough. Therefore, I think this will be the perfect cure for us who want to encourage tree planting in those areas. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

1.04
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Mr Speaker, I thank the committee for a good report. I would like to raise two issues. One is on power, which the Prime Minister committed himself to and said that the Government would extend it from Aboke to Alito. That line used to be there but because of insurgency, it was disconnected. However, it was supposed to be rehabilitated and the Prime Minister committed himself but I do not see it in the report as one of the priorities.

My second issue is on piped water. I have seen the honourable minister going to launch piped water in most of the new districts. Kole Town Council also needs water. These were commitments made by the Prime Minister who is the Leader of Government Business. Those are the only concerns of the people of Kole, which are not indicated in this report. Thank you.

1.06
MS STELLA NYOMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): I thank the committee for the report. I support the committee’s recommendation on increasing the budgets of NEMA and NFA so that they can be able to support the local governments to facilitate the process of tree planting. Karamoja has suffered a lot under environmental degradation and there have been no interventions. It is like NEMA and NFA do not exist in this country. The place is flat and this has affected agricultural production in the area. We have had cases of people dying of hunger and it is just because the place has been neglected. There are no interventions from Government to ensure that trees are planted and that the environment is conserved so that the people can be able to engage in agricultural production.

Mr Speaker, recently we had a problem of hepatitis E in some of the districts in Karamoja. This was because of lack of sanitation and hygiene. The major problem was that people were drinking dirty water from the streams and wells, which are not well protected. The Ministry of Water and Environment did not take any action and as I speak, hepatitis E is still on rampage in Napak District. I think the ministry should learn to utilise the funds that are appropriated by this Parliament to ensure that the lives of the people are safe.

On the issue of latrine coverage, I read from the report that the ministry also undertakes sensitisation missions to ensure that there is latrine coverage and hygiene in some other districts of Uganda. In Karamoja sub region, however, the latrine coverage is at 10 per cent. This is very shameful and yet we continue to appropriate funds for these programmes to be undertaken by these ministries. 

It is my prayer to the committee that we follow up whatever we appropriate to ensure more sensitisation and mobilisation on latrine coverage in Karamoja District so that coverage goes up to at least 30 per cent. We can be able to avert disease infection in the Karamoja sub region. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.09
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting a good report.

Mr Speaker, I have got only two areas of interest and one of them is the rainwater harvesting programme that the committee recommended. As you may know, most of the iron sheets for roofs are coloured and from experience, most of these iron sheets keep fading and the colour keeps coming off. Most of our schools, hospitals and even residential houses use these roofs to aid them in rainwater harvesting. I would like to know from the chairperson how safe these roofs are. How safe is the water being consumed as recommended by the committee? 

Secondly, for quite a long time we have been receiving recommendations to do with water dams in most rural areas. In the rural area I come from, we have a cattle corridor and we have more than five dams. However, they need de-silting and for almost four years, they have never been de-silted. We have been receiving promises from the committee and the Government; our people have started worrying because at the end of the day, to be a healthy person you need to consume a healthy animal.

Mr Speaker, I would like to know whether the water from the roofs is safe to be consumed and secondly, why you are not de-silting our dams. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

1.11
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the very good report. 

Commenting on the degradation of the central forest reserves, the committee recommends that the Government should provide Shs 1.2 billion so as to restore the degraded natural forests. In my own view, much as this is a very wonderful recommendation, we should be able to go above that and be even more detailed. We can find out, for example, from the National Forestry Authority who these encroachers are and what the causes of this encroachment are. This is because we may give the money but what will happen next? Shall we continue to provide money every time these encroachers do their bad activities? I would recommend that NFA should be able to assess every region, for instance, Karamoja, and find out exactly what causes these people to do this and if we have got ways of overcoming this.

Secondly, it would also be better for the committee to spell out the number of forests - how many they are and their names - so that we know that Shs 1.2 billion was provided for a certain number of forests. When you follow up next time, we may not be able to measure the success. So, how many forests are we talking about? That would enable Parliament to measure the success of this recommendation. National Forestry Authority should, therefore, provide more information about this for us to be able to get the reality. 

The other point is on commercial tree planting. While I do agree with the committee that during the review of NAADS a forest component should be included so as to support the forest sector, - it is a wonderful idea - I want to add more strength to this recommendation. While we provide funds for this, I would like to see an initiative that would motivate the commercial tree planters to have competition among the regions. Let some prizes be provided for the best performers - those who plant a significant number of trees - so that when others also begin to compete, we will be able to plant a lot of trees. This is my proposal. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

1.14
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to apologise because my voice is not very clear as I have some ailments. I would like to join the rest of the members in thanking the committee for the good report. However, I have one question to raise, and that is about rainwater harvesting. Year in, year out, a recommendation has been made to the Ministry of Water and Environment to put in place a policy which ensures that all plans for buildings, which do not have water harvesting facilities, do not get approved. This has always remained in black and white but in reality, very little is being done. 

Even for buildings which were constructed long ago, like the Parliamentary Buildings, the water harvesting facility has been done halfway; water is not being harvested. If you look at the amount of water used to clean the parliamentary premises, it is a lot and yet we are letting rain water flow away. All the water being used to clean the parliamentary premises is drawn from the lake and yet this is a rainy season. We should reserve this water from the lake and use rainwater to clean the parliamentary premises but this is not being done. 

I wonder why this policy cannot be put in place so that we harvest rain water and leave lake water for things like hydro-power dams. I thought I should bring this forward because for about three years now, the same recommendation has been coming from the committee but nothing is implemented. (Member timed out.)

1.16
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start with the issue of polythene bags. Indeed, there is a very serious matter that has befallen our country. I want to thank Parliament for putting its foot down to ensure that we legislate to ban importation and manufacture of polythene bags. 

Mr Speaker, we need to be aware, as my colleague, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, the man, said; it is not about the microns or thickness of the polythene. What is happening in the countryside today is that many people actually use polythene bags to cover their food or to serve hot food. When you subject a polythene bag to high temperature, it disintegrates the chemical structure of the kaveera. The emissions thereof, including inhalation of smoke from burnt polythene, which is going on everywhere, are extremely dangerous. Consumption of food covered by polythene actually predisposes one to cancer of the oesophagus, which is on the increase. Why don’t we save our people! We need to have expeditious enactment and enforcement of a law banning the use, importation or manufacture of polythene in order to save our people from cancer of the oesophagus. 

Secondly, I note that there is an observation by the committee that NFA needs Shs 32 billion to open boundaries and survey the central forest reserves. However, in the recommendation, they talk about Shs 7.5 billion to be allocated to NFA for the purpose for the next five years. I need to observe that there are a lot of disputes across the country arising from encroachment. The longer we take to resolve the matter of opening of boundaries and surveying central forest reserves, the more risk we have of death of purported encroachers. 

Indeed, during the opening of borders, NFA should have a human face. I have noted that there is a lot of brutality going on all over the country. In Teso - Amuria, Katakwi - Kapchorwa and Bugisu, there is a lot of tension going on. So, we need to urgently appropriate money. I am not satisfied with the Shs 7.5 billion for the next five years because we need Shs 32 billion to resolve the matter. If it were possible, let us have strong affirmative action to make sure that this particular activity is put to rest. (Member timed out.)

1.20
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have a few issues to raise in regard to the committee report. The first is in form of a question. Why has the ministry opted for a 40 to 60 arrangement in regard to investment in the refinery? I am sure the investment in the refinery will translate into competition in future when we begin to get the oil revenue. 

Secondly, the committee has rightly observed that there are private companies occupying Amber House and yet some offices of Ministry of Energy are in rented premises. It is important that the House approves the recommendation that the ministry quickly moves its agencies to Amber House because we are losing a lot of money in paying rent and yet we have a building that should be occupied by the ministry. 

Thirdly, I support my colleagues on the issue of the policy on way leaves. I do not know whether it was an oversight or an intended move by the committee to say we amend the Constitution and yet the framers of this particular Article envisaged that in future, land would be on demand for various purposes; indeed, the individuals landed a free gift. We are all born on land and we get some assurances that we have some possession because land is the first capital.

If Government has envisaged any use of land, the framers of the Constitution provided for that provision to protect Ugandans from these arrangements. So, this is the time for us to test Article 26 and particularly, that clause. I think the Ministry of Energy should live up to this fact that Ugandans have this protection within the law and that this is the time for Ugandans to benefit as provided for in this Constitution. (Member timed out.)

1.23
MR HARUNA KASOLO KYEYUNE (Independent, Kyotera County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the wonderful report. 

I have concerns about lack of coordination among government departments. In Kyotera constituency, for example, the Ministry of Water and Environment extended piped water to the people of in Kirumba Sub County, which was a wonderful gesture, but surprisingly, in the bills of quantities in respect to that contract, the contractor was supposed to extend power to the main source of water but there is no power in that sub county. The main source of water is just a few kilometres to the sub county headquarters in a nearby trading centre. However, Ministry of Water and Environment did not coordinate with the Ministry of Energy to ensure that these people in the surrounding areas benefit from this project. 

For the ministry to extend water to the people and leave without connecting power is not good planning. I am saying this because they will not get money to pay for the water bills. I think we need only about 15 electric poles to cover the distance from the main water source to the sub county. I contacted the Ministry of Energy about this but they are turning a deaf ear.

I appeal to the Ministry of Energy to work with the Ministry of Water and Environment to extend power to the people of Kirumba Sub County, which also houses the health centre III. This will help our people benefit more. We should give them water in order to also boost their income. That is my concern. I wish the Minister of Energy could answer my appeal. (Member timed out.)

1.27
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the effort of the committee in coming up with the report and key highlights. I have two issues to raise to the chairperson of the committee and the minister of this sector. 

The first issue relates to the recommendation on rural electrification. I appreciate your concerns relating to the slow rate at which this project is moving and the need for us to help the ministry to fast-truck these activities. However, my concerns relates to whether you have taken time to realise that even when power has been extended to the people, consumption is very low especially owing to the high cost of power. 

Have you tried to understand and seek explanations as to why the cost of power is so high to the extent that people see these power cables passing over their houses as mere decorations because they cannot afford it? I am saying this because later on, you raise the issue of VAT relating to transmission projects, but whose VAT and whose power? My sense is that the reason you are raising this concern is partly because of the disaggregation of the power sector. We simply have very many power centres and interests. 

In your report, the role of the distributor, Umeme, does not come out. If you are going to get to the real issue, I think you need to go down and disaggregate the roles of all these players, including Parliament. How far has the concessionaire gone, for instance, in fulfilling their obligations because this could partly explain the cost of power for our people? I have not heard from the committee whether while you reviewed these issues and entities, you went down to break down the roles of the different players, and in particular the last entity that actually bills and ensures people have access to power.

Lastly, on the mining leases, you have said that the Mining Act, which I am not privy to, states that the licence should be given on first come, first served basis. In the same report, it is indicated that it is the Government that undertakes the surveys. So, who communicates to these people who claim they have come first? If the law –(Member timed out.)

1.30
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I salute the chairperson and committee members for presenting a good report. 

Let me draw your attention to pages 21 to 23, where the committee mentions output performance, which is described using a table on performance of key projects. In here, the committee lists the various projects and the ratings in terms of percentages, for example, for Bushenyi, Kasese, Kyenjojo, etc. However, in the entire list, projects of the same kind that are taking place or those that are supposed to be there in West Nile are not included. Why did you omit the West Nile projects from this list? From Gulu to Atiak, Adjumani to Moyo, Arua to Koboko to Yumbe, we see a lot of work going on there but it is not listed here. Aren’t these projects supposed to be monitored by Parliament?

Mr Speaker, there is also a big concern about people who live in the Nile valley. People who live either side of River Nile, east or west, are left isolated and abandoned without development. We expect an electricity line from Packwach, for example, to Rhino Camp to Obongi up to Laropi but there is nothing there. On the other side of Nwoya District, there are people living in the Nile valley but these people are not taken care of. I would like to draw the attention of this House to the fact that the people Obongi also need electricity because they are also people. (Laughter)

I would like to draw your attention to page 8 -monitoring of oil and gas activities. You have informed us that the construction of a refinery is at the stage of getting the potential partner to work with Government; that is okay. What about the area of waste disposal and management? How much is the waste and where is it located? Which companies have been licensed to deal with this? There are activities that come out to the market or on the oil for use but what about the waste disposal activities?

Nwoya is sitting on a time bomb because there is some waste that has accumulated there and they do not talk about this. Some of the licences of the companies licensed to deal with disposal of waste have expired. So why haven’t you included the issue of the renewal of licences of companies dealing with waste disposal?

Lastly, we must be informed about how much oil has left the soil and how much oil is still down there. People ask me, “Hon. Fungaroo, is the oil still there really or it is already finished?” It is the ordinary people that are asking this ordinary question. (Member timed out.)

1.34
MS SARAH MATEKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the good work. 

The committee has talked about waste treatment and has concentrated a lot in Kampala. What plans do you have for the growing towns? Much as you talk about water, water and sanitation go together. I have not seen you talk about the treatment plants in the growing towns. A case in point, which I have always stood on this Floor to talk about, is the sewage treatment plant in Kisoro, which was constructed in the middle of homes and is very dangerous for people’s health. We either compensate these people or we transfer the treatment plant somewhere else.

I would like to thank the ministry for the good work, especially on the rainwater harvest tanks. In Kisoro, they have really done some good work but the cost is still high. Even if you tell people that a household is supposed to pay Shs 400,000 to get a tank and the district only provides labour, it is still very high for the peasant. Can’t we get cheaper materials to help the peasants get this water?

Another issue is about the solar systems. I thank the committee, which brought out this idea of using solar systems for pumping water. However, in Kisoro, although they really gave us a very big solar pump project, it failed. I do not know what happened. We now have very many solar pumps there. Wouldn’t it be right if we reduced on the cost of pumping water, especially in areas where we are using electricity? At the end of the day, all the money used for pumping the water is going to Umeme. Wouldn’t it be prudent for us to reduce the tariff for pumping water in these rural areas?

Finally, still on the issue of solar pumps, in Kisoro District we have really had problems with the pumps and it is because of too much pressure. Originally, this water was supposed to supply the town council only, but because of the demands this water was pushed to other rural areas. The pumps have been pushed to their limit. I do not know what plans you have to help us so that we have these new pumps.

According to some of my other colleagues I have talked to, in some areas where they have put these water pumps, they are fake; they are not working. Can the committee come in and investigate that? (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will be drawing to close. I will allow a few more members. I will ask the honourable ministers to group their issues and not to respond to each Member because I am going to give you very limited time. We need to finish by 2 O’clock so that we can take a break and come back. So, group your issues because I will give you very limited time.

1.38
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I listened very carefully to the report as it was being presented by the chair and I must thank the committee for the wonderful work done. 

I have two concerns. One, the report refers to NEMA conducting public awareness campaigns in most regions of the country. However, a few months ago, when we had an interface with the Minister of State for Environment, she told us that her ministry in conjunction with NFA were organising a massive tree planting campaign. They were going to distribute tree seedlings to major areas in the country that are affected by environmental degradation. I do not how far this approach has gone. Surely, if we are to have effective mitigating measures towards the undermining of the ecosystem, we need to have these tree seedlings distributed, especially to the youth who spend most of their time in the villages and those that are not employed. They should have these trees planted and then environmental degradation will be addressed.

Two, I listened to the chair talk about the on-going electricity infrastructure projects that were listed. I was waiting to hear Budiope East in Buyende District because there is a serious tourism project that was unveiled by the President of the Republic of Uganda. Since we all know that tourism is a major foreign exchange earner for this country, we surely needed electricity extended to this area. In Buyende District, we have Kagulu Rock; the Chinese have already come and surveyed the place and they want to put cable cars so that the tourists that come find it easy to get up the rock in addition to other tourist attractions that are in that place. I would like to appeal to the Minister of Energy to have Budiope East in Buyende District considered for extension of electricity. 

In some ministries, it is standard practice that if money is not immediately available, you classify that as one of the unfunded priorities so that we know that money will be availed to cater for power extension. (Member timed out.)

1.42
MR CLEMENT OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the committee for the work well done. However, I wonder why the committee seems to be pushing so much for these solar innovations which, as my colleague, hon. Mateke, has pointed out, have had a lot of problems. I think if we used the hydro-generated water system, which seems to be picking up in all the western countries – anybody who has flown in and out of Amsterdam will have noticed wavelength rotating because they are used for irrigation. I do not know why we cannot try that especially in Kaberamaido where we have a lot of wind during dry season. And I think that would do a better job of generating water than using solar.

Secondly, as far as rural electrification is concerned, I am wondering why electricity is being taken more to trading centres and not to schools and health centres. In Kalaki, for example, not a single primary school is connected to electricity and this is why Kalaki is at the bottom of PLE performance every year.

The forestry department, unfortunately, Mr Speaker, will give seedlings when the dry season is approaching. Right now, if you went to the forestry authority, they are selling seedlings but when the dry season kicks in then they begin distributing seedlings to MPs to take to their constituencies and unfortunately we cannot plant these things during the dry season. So, I ask the NFA to have a clear policy for distribution of seedlings and in which particular area of Uganda where seedlings grow. Even the army know this now – right next to me you see hon. Katirima and hon. Lakot; they are both wearing UPDF uniforms but they are different because one is for Somalia and the other is for rainy areas. (Laughter) NFA should think about this as soon as possible. Thank you. (Laughter)

1.44
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for this report and the Ministry of Energy for their effort to supply electricity in Uganda – in generation, transmission and distribution. However, I would like to request the minister, as a matter of urgency, to bring before Parliament the real final cost of Karuma, Ayago and Isimba. This is because it is a loan which requires parliamentary approval. Whatever you are doing without parliamentary approval is unfortunate and you should have by now laid it before Parliament. 

Are we dealing with a concession loan, a PPP – what is in your addendum which we are getting from the press? It should have been brought to Parliament yesterday. At the end of the day, what this country wants is affordable and accessible power and we all seem to be moving in the direction of affordable power. This is because if the Inga power tomorrow produced with interconnectivity, our generation may become redundant; we need power but affordable. And Ethiopia is also doing interconnection and very soon they will bring to our borders affordable power. What are you doing as we end NDP-I and we go to NDP-II to give this country and the region affordable power because there is competition?

Secondly, on behalf of the early-production regions of oil – as an MP of Buliisa from Bunyoro and neighbours of Acholi, you are not consulting us on the oil development plan. You have not brought us together as Bunyoro and Acholi leaders – not as district leaders or MPs; instead you are backbiting us in your development plan. You are planning for land of which some has already been taken by speculators against the people. So can you, with immediate effect, arrange a consultation with these regions because by not doing that you are causing us a lot of havoc? You have just done a refinery road to siphon oil from Kaiso-Tonya but you have forgotten the community – those of us who have been there before; the fishermen, agriculturists. You have forgotten the interconnection to West Nile and the road to DRC. You are talking of the international airport without looking at what is in the Vision 2040 – which talks of another international airport, which could actually be close to DR Congo as Sudan is near. The railway line is in Pakwach and as such we do not have that connection. We are talking of Hoima and Buliisa oil towns and yet our vision is talking about another city in Uganda. Why don’t you talk about Karuma, through Bweyale-Kigumba up to Nakasongola? 

These matters, Madam Minister, are not only for your ministry; we should bring in the other ministries. And you are not giving us, as Parliament, a feedback; for the last three years, I have been demanding that you bring us an inter-ministerial and comprehensive plan but nothing has come here. It once came up during the oil debate but nothing has come here. So basically, you are leaving us in darkness and yet as leaders who are supposed to explain issues, we do not have information. I do not think you can mention when we last met, at least as Bunyoro sub-region leaders –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will now have the shadow ministers; each of them in their sectors will take four minutes while the government ministers should take five minutes each.

1.48
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENERGY, OIL AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Florence Ekwau): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for its good work. I will begin with the question of the Escrow Account; you can get this information on page 18 of the alternative policy statement. By 2011/12, Government was recording Shs 97 billion in the Escrow Account; by 2013/14 financial year, there was zero balance in the Escrow Account and yet the laws of Uganda say that the minimum that Uganda can ever have in the Escrow Account is Shs 20 million. Honourable minister, what have you done and where is our money?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the question of the earthquake facility; Uganda is the only country in the globe where any vandal walks into government facilities, vandalises them and walks out. The earthquake facility was vandalised and in this financial year, Government intends to spend Shs 4.6 billion to reconstruct that vandalised facility. But no clear updates have been given up to today on how far this case has gone. I think it is imperative that this House demands to know what happened to this case. And how can vandals – Ugandans in the names of investors – own land titles of government facilities that already have programmes and projects on? This is because computers would have thrown out everything; how far has this case gone?

On the question of Umeme, I will talk about energy and the electric power department generally. The performance of Umeme has been left to chance; the electricity sector is underperforming because of the inefficiencies of Umeme. The adhoc committee of this House made recommendations and the question of power losses is still standing at 28 percent. The agreement Uganda signed with Umeme stipulated that by 2015 at least power losses would be operating at below 20 percent. And cabinet’s continued refusal to adhere to advice given by this House is clear impunity that honestly deserves mentioning. We wonder what the ministry is going to tell us about Umeme – whether the minister and her team are satisfied. No mention was made whatsoever in the ministerial policy statement regarding the performance of Umeme.

Mr Speaker, on the question of high tariffs – you will get this information on page 19 of the alternative policy statement. High tariffs in Uganda are caused by the high cost of power production. When you look at what is happening, one of our colleagues, hon. Andrew Baryayanga v Attorney-General, lodged a case No.162 of 2013. It was swept under the carpet; no one has followed it up. It was ignored and yet Karuma Dam remains one of the highest as far as the cost of construction is concerned. How will you expect this power to be affordable to Ugandans at the end of the day? We will continue paying through the nose until Government learns to do what is expected of it the right way.

Mr Speaker, I will now go to the issue of negotiation for the refinery. As of last week, negotiation on the refinery had commenced. We want to send clear signals and warnings to the ministry officials and Ugandans involved in the negotiations on the construction of the refinery. Once bitten, twice shy. We are suffering with the shoddy work of Umeme and bad contracts that Uganda signs as a Government on behalf of Uganda. Moreover, sons and daughters of Ugandans sit on the negotiation table. We are sending warnings to the officials responsible for the negotiations in the oil refinery construction     - stand warned! Should Uganda get a raw deal out of this contract and should Ugandans be cheated again, we will go for your necks this time. 

1.53
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee and honourable colleagues for the report and particularly for adopting most of my recommendations in the alternative policy statement. That is the way in which we can propel this country forward.

I would like to emphasise a number of issues in the alternative policy statement and one is on the recommendation of the committee to restore natural forests and we are allocating funds to that. We would like to go an extra mile and deal with some people who are staying like for example in Mabira forest, which is so pertinent to this country. There are indigenous people inside who could easily be used as an entry point. We would recommend that the government ensures that these people are compensated and we have Mabira forest fully restored as it is our natural and national pride.

Two, we would like to recommend to Government that national forests should equally be used for revenue by way of bee farming. They could even act as soldiers for those who would want to go and cut down trees or unnecessarily degrade them. In fact, it would be a good source of revenue if we could undertake bee farming in these forests and also emphasise that we need eco-tourism promoted in these natural forests.

Mr Speaker, I would want to reiterate that Government should quickly gazette the forest regulations to enable the National Forestry Authority undertake good planning for this country. As we speak, it is not yet in place. 

I would also want to emphasise that the exemptions on VAT should be reinstated. As a country, we cannot afford to put VAT on water. Water is life. We could get another source where we can collect taxes but for heavens’ sake, I would want to request, on the recommendation by the committee, that VAT should be exempted on water because water is life and as a country, we are struggling with extensions of clean water to the people. That will be double standards.

Mr Speaker, I would like to also urge Government that the special audit, which was also emphasised by my colleague in my alternative policy statement, should be taken seriously. This is on environmental funds, which have been settled and I am happy about that.

I would also want to propose to the ministry that as we are going to National Forestry Authority for seedlings, we would want you to look at another type of seeds. Fruit seedlings could be a motivating factor if it also distributed to Ugandans because they take a short time to mature and have a quick return on investment. So let the ministry think about investing in and distributing fruit seedlings like mangoes or oranges to the people as a way of seedling distribution in this country.

Mr Speaker, I want to show my disappointment on the issue of climate change. As a country, we have not taken on this mantle seriously. We have taken it lightly and yet the effects to this country are large. I had earlier suggested that we create a committee to fast track the effects of climate change. Unfortunately, this has not taken off. In my alternative policy statement, I have emphasised that we need a full department to have climate change fast tracked. So far, this House has not even had an update on – (Member timed out_).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, five minutes each.

1.58
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to colleagues in thanking the chairperson and members of the natural resources committee for a job well done. I appreciate the support that they continue to give to my ministry and I thank all of you colleagues for the support that you give us in ensuring that we have quality services given to this country.

I will go straight to the issues that have been raised by members. I do agree with the recommendation of the committee on the issues that have been raised. The only clarification I wish to make regarding the performance of one of the successor companies, Uganda Electricity Generation Company, is that this company is the one that we are using as Government to own and also supervise the implementation of the project of power generation. As we move along with all the recommendations that you have made in streamlining the energy sector and the ownership of these companies, I think all these issues will be clarified and we should be able to move in harmony.

At the same time, I also wish to let you know that a committee that is chaired by myself to look at the energy planning and development in this country and involves all these sector companies and agencies, has been formed so that we can have a harmonised process of planning and developing energy projects for this country.

Honourable colleagues, I do appreciate your individual needs in your respective constituencies for power extensions and as Government, we are trying our level best to see that we reach out to each and every one of you. I will only ask for patience because of the limited financing and I am happy that the committee recognises that, and has emphasised that as much money as possible should be availed to us so that we can reach out and increase electricity access throughout this country.

So where we are progressing, we need your support and we will try to reach out to schools and health centres because we recognise that it is important that they are connected to electricity for better services. We will look at potential economic areas like fishing, mining and economic centres like business centres. We are looking at all these; so we will strive. Bear with us but what I can pledge is that we shall reach out to all of you.

The issue of wayleaves is really a challenge because while we want to extend this electricity to every part of the country, we do recognise that land belongs to the people and I think that is why the committee has brought out this issue. We recognise that for us to be able to reach all those places, we have to pass the lines. Now those lines require that you allow some area for the lines to pass. If we are to wait for compensation for each and every person in whose land the lines is passing, we will not get to your places quickly.

So we request that you support us and we have actually appealed to each one of you several times to engage the local people to allow us to pass the lines so that we can get to your places as quickly as possible. If you wait for compensation, it will take a long time because it means Government has to get money. However, for some of the big projects, some compensation has been done, but compensating people and resettling them takes a lot of time. That is why some of the projects end up delaying. I request that you continue giving us support in that area. 

Now, I want to talk about the ownership of the refinery, public private partnership where we want a leading investor to take 60 percent of the shares and 40 percent as public. The considerations were made because this kind of investment is huge; we are talking of billions of US dollars. And this is an area which is new to us. 

We need technology and expertise and the leader investor is also going to operate this refinery. So those considerations were made and that is how we arrived at the 60 percent – (Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I raised a constitutional matter on the developments in Karuma; the biggest loan this country ever got, which by constitution requires parliamentary approval – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister has not yet finished; you are wasting time.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Indeed I am going to talk about the issues he has raised. Please give me a chance to respond. So that is the investment, because of the nature of the investment and I request that you continue to give us your support. We emphasised it to the team that is negotiating to make sure that they do a good job for us as Ugandans because this is an investment which will stay with us for over 25 years. So we need to make sure that we bring a good investor who can partner with us for a long term process. 

I want to talk about loyalties for minerals. I have recognised that colleagues may not be aware that we have a mining instrument where all these rates are indicated. I request that you take time to look at mining instrument 2010, which has the revised rate of how much –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please deal with the issue of Karuma only. 

MS MULONI: On Karuma, my colleague is concerned that work is going on without agreements brought to the Floor of Parliament. The issue of the loan is still ongoing. Once they have processed the negotiations and approval is done, my colleague, the Minister of Finance, will bring here the loans for Karuma and Isimba to be passed by Parliament.

For now, the companies accepted to start on work using their own financing – (Interjections) – yes; honourable members, you recognise that we would never want to be taken back to the days of darkness; we must have these projects progress as early as possible. The demand of electricity is really high – (Interjections) – yes, the companies accepted to start on the projects using their own financing, which we appreciate as Government. When the loans are ready, my colleague, the Minister of Finance, will bring the loan applications for Parliament of Uganda to approve. 

2.07
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, it is with a heavy heart that the Ministry of Water and Environment has lost one of its dedicated and one of its most patriotic members who has served this ministry and this government for over 32 years and had risen through the ranks to being the director of water resources, Engineer Shillingi has died. Mr Speaker, that is life; we shall miss him, but we must continue. Mr Speaker, if you guide so, a minute of silence could be observed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us rise for a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that humane gesture and members of Parliament. There are many good things that the chairman and member of the committee have brought forward. We really feel inspired as a ministry. And if time permits me, I want to bring out only three areas which I think are very critical. 

One relates to Uganda Meteorological Authority. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, for passing an Act of Parliament establishing this authority and the board has been appointed to implement your desire. It is absolutely critical that we have as part of transformation a metrological service that provides accurate information for decision making of millions of Ugandans who depend on the forecast. If it were not for this House, today, I would be delaying information regarding the seasonal rainfall outlook for Uganda for the seasons September to September. It is important. Therefore, I really agree with you, honourable members, that much as the board has started – and it has started in earnest, it has no vote and I would agree with the recommendation of setting up a vote for the Metrological Department to move. They have shown enthusiasm and be patient, I am sure they are going to respond to your expectations. 

Second, is the role of water and environment in economic transformation. The centrality of water and environment, honourable members – water is important for energy security; water is important for food security; water is important even in oil which we have discovered. It will need even more water than we have ever had and as the country improves its welfare and becomes richer, it will move away from – we will use more water. Water is so central; it is not just like – we talk about water being life, and indeed it is because 90 percent of your blood is water. But prioritisation of water has always been a challenge. But I am pleased, from the debate, this is now being cured. 

Third, I was pleased about rain water harvesting. By the way we have figures. If we embarked on massive rain water harvesting from surface and roof, we would reach 11 million Ugandans currently who are not accessing clean and safe water. And may I confirm from the medical authorities that actually rain water harvesting from colligated iron sheet roofs is clean. Only that you need to boil it before you drink it because you get contamination from the atmosphere and that can be cured if you boiled the water before you drink it. But certainly that water is cleaner than the water you get from wells and rivers where you are almost intermingling with the animals. If we had time I would show you how this is done. Everywhere we go – and I agree with the committee recommendation that if it were possible district authorities, across the country, would pass bylaws to say that in any building where public funds are being spent on, there should be a rain water harvest facility. I take your recommendation – in fact – if we had a vernacular translator - but you are simply pushing the willing person. I am willing to implement this recommendation fully. These are massive recommendations and the implications will be seen in the years to come.

Similarly, if we had been bringing the economy through massive tree planting movement on say the road reserves and land boundaries, schools gardens and ornament trees for wedding and birthdays – I also want to add that if all those who celebrate religious sentiments, had to plant a tree during their celebration of the birthday of Jesus and Mohamed and so forth – if they had continued to plant a tree per year until they have come back, we would be having the whole country – even national boundaries can be marked by planting trees. So, Mr Speaker, I entirely agree with the recommendations of the committee on planting trees on all occasions.

I have three more issues to talk about. One is about polythene bags. May I confirm to the House that the law governing polythene bags in the Finance Act and the environmental law are being reviewed? And when these come upon – the laws are being reviewed and we shall address this issue because the two ministers are just as concerned as the hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi is on this polythene bag issue.

There are specific questions that were raised. One concern the Kisoro Water Supply and I would like to inform the honourable member from Kisoro that a new water supply source at Nkaka near Bunagana is being undertaken. We hope this will solve this problem. Secondly, the sewerage system that is the source of the problem – the National Water and Sewerage Corporation is going to introduce a new technology to solve the problem of garbage.

Similarly, let me also address the issue on the piped water for Kole town. I want to say this piped water will be provided by the Water Sanitation Development Facility in the North. All we need to do is to work with you to apply for this facility to be done –(Interjections) –yes, you just apply. We will consult with the district and it will be done. By the way, we enjoy supplying water to the people. It is only that I can’t ask the House for more money because budgetary provisions are part of the limiting factors. Once again, I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. Honourable members, I will now put the question for the adoption of the report before we process the recommendations. Okay, I put the question that the Report of the Sectoral Committee on Natural Resources on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the financial year 2014/15 be adopted.

Honourable members, before we vote on this report, you will recall that there were debates on the issue of the refinery environmental impact assessment and that was settled. That is what the law requires and so it should be reflected in the report clearly.

Two, there was an amendment to the effect that the Environmental Levy must not be scrapped. We adopted the recommendation from the minority report as being part of the main report now. 

And three, there was the issue of reviewing the law on polythene materials used in this country and related matters. All those and other things should be brought here and handled comprehensively so that that matter is addressed squarely. Those are the recommendations that came from the minority report that we have adopted. So, we have adopted those as part of the amendments to the main report. So, I now put the question to the motion as mended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On Karuma Dam, honourable Minister for Energy, you are aware that these issues have been coming to the House, not once, not twice but actually many times. So, you might have to find a way of briefing the House properly about what is going on. 

The other time it was about the Chinese agreeing to finance 85 per cent only to turn round and started asking for our 15 per cent before they started doing anything. These are some of the matters that make us not confortable. So, you need to give us some comfort about what is going on.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have teachers of St Peter’s Secondary School, Nyarushangye, Rukungiri District, represented by the honourable Minister, Ssezi Prisca Mbaguta and hon. Turyahikayo Mary Paula, the MP for Rubabo. They have come to observe the proceedings and please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, we have exceeded the time by 20 minutes. I will extend that time into the time for reporting back. House is suspended until 3.20 p.m. Thank you.

(House was suspended at 2.20 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.30 p.m _)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE ANGELO ANDREW BANYA. FORMER AMBASSADOR AND A MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion is up but I think because of the delay the mover of the motion is not yet here and I do not know how to proceed. We will see if we can handle item 2(b) and it is our desire that since Defence and Internal Affairs report is ready, it would be proper if we could reach there and also finish that today with us making some gain on our time table. We will see how business goes and we will see from there. Is the chairperson for agriculture here?

Let me inform the House that the family of the late Angelo Andrew Banya led by his own son Dr Alfred Banya is here sitting at the technical bench behind. Dr Alfred Banya is actually a member of the London City Council; he sits in council and assembly like ours and he does a lot of work there. He is also a canon in the Catholic Church. So he is very advanced in those areas. I think that goes to point out how he was brought up by his father who we will be paying tribute to this afternoon. The mover of the motion is here.

3.31
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Angelo Andrew Banya former Ambassador and Member of the Legislative Council.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by the Opposition Chief Whip, Minister of State for Internal Affairs, Minister of State for Animal Industry and also the honourable member for Moyo West and the also the member for Bufumbira North.

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am moving under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament:
“WHEREAS the Parliament received with grief the news of the demise of Angelo Andrew Banya which occurred on the 12th of August 2014;

AND WHEREAS  the late Andrew Banya was born on the 5th of April 1928 at Kolo in Kolo sub County in Gulu District to Andrew Otto Lara of Kolo Lamutu clan and Julian Amonyi of Awel Putwong clan;

FURTHER AWARE  that the  late Angelo Andrew Banya attended and completed primary education from 1935 to 1940 and secondary education from 1941 to 1945 at Lacor Seminary where he graduated with Cambridge Certificate and later proceeded to Kyambogo Teachers’ College where he graduated with a diploma in education;

NOTING that he served his people as an educator up to attaining the position of Commissioner for Education in Eastern Uganda based in Mbale in 1978;

FURTHER noting that in 1953 the late Banya was among the people who founded the DP to counter the then UNC of Ignatius Musaazi and in 1961 he became a member of Uganda Legislative Council. (LEGCO);

AWARE that Angelo Andrew Banya later on returned to public service and in 1962 he was appointed Deputy Principal of St Joseph’s College Layibi in Gulu as well as a representative of teachers at the Uganda Teachers National Association;

FURTHER aware that the late Angelo Andrew Banya served his country with dedication when in 1971 he was appointed a diplomat and posted as Educational Officer Attaché’ to Uganda’s Ambassador in the then Soviet Union;

CONSIDERING that in 1978 the late Angelo Andrew Banya officially retired from active service and was involved in publishing many books both in Acholi and the English languages and later served as a board member and chairman at various institutions which included St Joseph’s College Layibi, Pope Paul the IV, Old Boys of Sacred Heart Lacor, Kolo farmers and savings cooperative, Kolo cultural institution and Uganda Red Cross;

APPRECIATING that during his lifetime the late Andrew Banya received various awards, which included the Independence award in 1962 from the late President Apollo Milton Obote and an Independence Golden Jubilee award from President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni;

FURTHER appreciating that the late Angelo Banya was a democrat, author and educationist;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
    (i) That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the relative, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of the late Angelo Andrew Banya.
    (ii) That it takes cognizance of the services rendered and contributions made by the late Angelo Andrew Banya to the country.
    (iii) Pray that his soul rests in eternal peace.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, that is the motion before you. I propose it for your debate. I will now invite the seconders of the motion.

3.35
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to start by sharing one of my favourite quotes from Jim Rohn: “Whoever renders service to many puts himself in line for greatness: Great wealth, great returns, great satisfaction, great reputation and great joy.” Today, we pay tribute to the late Angelo Banya for the service he wholeheartedly rendered to out motherland, Uganda. Many reflections will be made of his life that resonate bravery, commitment, patriotism and accomplishments. He stood firm on his conviction to his last hour of life and made some of us proud, as Ugandans. He served his creator, his party and the country with dedication, humility, integrity and nationalism, putting the country and its people first.

Mr Speaker, Angelo Andrew Banya was simple but great; he never feared to say his mind even if it was not liked by those who employed him. He was passionate about the vision of justice in society. Angelo Andrew Banya died as a founder member of the Democratic Party, former legislator, retired diplomat, educationist and a community leader. In all these positions, he dependably undertook all duties serving unselfishly. He and others in his category represented the first crop of post-independence civil servants and political leaders who genuinely placed the country above self and worked for the betterment of all despite the extremely scarce resources at the time, and did not enrich themselves but put all the state resources to fight poverty, ignorance and disease of the time.

We thank God for such distinguished and resilient men and women of the day who never wavered from the truth despite the pre- and post-independence threats from colonial masters and harassment. They gave us reason to fight on. These days, many of us are swayed from the truth because we want to survive politically or shortcuts to wealth. 

Angelo Andrew Banya could have died a poor man but a great man. He is one person who has been strong, simple and supported ideologies and his political philosophy. He was a faithful civil servant and politician. He has left behind a legacy of clean leadership, humility and strong commitment to serve others.

Mr Speaker, as a country, we are doing poorly today; virtues of humility, selflessness and honesty are difficult to find with the current crop of public servants. In politics, instead of the people-driven development agenda, it has become the mafia-driven agenda. It is sad that we are continuously losing many eminent citizens who have shaped the country on the right path yet their voices have been constantly drowned out by today’s loud-mouthed populist persons whose real interest is self and not country. In Luo, we refer to such as “Meg wa”, meaning “it is ours” and specifically, “It is our turn to eat.”

As we pay tribute to Angelo Banya, may we first pause and ask ourselves the following questions:
One, Do we reflect what he represented and stood for at the struggle for independence? The choice then was between “independence now” and delayed independence. Banya and his team chose “independence now”. Today, if we were to ask many Ugandans in leadership – because of widespread corruption and mismanagement of state affairs, do you want “change now” or delayed change?

Two, Uganda at 52 years today; the country that Angelo Banya and his fallen colleagues lived for, can we today stand up to be counted? But indeed we can do what Andrew Banya did – to leave Uganda for our children and grandchildren as a united and prosperous country, without looking at ourselves or as we say in Luo, “Meg wa”.

Three, why do we, in this current generation, prefer to pursue politics of exclusion when we strongly believe that every Ugandan, regardless of ideology, has laid a brick to build this nation called Uganda? The late Banya played his part but few continue to claim that they are the only ones who have made Uganda what it is and therefore justify that claim by continuously mismanaging the state affairs.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, it is not too late to correct the current undesirable situation: corruption, for example, can be dealt with effectively; nepotism, tribalism, patronage, cadre-recruitment in Public Service and high offices and even the vanguard of justice. We can deal with those. Those who are waiting to take over the baton are watching us now. What lessons are we passing on to them? That stealing public resources is fine as long as you are in leadership? We need to reflect and learn how Banya and others in his category managed to live humble but pure lives.

Although the sparkle in Angelo Andrew Banya’s eye is gone and his mind has faded, we in the Opposition wish to assure the family and all Ugandans that some of us will work to pursue his dreams to see a better country enjoyed by our children and grandchildren. We promise you this.

Andrew Banya fought a good fight and his sweat was not in vain. The struggle will continue and will lead others to always be inspired by his dedicated, unwavering and pure service to this country.

In the same vein, we urge the Democratic Party leadership and the entire membership of the Democratic Party to use Angelo Andrew Banya’s death as a unifying point to heal party wounds, to unite the party and move the country forward.

Finally, I wish to urge the government that it should, in every way, assist the family to clear any medical bills that could have accumulated because of his long ill health. I pray for God’s mercy to continue to strengthen the family and uphold the family. May God bless the family and particularly the children and grandchildren that are left behind.I believe by faith that God is not selfish. Some strong leader will come from that family. May God bless you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member.

3.47
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My condolences go to the bereaved family of the late Andrew Banya who is one of the founder members of the Democratic Party.

I am delighted that politicians of all walks of life, of all political ideologies and backgrounds can speak kind words about a democrat of the calibre of the late Banya. The late Banya preferred peace to violence. Having mentored very many democrats, he interacted with very many political leaders in the Democratic Party. Banya prevailed over the Democratic Party in 1980. When some elements chose to go the violent way, he chose peace. There were even some elements in the Democratic Party who preferred a military approach to solve political questions. Angelo Banya prevailed over all leaders in the Democratic Party and preferred a democratic line to give the UPC Government a chance to lead as we explore ways of democracy.

Angelo Banya mentored very many leaders in the Democratic Party and served his community well. He was a proud man and he did not depart from his party values of peace and non-violence. He did not search for personal gratitude, for gifts or money. He would have died a stinking rich man if he had succumbed to those kinds of attributes but he did not.

He valued simplicity, honesty and openness in Government. He valued hard work, justice and truth. He despised people who wanted to get something out of nothing. That is why he valued hard work for our population. He despised violence as I have said and taking over governments with force of arms. When he served in the Foreign Service as an education attaché, he served Uganda, which had sent him there diligently and committedly.

I happened to have engaged with the late Banya when we were launching a branch of Uganda Young Democrats in Gulu. He was an old man who came and mentored us. He spoke softly but his words were very inspiring. He was an example to the young people who usually want to be inspired by fellow young people but the old man inspired us and he still does, to value the principles of the Democratic Party, stick to it and die in it. He did not waiver, he did not change his party nor did he do away with the values that he had cherished.

Mr Speaker, Uganda has lost a very principled man, a mentor, an educationist, a religious man and a great statesman! May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Mr Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Angelo Andrew Banya for his contribution to society as a political activist towards the independence of the Republic of Uganda, as a legislator, as a diplomat, a religious leader and educationist. There are so many people who die and one cannot even gather a few things to talk about them. For us legislators, we should learn that whatever we do, we do it in public interest and that history will judge us harshly for our bad mistakes. 

Mr Speaker, the late Andrew Banya received an independence award under the UPC Government. Interestingly, he also received a Jubilee Independence Award during the NRM Government. What does this show to us? That we should not simply talk about somebody’s values but know that Uganda belongs to all of us.

This morning, we are involved in the budget process and it does not matter whether you are on the other side or this side. It is for the common good. We need to love each other and to know that we need each other at every time of our lives in Uganda. I have seen occasions where we use every little opportunity there is to bash their opponents unfairly and I think as legislators, we should go and stand above this.


I want to inform the House that the late Angelo Andrew Banya was in the Democratic Party with my father. Mr Speaker, anybody who does not change and has capacity to change, he can drown. I want to say that the late Banya changed many times. He went with modern times. You have heard from his contributions. As an activist, as a diplomat; as a religious leader – those are deferent mandates and he fulfilled them to the letter. 

So, finally, I want to encourage all my colleagues in this House to hold public offices in trust. It is very good to leave a good record; it is very good to be fair to your friends. It is on this ground that we are standing here from both sides of the House to pay tribute to the late Angelo Andrew Banya. May his soul rest in perfect peace.

3.54
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It was on the 12th last month that we got the sad news. Unfortunately, it was not very easy to reach to the key people of Parliament. So we struggled because Banya was really – apart from being my in-law, he was a close friend because of our roles as politicians. He tried very much to mentor me. So when I heard about his death, I tried to connect with people and it looked like most of them did not know much about him. Some people told me he was not a member of Parliament. But later on, I said, “It is better I get to his book”. He had written a book in Luo, “Adoko Ogwok”, which means, “I have become a dog”. It is a very good book for the Luo speakers. That is where I got to know more of him. I learnt that even if people said he was not a legislator, in 1961, he was a legislator. And that was why we become friends; he wanted me to work better. So we struggled in vain and after about one and half weeks, we buried him. 

I would like to appreciate the Speaker very much for according him this honour –(Applause)– even though he was buried last month. Thank you very much; this is a great honour, not only for the family of the late Angelo Banya, but for all of us. It is for the people of Gulu and Uganda at large and the DP family. 

In spite of being from DP – I remember Mr Speaker, when he  contested to be chairman of Gulu District, way back in 1996, he was very instrumental in our consultations. That means that for him, he did not only focus on parties, his was about the ability and competence that he wanted to promote. 

One thing that we are not doing well right now is about acknowledging who is bigger. We have lost that integrity; we have lost the patriotism. He was a patriot that is why he received an award during UPC reign and also received an award during the reign of NRM. People did not consider his party but his abilities. 

He was a teacher; you know how teachers are. Teachers are very important people. As a teacher, he did his work very well. He climbed the ladder to the position of education officer. He rose further to become a diplomat; he was an education attaché in Russia.  And we teachers should be proud of that –(Applause) – I am a teacher. I feel very proud when teachers excel. The late Angelo Banya should be our role model as teachers and we should emulate the good things he did in his life. 

As a leader, I think he was not selfish. These days, leaders are so selfish; people want to build skyscrapers, not in one place, but in very many places; shame on us. For him, he had a place where he would welcome all the DP family. I am sure that DP family that went to Gulu in those days of 70s and 80s know that Banya was able to welcome them in his home and comfortably live in a simple house. But these days, it looks like we do not even want to live with our colleagues. We do not want to live in our brothers and sisters homes; we want to stay in five star hotels. This is very unfortunate. That does not bond us together. When we reach out, we are also trying to bond with our colleagues and to improve on our work. 

Banya was selfless and he did not encourage nepotism. He did his work without looking at whether so and so was his relative or friend. He was a peace lover. I remember in 2012, I invited him in my home and he came. He did not say, “That is a simple, small person, I cannot go to her home”. He came and we ate together. That was 1s January, 2012. He came and advised us; we conversed and he even wanted us to help him with his book; he wanted to do another edition of the book. He was so fond of my husband because my husband is actually his “Muko” – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is “Muko?”

MS AOL: It means brother-in-law. His younger brother married my sister-in-law. You know, for us in Acholi, we have such long connections.  He was a peace lover. He wanted to promote dialogue in everything. He did not want people to go fighting. He was exemplary. He even dialogued a lot with the Speaker. Much as the Speaker became a member of NRM –(Interjections)– still the late Angelo Banya was able to work very closely with him. Much as I am for FDC, he was still able to work very closely with me. That is how it should be. When we are in leadership, we should not try flashing out our signs – (Interjections) - I am not fond of doing that. I have seen it even from the head of state. Wherever he goes, instead of just putting that hand away and making sure that Ugandans are all for him – when I go to Gulu, I know that all the people of Gulu are for me. So I should not go doing this, unless I go especially for that reason. But these people here, all the time they go flashing their sign. It is not right. 

What is it that you wouldn’t help us on much? So, my appeal is, honourable members of Parliament, if you are going to emulate him, whenever we go to meetings with people in general – unless we go to meetings of parties – it is important for us to serve people without segregation. There are very few of us who serve this country without segregation because we focus more on parties than on serving the people of Uganda, not knowing that the resources that we appropriate here, whether to KCCA or any other institution, are people’s resources; they are not resources of any party. That is why we need to serve people thoughtlessly without segregation. 

Yes, the late did his work. He worked for us and that is why we are now paying tribute to him. But I would like to suggest that in the future, Parliament does something to remember him. I may not suggest that Parliament can but I still think something should be done to remember the efforts of the late Angello Banya. Very many people testified not to have known him. So, as leaders there is need for us to try to put up something for which we would like to be remembered with nationally and not just –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member.

MS AOL: May the Almighty rest his soul in peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Actually let me say that the person we are talking about this afternoon was recognised by this Parliament when we recognised members of the LEGCO. A certificate and a plague were issued by the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

Second, at the time of his death, information was given to the President and he had agreed that the late be given an official burial by having his body brought to Parliament. But the way Parliament had been constituted that time, there were some logistical difficulties to have his body brought here. That is why his body wasn’t brought to Parliament. Otherwise, you can recall we were able to bring the body of the late Tiberi Okenyi. We brought the body of the late Andrew Adimola and the same would have applied to the late Angello Banya but because of the reasons I have stated, even if the President had agreed to that idea, which he actually did, we could not implement it immediately at that time. That is why we had to squeeze the budget time to have this debate done and especially before his son Col. Alfred Banya goes back to London. We had to hold this debate to recognise the efforts of his father before he goes back to London. 

So, I am so grateful that members have been able to come over. However, I would like to appeal to you to use this time properly. I wouldn’t like to borrow the example from Gulu District on how we are going to use the time. That would not be a very good example because it would limit other members from contributing.

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I recall the late Andrew Banya as the education officer of Arua where he served the entire West Nile. He was much loved by the people of West Nile for mentoring them. Many people who are educated in West Nile passed through his hands. Many years later, after he had left West Nile, one of the children went and married a Lugbara girl. By that time, the late was also our Meg wa. That is why we share this loss.

But I also remember him when he joined the diplomatic world as an attaché in Moscow. There is a system where we have expertise in the various areas like education, military and so forth, who are attached to the embassies to do technical work. The late served at our mission in Moscow and was responsible for securing a number of scholarships from the Soviet Union of then. In that sense the late contributed to the education of Ugandans. So, in paying tribute to him, we thank him for the contribution he made to the people of Uganda. I am glad the NRM Government already recognised his services through the award of a medal. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.10
MR MOHAMMAD MUWANGA-KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I stand to pay tribute to someone, while I was the National Chairman of UYD –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is UYD?

MR MUWANGA: It is Uganda Young Democrats. That time I was going around the country and most of the young men we worked with then are now here in this Parliament while some are now ministers in this Government. For example, the hon. Rose Namayanja there was my vice-president.

At that time, we went around the country interacting with elderly people on what it takes to do politics in an African context. We would move from Ruti in Mbarara, to Buganda here and Teso. But you would find common similarities with all of them. For example, they lived moderately in their houses and you would tell that the person you have met was a democrat. One of those elderly people we met then was the late Andrew Banya. That time I was with hon. Dr Bayigga here and others.

When we met him, he inculcated into us three values: One was that politics is never personal; that when you decide to do politics, it is never about you. It is always about the common good. He also preached to us that if you went to politics and made it personal, the temptations can be real and self-evident.

Secondly, he told us that good politics is always through associations; that you have to do it with others. But that time, there was this notion of individual merit, which was a hard debate in the country. But the old man told us that good politics always and will remain through associations and it is never done alone. 

He further said that after you have done your part, others take on. It is bad that for now people think that politics is for eternity – pakalast, UYD, MP for forever – (Laughter) – yes, pakalast. That is why I want to take this opportunity to pay tribute to this eminent Ugandan. He told us that there are a few things in life that are immortal or that live forever: that nations and countries will live forever but for us we live for a short time.

The other notion he told us about was that good politics transcend, it transcends tribe, religion; it transcends even political colours and that is good politics. Many people never live to the notion that good politics transcend. That is why leaders of our calibre who touched the greatness of people like Banya are slightly different. Those of you who have had the opportunity to interact with the man -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And that includes the Speaker.

MR MUWANGA: Including the Speaker of this Parliament, because as they drag on the deepest part of knowledge of politics, from people who really cared for the country - they lived for it and nothing for themselves. But today you can tell when you meet a bad leader, you know he will be driving the biggest car; have the biggest house in the village; his sons or daughters will be going anywhere for education; they will have health insurance. That is the country we live in. so the late Banya and others lived for that, doing their best; they have paid the ultimate price. They have died modestly; they have not had the opportunity to go to India for treatment or to Nairobi but have gone to Lacor Hospital and others that have been run down.

In Acholi different from my region, I met a key notion of elders. I have been doing a lot of mobilisation in various constituencies in Acholi; even trying to harmonise candidates there. Wherever you go, they say let us consult elders. Let us have a country where there are elders you can consult. I want to be a president and consult two former presidents. I dream of that day where there will be a president or any one and I will go to consult hon. Kiyonga and say, “Your Excellency, how did you handle this?”

But in Uganda today people want life and when I talk of elders, they never thought of grooming their children for anything. They never curved out constituencies to say when I leave my son will take over this one. Let’s borrow a leaf from them and take them as role models. I do believe there is more to learn than to just pay tribute. Hon. Speaker and hon. Members it is easy to find nice words to say about good people but I have also to say that when you meet beauty you cannot obscure it, when you meet greatness you can tell on a good day that you have met a great person and it is not about pomp and circumstances. It is not about the environment, it is about the soul and the inner richness of spirit. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, the late Angelo Banya was my OB of St Aloysius College Nyapea and most of the tributes and qualities described about  the late Angelo Banya he obtained them from St Aloysius College Nyapea and that was for a very long time the best school in Northern Uganda.
He was a time keeper; he was very articulate with keeping time. He was a very smartly dressed person throughout his life and including in his home. He was a very smart person. He was a very good debater; St Aloysius trained very good debaters. I remember the hon. Angelo Banya one time as afresher they were not allowed to give speeches in the halls but Banya broke that protocol and made a fantastic speech and from that day onwards even first year students were trained in debating.

The members of the Democratic Party were very stubborn. I want to say that when it came to the ways of presentation, they were very stubborn. My late father-in-law Martin Akello, DP, used to speak here sometimes in the 80’s. He was a member of Parliament here. I remember the late Gaster oda who was in the LEGCO with the late Angelo Banya. The Speaker at that time was called Patel and each time there was disorder in the House Narendra Patel would say “Order in the House”, so one time the right hon. Oda got up to say, “Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Speaker to continue mentioning my name ‘Oda’ in the House when you see me here in the House?” This great hon. Oda was killed in 1979 and on the 13th of this month we shall be honouring him in Arua. We shall have service for him. These were members of the Democratic Party. 

We would like to thank the contribution of Angelo Banya; he was several times elected chairman of Gulu Archdiocese laity Association for many years when he was championing religiosity of the people of Gulu in particular but Northern Uganda in general.

The late Banya was also a very close friend of my late uncle Alfred Ochen who was also an educationist like him, and I am happy that these people trained not only their children but they also educated many other Ugandans not only from northern Uganda but from many parts of the world. I urge the people of Uganda to emulate their example. May the soul of Angelo Banya rest in eternal peace and ensure that there is “order” in the House. 

4.22
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you for enabling us an opportunity to pay tribute to such a great son of the soil. I also want to thank the honourable colleagues for all the kind words you have attributed to the deserving son of Uganda.

From the expression, I would want to comfort the family of the late Banya that Mzee died in dignity and therefore the children will remain working with their heads high. They are never going to be ashamed in this country that their father did something that haunts them. For me that is very important, as I speak and as I heard colleagues giving all the kind words to a great son of the soil, I couldn’t stop feeling proud as an Acholi to be associated with dignity, honesty and integrity.

This to me should be instilled in the young generation because today’s generation is after quick returns and benefits. And that is why you see the issue of corruption is rampant. We think it should be a learning process for the young generation; we rather go by our own saying, “Nying aber loo longo,” meaning “A good name is better than wealth.” And therefore, this should be one of our principles to teach the young generation so that as we move in this world we are mindful that after we have stopped making noise in this world – like some of us are known for – the day your Creator calls you, what do you leave behind? What is your legacy? And therefore today I am humbled to learn that he walked in this world consciously and strategically, leaving permanent, dignified footsteps. May his soul rest in peace.

4.25
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Mr Speaker, Mzee Angelo Andrew Banya was known to me; I got to know him through his daughter, who happened to be my neighbour when I used to live in Gulu. I got to know him as a very humble person and I did not know that he was a politician because he lived a life of humility. You could not tell the difference between him and the ordinary elders you get in Gulu in town, apart from the fact that he would ever be smart in a jacket. This means that he has ever been in the corridors of this Parliament and he knows how to dress even out of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, Mzee Angelo Andrew Banya laid the foundation for politics in Acholi by demonstrating that politics is actually serving and not merely a job. This is because he continued serving even after leaving Parliament. After Parliament, he went to the diplomatic mission abroad and even when he came back he continued with his profession of being an educationist. When I first started interfacing with him, I thought he was merely a retired teacher. This is because you would often get him with books – actually he was chairing many boards of schools and others. You would also meet him carrying a book – the books he published. I encourage honourable members, even if you do not come from our sub-region, please have a copy of the book. I also encourage all of us that whenever we get time in our constituencies, let us interact with elders – whether they are politicians or not. That way we can get wisdom and avenues of moving our country forward. This is because we may not get time to be taught but if we go through them they can share with us a lot of experiences and also counsel us.

Mr Speaker, I appeal to Government to extend the social protection programme to all other parts of the country. This is because much as Mzee Banya has died, if you go to his house, you will find many elders surrounding him, most of who are not in a very good condition. And they keep asking us, “What is Government doing about this social protection programme in other districts.” But I am very proud that at least being a gallant member of this House, if we also got that programme, it would have been good. So I urge that we extend that programme to all regions and not only a few areas.

Mr Speaker, I also urge us not to recognise the former members of this House, particularly those who served in the Legislative Council only but to have a gallery somewhere where we display pictures of not only the speakers but all those members who served in the First Parliament. This is because not many people knew that Mzee Andrew Angelo Banya was a member of the Legislative Council. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like us to share the time now because I would not be the right person to stop this debate. But you know what we are doing at the moment. So since members have not respected time, I am going to impose a time limit of two minutes for each contributor. 

4.31
MS OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Personally, I did not get the opportunity of interacting with the late Angelo Andrew Banya but from what I have heard, I have no doubt he was a great man. And I want to thank Parliament for according us this time to pay tribute to him.

Mr Speaker, the late Angelo Andrew Banya made great contributions to this country and for this one, I say with confidence because I have learnt that he was one of the people behind the high standards of education at St. Joseph’s College Layibi during the 1970s and 1980s. And Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that St. Joseph’s College Layibi was a star school during that period. It is a school that brought up many highly discipline young men; it was a no-nonsense school. It is unfortunate that he has died and yet he could still be a mentor to the young people of this country. I thank God for his life and what he was able to do for this country. My condolences go to the family, the people of Gulu and the country at large. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.32
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Moyo District, I would like to send our condolences to the bereaved family of Mr Angelo Banya. And I remember him, as a teacher of history, for having created Moyo District in 1962; for having curved West Nile out of Gulu. I remember that before Independence, the whole of West Nile was being controlled by the British from Gulu. With the assistance of people like Alex Lotika and Felix Onama, among others, they were able to sit down and curve out the current Arua District and Moyo District out of the Greater North region. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.32
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The late Banya was not only a legislator – you remember sometime back we used to have Acholi District, meaning anybody who is a leader, whether from Gulu, Kitgum or anywhere else in Acholi, they would look at the welfare and development of the entire sub-region.Because of that, there were many people in Agago who, when they heard about the death of Banya, said “we have lost a loved one”. Indeed this was because of all that Banya had done. 

Banya was such a great leader to the point that I remember when I became a Member of Parliament, I was told, look Amos, leadership is more than what you think. Leadership is devotion. Leadership is a vocation and leadership is all about sacrifice. You must leave a legacy. A legacy does not depend on the money you are going to give to the people but it will depend on the way you are going to conduct your life. He said, do not hide the character you have. The best you can do, if you are a leader, is to make sure that you plant a seed in the lives of the people. Plant a seed so that people will recognise that you are serving the country.

I want to thank the Parliament, the Speaker and the President for allowing that such a great leader like Banya be recognised nationwide –(Member timed out_)

4.35
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues in paying tribute to our fallen elder and distinguished gentleman. I stand here to represent the grandchildren. Looking at the age and the year in which he was born, I think I qualify to say that I am here to represent the grandchildren.

Mr Speaker, although I did not meet the late physically, in the archives of my grandfather who worked as a county chief, in that period the late hon. Banya was in Arua as education officer and worked closely with him. It is on that basis that I stand here to pay tribute to him.

Secondly, on the 13th of this month we were organising ourselves to also pay tribute to one of his colleagues with whom he sat in the LEGCO that is hon. Gaster Oda. The late Oda was also DP and sat in this House together with the late Banya and at the time of independence, they worked to receive the independence that we are enjoying today. May the souls of the late Gaster Oda and Andrew Banya rest in eternal peace for the good job that they have done for this country, and I hope that besides the medals that they received, something more will be done.

Mr Speaker, I am saying this because the number of the then LEGCO members and the first National Assembly is not as big as this one. Therefore, I think Government can think of something, either material or financial, to recognise the good foundation that these distinguished gentlemen –(Member timed out_)

4.37
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank your office very much for according us this opportunity to recognise the life story of such a great servant of Uganda. His story and his career tells us a lot about what the politics then was all about. Their fight for the future led them to set aside the differences that they had in terms of political party, in terms of religion, in terms of their region or where they came from. 

They knew they had a purpose to accomplish and they made sure that they accomplished that purpose. Even when they were in LEGCO, they could be far apart in ideas but not differ in what they expected the future of Uganda to be like. They all wanted independence. 

I remember Dr Obote would at times argue with the late Angelo Banya but at the end of the day, they would sit down on the round table of brotherhood and discuss about the future of the country. This is the same spirit that we need in this House, not the spirit that if you talk to an NRM member of Parliament, others will say, you have been bought. This is the kind of politics, which has poisoned our politics for so long and that led to the chaos of the 1970s and we need to leave this behind us.

I urge members of Parliament in the Ninth Parliament to emulate the spirit that the late Angelo Andrew Banya had, the spirit that no matter where you came from, no matter how you started, our future is here. The spirit that says, it does not matter what political party your colleague belongs to, it does not matter where you come from –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. At the funeral somebody said that in 1962, the Prime Minister then who became President Milton Obote found Andrew Banya worthy of receiving a national medal. Fifty years later, President Museveni found Angelo Banya worthy of receiving a national medal. The two leaders could not agree on many things but they agree on the personality of Angelo Banya. I thought that was a strong point that makes this gentleman who we recognise today stand out as one of those distinguished leaders of our time.

Honourable members, the motion is for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Angelo Andrew Banya, former ambassador and member of the Legislative Council. I now put the question to the motion that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of the late Angelo Andrew Banya; that it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contributions made by the late Angelo Andrew Banya to this country; and that it collectively prays for his soul to rest in eternal peace. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members and I thank the family for finding the time to be with us when we set aside this special moment to recognise one of our own for his contribution to this country. It gives us pride and makes us happy that this can happen when we are witnessing it. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you. The full resolution will be signed, processed properly and delivered to the family. Thank you. Next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND THE BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this matter is already before us and we should have had it earlier. This is the appropriate time but we all know that there has been one single issue that has been bothering the country concerning what we are going to go into and it will affect the debate in this House. I want clarity from the Minister of Finance on how we are going to proceed with this particular matter that is likely to bog down the House or the debate on this particular sector. I wanted the minister to give us guidance on this before we start the debate; the issue of taxes on agricultural goods and implements because that is going to make the debate on the policy statement unhelpful if you do not make this clear.

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, the issues of taxation will be handled under the various taxation laws that are requested to be looked at by this Parliament. However, in regard to the proposal under the Ministry of Agriculture, right now, agriculture contributes over 26 percent of GDP and in terms of revenue collections emanating from agriculture; it is only about 0.3 percent. This is because most of the players in the industry are outside the formal sector. So the proposals that were being presented to Parliament in regard to taxation of agriculture were to try as much as possible to bring those who are ready in the formal brackets under agriculture to come under the taxable brackets. 

As far as the VAT collections are concerned, it was more to attract people outside the tax bracket to come within so that we would enhance the revenue collection to GDP from the current 13 percent where we are stack as a country, to at least near the regional average which is currently at 18 percent. Mr Speaker, this was the spirit of the prayers. 

But two, these measures being given to Parliament were also to collect taxes which would bring us revenue of over Shs 30 billion. In the event that this is not sustained, then this Parliament would have to assist us to see how we can balance the budget because both the revenue and expenditure have to be balanced in order for us to pass a balanced budget. But the revenue measures that would come out of this would be in excess of Shs 30 billion. But we are committed to working hand in hand with this Parliament. Thank you. 

4.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Mathias Kasamba): Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. I stand before this House to present the report of the Committee on Agriculture Animal Industries and Fisheries on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for financial year 2014/15.  Before I begin my submission, allow me to lay on Table a copy of the report of the committee. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR KASAMBA: Allow me also to lay on Table the committee minutes; the presentation by the Minister of Agriculture; the presentation by the NAADS; presentation by Uganda Coffee Development Authority, presentation by Cotton Development Organisation; presentation by NARO; presentation by Diary Development Authority; presentation by National Agricultural Data Bank; presentation by Uganda National Diary Traders Association; presentation by Uganda Seed Traders Association; presentation by the Civil Society Budget Advocacy Group; presentation by the Parliamentary Budget Office together with the submission of appeal against proposed Government ban on sale of unpacked raw milk in urban areas. 

And then also presentation to Parliament by the Opposition statement in response to the policy statement of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries by the Shadow Minister of Agriculture – I lay all the documents which we used to analyse the budget as far as agriculture is concern. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes and all those attachments received by the committee. 

MR KASAMBA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, in accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 177 of the Rule of Procedure of Parliament, sectoral committees are mandated among other things to examine and comment on policy matters affecting ministries and departments under their jurisdiction; examine critically Government recurrent and capital estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House.

Scope

The committee considered the ministerial policy statements and examined the budget estimates for the fiscal year 2014/2015 for the following votes: Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries; Vote 142 – National Agricultural Research Organisation; Vote 152 – National Advisory Service Secretariat; vote 155 – Cotton Development Organisation; Vote 160 – Uganda Coffee Development Authority; Vote 121 – Diary Development Authority; Vote 125 – National Animal Generic Resource Centre and Data Bank then Vote 501 – 850 – local governments agriculture conditional grants.

The report covers the flowing aspects; sector mandates, budget performance in financial year 2013/14; budget and planed activities and programme for the financial year 2014/15; committee’s observations and recommendations. 

Methodology

The committee examined the background of the budget speech, June 2014; the budget performance report by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; held meetings and received some people from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries and all the sector agencies as mentioned in the various votes; examined and reviewed policy statements. 

The committee reports on the policy for the financial year 2013/2014 and the medium term; the budget committee reports on the national budget framework paper for 2014/2015; the analytical paper of the ministerial policy statement of the agricultural sector by the Parliamentary Budget Office which analysed the consequences of the various tax regimes; alternative policy statement by the shadow minister of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

Allow me to go to observations and recommendations; sector policy and legal framework. Currently, the sector is operating without a holistic agricultural policy to guide specific sector policies and strategies. Lack of policies for all key crop enterprises has led to under investment and poor management of challenges faced in such crops and enterprises. MAAIF should establish an agriculture policy to guide investments and other clearly optional roles for private and public sectors. 

In addition, other policies like the extension policy, pastoralist, aquaculture, mechanisation, animal health, plantation agriculture, irrigation, seed and fertiliser policies should be established to guide regulation of the sector activities and programmes. 

Outdated legal frameworks and absence of a number of them in place has rendered the regulation of the sector difficult making relevant institutions ineffective. MAAIF should present to Parliament all pending laws on both crop and animal resource sub sectors to improve regulation of the sector in the financial year 2014/15. 

The planning of the entire sector is hinged on the sector development strategy and investment plan which has gaps in certain areas critical in improving agricultural productivity. For example, climatic change effects are not identified and mitigated in the plan. And a sector like Sericulture is not prioritised despite its value. 

Ministry of Agriculture should undertake empirical studies to inform the next BSIP, which should address the binding constraints facing agricultural productivity as a whole with a strong linkage to the National Development Plan II process which is already under way. 

Institutional framework: the wage release performance at 63 percent clearly demonstrates the gaps in operationalising of the structure of the Ministry of Agriculture. This has constrained service delivery demonstrated by poor regulation of agricultural sector. MAAIF should make a wage provision in financial year 2014/15 for recruitment to be included in the recruitment plan as approved by the Ministry of Public Service and embark on the recruitment as planned.

MAAIF continues to implement the new headquarter staff structure, where new departments were created and substantive heads of department promoted. However, the non-wage provision to MAAIF to implement the structure remains the same as financial year 2012/13. In finalising the estimates for financial year 2014/2015, Government should provide Shs 6 billion to operationalize the new MAAIF structure in financial year 2014/2015. 

MAAIF intends to create a directorate of extension services after the approval of the newly created structure, with various directorates for animal, crop, and fisheries resources; and agricultural support services. Given the cross cutting nature of extension across directorates, extension staff should be provided under existing directorates depending on their respective areas of specialisation rather than creating other administrative units with in MAAIF. 

As the sector moves towards a single spine agriculture extension system, the staff structure at the local government will have to expand to provide the required extension services to farmers at the local level. Budget allocation in financial year 2014/15 should reflect this change by making provisions for recurrent expenditure increases to local government budgets under the agricultural sector.

There’s notable increase in the number of districts over the years (112 districts) increasing the cost of providing decentralized services to the public notably, collection of agricultural statistics, pests and disease control, regulation and enforcement. This is done through the Production and Marketing Grant (PMG) to districts. This grant has a provision of Shs 14 billion for all districts. This implies each district receives Shs 0.125 billion per annum to the above activities, which is insufficient.  Government should increase the PMG from the current Shs 14 billion to Shs 25 billion in financial year 2014/2015 per annum to enable districts improve agricultural productivity. 

There are a number of sector activities that are implemented by more than one institution/agency creating duplication of roles. For example provision of tea, coffee and other inputs by NAADs yet the same are provided by either specialised agencies or the MAAIF. 

Starting financial year 2014/2015 activities for specialized agencies (CDO, DDA, UCDA) and MAAIF should be financed under their respective budgets in the implementation of the commodity approach to improve accountability in the sector and build synergies with NARO, where agricultural research is required. 

KCCA received Shs 1.35 billion in financial year 2013/2014, yet their activities under the agricultural sector are not provided for in the ministerial policy statement for Parliament scrutiny of their budget estimates. This has constrained justification for KCCA agricultural grant for financial year 2014/2015. It is important to note that KCCA exhausted its entire wage budget by half period of financial year 2013/2014

Financing of KCCA Urban agriculture should be done under the Ministry of Presidency since KCCA is not a local government. 

Agricultural Extension/NAADs

Budgeting for extension services as indicated in Annex 1, has continued to reflect a pararell structure of extension services in the country, despite the proposed reforms of creating a single spine extension system.  During the financial year 2014/2015 budgetary allocations should reflect the implementation of a single spine extension system under MAAIF, separate from input distribution system under NAADS programme. 

The committee notes with concerns that the government policy shift on advisory services envisaged in the NAADs Act 2001, to the Single spine extension services has been done without any study carried out to inform policy decisions. 

In addition, the existing legal framework (NAADs Act, 2001) has not been amended to guide the implementation of the single spine extension system: Government should undertake a study justifying the policy shift, identifying any gaps in the current NAADs operations and where necessary amend the NAADs Act, 2001 with a view of filling in the existing gaps that may have been identified.

MAAIF proposed a reform of the national agricultural extension system with the aim of establishing an integrated, coordinated and harmonized public extension system (single spine extension service delivery system). 

In the reform, NAADs Secretariat is supposed to be reduced in terms of size and managed by experts in crops and animal husbandry as well as value addition. However, the NAADs non-wage budget is projected to increase by Shs 2 billion in financial year 2014/15 and the wage bill has remained at the same level as in the financial year 2013/2014. The local government structure for extension staff should be filled in line with the new mandate under the single spine extension system.

Resources of technologies are still reflected in local government budgets rather than opting for a single agency. In order to reduce operational expenses in the NAADS programme at the district level, the budget for agricultural technologies/ inputs should be managed centrally. This is to ensure proper accountability, build synergies with other institutions and achieve economies of scale in bulk purchase of inputs for distribution. Mechanisms to protect allocated resources in each district should be put in place to provide for equitable distribution.

The committee notes that contracts of NAADs staff that expired in financial year 2013/2014 in local governments were not renewed and staff with running contracts were issued with notice of termination. However, budget allocations to districts maintained the NAADs grant for recurrent expenditure as indicated in Annex 1 for financial year 2014/2015. 

Government should abolish the NAADs grants and manage input supplies and value addition at the Centre. The wage bill for Local Government NAADs grants should be adjusted to compensate cancelled contracts and termination, to be managed at the centre.

District local governments have been instructed to embark on the process of recruitment of technical staff in the production departments in order not to create a vacuum left behind by termination of contracts of NAADs staff. However the wage bill for district production services has not been adjusted to allow the recruitment to occur.
 
In addition, wage bill for agricultural extension staff is projected to decline by Shs 0.71 billion as indicated in Annex 1. Therefore the single spine implementation at the local government level will have personnel gaps. Government should separately provide additional funding to enable districts recruit in financial year 2014/2015 to implement the single spine since agricultural extension remains a decentralized function in line with the decentralization policy.

During the financial year 2013/2014 NAADS secretariat received supplementary funding of Shs 30 billion in the fourth quarter of the financial year to provide technologies/inputs of tea, citrus, mangoes to support various beneficiaries without approval of Parliament. Budget Committee of Parliament should investigate this anomaly with the intention of rectifying it.

The committee was informed that Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) was to be engaged in NAADS activities especially in distribution of inputs. The MAAIF should come up with a clear statement on the involvement of UPDF as far as the agricultural sector is concerned.

Water for Agricultural Production

The rehabilitation of Agoro, Mubuku and Doho irrigation schemes have been completed and ready for use by farmers in financial year 2013/2014. However, there is a challenge of slow progress in establishing the management systems for sustainability of the schemes. The MAAIF should expedite the process of establishing the completed schemes’ management systems in financial year 2014/2015, to sustain their operations.

The irrigation technologies that were disseminated continue to face challenges of low capacity by farmers to adequately use them. 

Irrigation is a new technology/practice to most farmers and extension staff should pay attention to providing the requisite skills to farmers to improve technology uptake. In addition, local governments should recruit and fill up all established posts of senior agricultural engineers in the production departments to ensure continued technical support to farmers in irrigation, mechanization and agro food processing.

Water is a very important component in agricultural production system. The committee noted that the machinery which was provided by JICA have not been utilised and it is confined in a few specific districts. More machinery should be acquired for equal regional distribution. In case where there are machinery under other ministries and local Governments like the UNRA regional offices, Government construction units, and communities should access these machines for development purposes.

In addition, land tenure and wrangles especially in areas with communal valley tanks and dams have frustrated establishment of irrigation demonstration sites which claims that Government did not compensate them for their land. Government should sensitise people on land ownership rights to enable Ministry of Agriculture to establish irrigation demonstration sites.

It was also observed that the high operational costs in the irrigation system associated with high fuel costs maintenance and water and other repairs are undermining the uptake of such technologies especially for farmers without electricity access. Ministry of Agriculture should design community based solar irrigation that can serve up to 10 households in addition to drilling for production boreholes.

Fisheries sub-sector

The fisheries sub-sector declined by 5.1 percent resulting from decline in fish stocks in L. Victoria and other lakes in the country. The decline in the fisheries stocks is a result of overfishing, use of illegal fishing gear, poor enforcement of the fisheries regulations, fishing in fish breeding areas in the water bodies and low levels of fish farm enterprises.

Government should expedite the development of aqua culture parks for commercial production of fish in order to free natural water bodies from excessive fishing. This would be followed by appropriate Government fiscal policy to provide incentives for low cost fish feeds to the private sector. Fishing holidays should be institutionalised by Ministry of Agriculture during the financial year 2014/2015 to rejuvenate the fish stocks that have significantly declined.

Government should deploy fisheries inspectors at all boarder points to overcome fish smuggling to neighbouring countries and ban the importation of wrong fishing gears.

Government should harmonise and ensure that standards are followed at the East African Community level. 

During the financial year 2013/2014 budget Ministry of Agriculture was provided with additional Shs 9.4 billion to improve fisheries regulation especially on the water bodies however the establishment of the agricultural police with a component of fisheries surveillance is inadequate to implement fisheries regulation. For example, fish law enforcement officials continue to be attacked by fishing communities engaged in illegal fishing activities.

Corruption tendencies by fish enforcement teams have also been reported. Government should streamline recruitment and deployment of fisheries enforcement officers and equip them with adequate infrastructure to improve their operations and avoid instances of corruption and a value for money forensic audit should also be undertaken to assess how the Shs 9.4 billion was utilised.

In an effort to promote aqua culture in Uganda the cost of feeds will require to be subsidised to make them affordable by farmers. Government therefore should consider tax policy revisions to make fish feeds affordable to fish farmers.

Agricultural research

The implementation of the NAADs Act 2005 has generated administrative challenges and also restricted NARO mandate to the release IDA foundation seeds only yet the research agenda should allow NARO scientists to pattern their seeds, which is not provided for by private sector like vegetative materials and food security. Government should review the NAADs Act in view of improving efficiency in management of agricultural research and create an avenue for NAARO to meet seed gaps on a commercial scale. NAARO land continues to be heavily encroached on compromising the quality of research findings.

The committee restates its earlier recommendations for NARO to expedite surveying and fencing off all land under its jurisdiction. Where land has been encroached on effort should be made to reclaim it.
The National Livestock Research Centre Institute (NLRCI) is one of the 14 public agricultural research institutes under NARO but most of its activities and staff are spread in other NARO institutes, which decreases the visibility and the impact of the Tororo based facility. This is in addition to the dilapidated infrastructure and lack of animal handling facilities like cattle dips, loading ramps, milking parlour and fence lines.

NARO should ensure that NALRCI activities animal and staffs at other NARO institutes are allocated back to the NARO institute premises. In addition NARO should prioritise infrastructure development at NALRCI. The National Livestock Research Centre Institute should fast track procurements related to animal handling facilities like milking parlour, cattle dips and loading ramps to facilitate improvement in the livestock management.

NARO spends 72 percent of its annual budget on consumptive items as compared to 28 percent spent on investments demonstrating a poor allocative efficiency in the institution. National Agricultural Research Organisation should allocate more resources towards investment in research to enable the institution create a conducive environment for its research agenda in the medium term.

The wage bill project for NARO has remained the same yet the institution intends to recruit during the financial year 2014/2015. National Agricultural Research Organisation should prepare recruitment plans consistent with what is provided for in the budget.

The presidential directive of increasing salaries by 30 percent in 2012/2013 has not yet been implemented by NARO. It should reflect this directive in their wage estimates to provide additional incentives for scientists.

The imposition of 18 percent on agricultural inputs and supplies has also affected NARO and is required to pay Shs 3.6 billion in tax, which is not planned in 2014/2015.

The introduction of VAT on agricultural inputs and supplies should be scrapped by the MFPED and should compensate the Shs 3.6 billion which was not foreseen by NARO.
Livestock sub-sector

This sector grew by 1.9 in financial year 2013 lower than the growth rate registered in 2012/13 at 2.8 percent. The low growth is attributed to increasing level of livestock diseases and poor regulation of the livestock subsector. An emergency fund ring-fenced for disease control should be established to enable quick responses to livestock diseases outbreaks. All bills for regulation of the livestock subsector are either in draft form or outdated and therefore inappropriate in dealing with the current challenges facing the sub sector. 

The ministry should expedite the introduction of all the Bills affecting the livestock industry to Parliament in the financial year 2014/2015.

Government took a drastic measure to contain Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) in Ntungamo, Kiruhura, and Rukungiri in the West and all districts in eastern Uganda were the quarantine affected marketing of livestock and livestock products. This has necessitated the need for intensified farmer sensitisation on animal health, feeding and grazing, marketing, transportation of livestock to reduce disease spread and mortality. 

However, Ministry of Agriculture has a shortfall of Shs 12 billion for financial year 2014/2015 to undertake annual vaccination of all the animals in the FMD prone district.

Government should provide an additional Shs 12 billion to MAAIF for this purpose for the financial year 2014/2015.

NAGRIC received over and above its annual recurrent budget by 20 percent by the third quarter of the financial year 2013/2014 to restock some of its livestock farms. Most of these activities are developmental in nature like the establishment of infrastructure on various farms and equipment. The budget for NAGRIC for financial year 2014/2015 only provides for recurrent estimates as those in the financial year 2013/2014.

NAGRIC should prepare projects related to improvement of infrastructure and purchase of equipment on its farm for the financial year 2015/2015.

DDA inherited several properties, about 40 milk collection centres in the North, East and Midwest at the time of privatisation. Most of these assets have no title. DDA should expedite the process of securing its land assets through titling the land because properties are at a risk of being encroached on or being grabbed.

The committee notes with concern the selective application of the legal framework with regards to collections of cess by DDA. The suspension of cess payable by processors while collecting milk levies from milk traders is evidence of selective application of the law. DDA should fully implement the DDA Act in terms of collection of non-tax revenues.

Milk being a highly sensitive and perishable product, the committee observed that there is need to promote hygiene in production, handling and marketing of milk.

Government should partner with Uganda National Dairy Traders Association, dairy processors and dairy farmer cooperatives to promote production of hygienic milk and to improve quality along the entire dairy value chain. (Applause)

The establishment of two regional offices in eastern and northern Uganda remains outstanding in the financial 2014/15 to ensure equity in the quality of services across the country. Government should provide additional resources of Shs 1.8 billion for this purpose; rehabilitate collections centres, procure lab equipment, chemicals, reagents and consumables in the financial year 2014/2015. 

Crop Sub-sector

Coffee exports increased by 5.1 percent in the financial year 2013/2014 due to the new yields from replanting campaign four years ago, mainly from Robusta and favourable weather patterns. However, coffee aggregate value declined due to the drop in international prices. With the international value for coffee beans dropping, Government should increase its efforts to invest in value-addition initiatives to produce coffee as a final consumptive product and develop industries that use coffee as an input. 

The committee notes that there are very few extension staff for coffee across the country to provide the much-needed extension services by farmers. Uganda Coffee Development Authority should plan for the recruitment of additional extension staff to provide adequate extension services to the farming community in the financial year 2014/2015. 

The committee is concerned about the low price UCDA buys coffee seedlings from nursery operators currently at Shs 300 per seedling. The UCDA should revise this price upwards with a view of enabling the nursery operators break even given the rising costs of operation. 

The committee was informed that 75 million seedlings will be ready for planting in August-November 2014 and March–May 2015 seasons. However, the available funds in the current budget cater for 45 million seedlings and 7.14 million will be provided by the private sector. Government should provide additional Shs 8 billion for the remaining seedlings required to keep the momentum of the replanting programme. 

Meanwhile, cotton exports declined by 45 percent in the financial year 2013/14, due to low production resulting from the drought in July and early August 2013, which prevented farmers from planting. This implies that irrigation technologies are urgently required to mitigate adverse weather changes. Government should urgently address appropriate technologies required for farmers to irrigate their fields.

The budget for CDO has remained constant despite the desire of foreign investors to enter the market to add value to cotton being produced. In an effort to avail seed to farmers at lower costs, Government should provide additional Shs 4.4 billion to complete the seed processing plant and make it operational in the financial year 2014/2015.

While the proposed increase in duty on used clothes to 15 percent is welcome – under the EAC Common External Tariff – the non-renewal of the local textile sector exemption that expired in the financial year 2013/14 should be extended to offer price incentives to cotton farmers, as big players enter the market to modernise the textile industry.

The committee notes with concern that the private sector (ginners) supports cotton farmers more than Government in terms of investments they make to ensure consistent production. Government should increase public investment in the cotton industry over the medium term, to enable farmers add value, acquire the requisite inputs; to enable farmers form credible groups to export finished products. 

Tea Production

Tea production and exports is on the decline based on the performance of the financial year 2013/14. Regulation and promotion of tea is poor in the country due to absence of a regulatory regime in the tea subsector. The MAAIF should establish regulatory framework for tea to guide public interventions and protect the tea industry from exploitation by foreign companies. 

Plantation Agriculture

Plantation agriculture operates without a public regulatory framework. Workers in plantation agriculture are left to the whims of the private sector actions especially in the sugarcane industry. MAAIF should establish a policy framework to guide agricultural plantation activities in sugarcane, cocoa, oil palm and other plantation crops. 

Agricultural seed and other inputs

The agricultural seed industry is regulated by the Control of Agriculture Chemicals Act, 2006; the Seed Plant Act, 2006 and Plants Protection Act, 1962. While the current legal framework may be out of date, to some extent, its implementation has never taken full effect. This because MAAIF has been constrained by inadequate human resources to implement various provisions of the law to ensure counterfeit seed is eradicated. 

The wage bill for MAAIF has remained the same for the financial year 2014/2015 implying additional recruitment required to improve the regulation of the seed industry will not take place. In addition there is shortage of quality seed on the market and quality seed is projected to be less than 10 percent. Most seeds being planted are home-produced. Most seeds on the market are counterfeits and this has affected the yields of the farming community, hence affecting profitability of the agricultural sector. 

The MAAIF should expedite efforts to increase the number of seed inspectors required for efficient regulation of the seed industry. Proper inspection and certification of seed should be emphasised. 

Stronger efforts to fast-track seed production between NARO, NAADS, UPDF and prisons should be considered in the financial year 2014/2015 to fill the seed gap in the country.

The agricultural input industry, including seed and machinery is further facing a proposed introduction of VAT on inputs and its supplies. According to the Parliamentary Budget Office study on the implications of agricultural input tax proposed in the financial year 2014/2015 on the agricultural sector and the economy, exports will decline by 12 percent over a two-year period; unemployment will increase by 4.7 percent and Uganda’s exports will be uncompetitive in the foreign markets. All this has implications on the overall real GDP, which is projected to decline by 2.7 percent within two years after approval of the above taxes. 

Uganda being an agro-based country, will suffer more and the study further states that the livestock industry, which the country is trying to support will be the hardest hit sub-sector where exports will decline by over 50 percent. Therefore, Government should stay the proposed agricultural input tax in the financial year 2014/2015, until such a time when the agricultural sector attains full modernisation indicators, to sustain itself. (Applause)

Agricultural financing 

Public sector investments in agricultural sector for the financial year 2014/15 will be three percent of the national budget or two percent of GDP. Given the importance of the sector to the economy in terms of employment and income to the country, this level of investment remains minimal to achieve sector targets and Vision 2040. 

Going forward, Government should mobilise additional public financing to the sector to meet the gaps of the funds the sector requires to modernise it. 

The available agricultural financing in commercial banks subsidised by Government targets wealthy farmers and still requires refinement to avail affordable finance to commercial farming. To-date a total of only 239 projects spread across the country have benefited from the Agricultural Credit Facility (ACF), with total disbursement and commitments amounting to Shs 158.7 billion. 

The rural financial services intervention that Government has opted under SACCOs does not explicitly target agricultural financing since the terms offered to rural farmers are market rates. Government should revive the co-operatives arrangement and re-capitalise UDB to avail affordable finance to all categories of farmers. In addition UDB should open branches and partner with existing providers to extend coverage in the short to medium term. As a long-term goal Government should explore ways of establishing a fully-fledged agricultural bank to provide a wide range of agricultural credit products that are affordable and accessible by the rural communities. 

Performance of projects under the sector

While the performance of externally financed projects that are within the MTEF is provided in the ministerial policy statement, off-budget projects, which are externally financed, are not provided.

The Ministry of Agriculture should provide performance-related information on all off-budget projects in various institutions under the sector in the ministerial policy statement to Parliament this coming financial year.

Counterpart funds for projects approved by Parliament, for example, the rice production in Eastern Uganda and the Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience Project are not provided for especially for land compensation amounting to Shs 6 billion. 

The Ministry of Agriculture should prioritise the allocation of counterpart funds required for all donor projects approved by Parliament, as this is one of the conditions used in accessing foreign financing. 

Under increasing mukene for home consumption project, the mukene fishing communities have not adopted the technologies the project introduced, for example, use of racks for drying mukene. This is because the racks are few and require strong nets and stands, which are expensive for the fishing communities. 

The Ministry of Agriculture should sensitise communities on locally available materials to increase adoption rates. In addition, Ministry of Agriculture, in collaboration with Uganda Research Institute (UIRI), should support or incubate local artisan mukene processors to undertake value addition for bigger markets, both locally and internationally. 

Under the fisheries mechanisation and weed control project, most outputs and targets set for FY 2013/2014 were not met due to the expiry of the MOU between Government of Uganda and Egyptian government. The biological centres that were set up at some of the landing sites are not yet operational given the low intensity of weevils introduced at the weevil rearing centres. 

Government should renew the MOU with the Egyptian government by extending the project and the Ministry of Agriculture should scale up operations at the weevil rearing stations to hasten the biological weed control process. In addition, the Ministry of Agriculture should commence mechanical weed control to address the growing problem of aquatic weeds on lakes and rivers. 

Intra sectoral allocations under the agricultural sector

Annex 2 indicates the intra-sectoral re-allocations proposed by the committee to the House to be able to streamline provision of services to the farming communities and increase coffee and cotton production. This will increase incomes and export revenues, which will impact on the trade balance of the economy. In addition, the re-allocations are in light of the proposed single spine extension system under Ministry of Agriculture while NAADS secretariat will concentrate on value addition and provision of inputs, which are not housed in any specialised agency. 

Recommendations for special attention
    (i) Imposition of 18 percent tax on agricultural inputs and supplies will adversely affect the economy. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development withdraws this tax on agricultural inputs.

    (ii) The agricultural sector remains grossly underfunded (3.19 percent) for financial year 2014/2015 contrary to the Maputo Declaration, to which Government is a signatory, of 10 percent, the National Development Plan, which is 5 percent and the Kyankwanzi Resolution, 2011 which was 7 percent.

    (iii) The committee recommends that Government steps up funding of the agricultural sector to at least 7 percent as resolved in the Kyankwanzi Resolution, 2011.

    (iv) In the absence of the National Agriculture Policy and accompanying specific policies like policy on mechanisation of agriculture, extension, seed, irrigation, fertilizer, livestock etcetera. Various interventions have been on project approach and ad hoc thus NAADS endlessly undergoing continuous reforms.

    (v) Government should expedite establishment of enabling policies to guide and stabilise the sector for consistent programme implementation.

    (vi) NAADS is undergoing reforms following the decision to introduce a single spine extension system, which has not been put in place yet. In the meantime, all funds under NAADS should be ring-fenced for NAADS related activities both at the Secretariat and local government agriculture conditional grants for those local governments and programmes until the NAADS Act is amended and the single spine system is established.

    (vii) Since KCCA is no longer a local government, the committee recommends that the local government agriculture conditional grants of Shs 1.22 billion be reallocated to the NAADS Secretariat for promotion of technologies and seed distribution.

    (viii) Most of the land under the Ministry of Agriculture, NARO, NAGRIC and DDA has been encroached on. Most of the land is not surveyed and even that which has been surveyed lacks land titles. This has led to land grabbing by unscrupulous individuals thus denying the Ministry of Agriculture and its agencies proper custody and utilisation of the land as they are mandated to.

    (ix) The committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture and all ministry agencies, in collaboration with other government departments like the Uganda Land Commission, the Police should recover, survey and secure land titles for the institutions. Where leases have expired, efforts should be made to renew them.

    (x) Following the merger of the Ministry of Agriculture with that of Animal Industry and Fisheries which happened in 1991, the overall performance of the three sectors i.e. crop, livestock and fisheries has dwindled over the years due to lack of focussed planning and budgeting by the specific separate ministries or departments. 

Following the merger, livestock and fisheries sectors have been generally marginalised in terms of programmes and budget allocation. Parliament has made several recommendations through motions and committee reports to split the ministry into two: Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries as was the case before the merger.

The committee once again strongly recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture should be split into two ministries, that is, Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries, for increased efficiency.

In conclusion, below is a table indicating the revised budget estimates for financial year 2014/2015 to various votes for application, incorporating the budget adjustments proposed by the committee.

Mr Speaker, Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry & Fisheries: Recurrent budget - Shs 32,589,823,000 and development budget - Shs 67,285,594,000 giving a total of Shs 99,875,417,000.

The Diary Development Authority: Recurrent budget is Shs 7,044,202,000 and development budget is Shs 1,000,000,000 totalling Shs 8,044,202,000. 

The National Animal Generic Resource Centre and Data Bank (NAGRIC): Recurrent budget is Shs 4,049,550,000. They have not yet received a development budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you read that figure again? 

MR KASAMBA: Vote 125 - National Animal Generic Resource Centre and Data Bank. Recurrent budget Shs 4,049,550,000. I thank you. There is no development budget and the total comes to Shs 4,049,550,000.

Vote 142, National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO): Recurrent budget is Shs 34,826,267,000 and development budget is Shs 122,645,641,000 making a total of Shs 157,471,908,000.

Vote 152 – the NAADS Secretariat: Recurrent budget is Shs 4,185,392,000 and development budget is Shs 164,520,000,000 giving a total of Shs 168,705,392,000.

Vote 155 – Uganda Cotton Development Organisation: Recurrent budget – Shs 3,796,137,000 and development budget - Shs 6,596,000,000 making a total of Shs 10,392,137,000. 

Vote – 160, Uganda Coffee Development Authority: Recurrent budget - Shs 52,186,792,000. They have no development budget and that makes a total of Shs 52,186,792,000. Mr Speaker, I beg to report and the attachments are well indicated in our report. I thank you, honourable members, for listening to me. (Applause)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and I thank the committee members for this very in-depth analysis of the ministerial policy statement and a very comprehensive report presented in that regard. 

Honourable members, the motion before you is for the adoption of the report of the sectoral Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for financial year 2014/2015. I now propose the question for your debate. And honourable members, I think the work is fairly comprehensive. Maybe there are some points of clarification that we can have –(Interjections)– you can see that you want a full debate on this matter. Can we have clarifications because the report is fairly comprehensive and if you had looked through, it would be helpful. We will have clarifications from the minister. 

5.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Kasamba for a very good report. I would like the minister to tell us what they are going to do about fake seeds. Fake seeds are causing food insecurity. People spend their little money buying seeds expecting a harvest, yet nothing comes out. 

Two, I am not certain about what is happening to NAADS. The minister should come out clearly on whether we are going to give NAADS a decent burial or we are reforming it. 

Three, they did not talk much about the fishing communities. I come from a fishing community. There are reports of harassment of fishermen. Recently, I was in Hoima in the Albertine area and even there, there is serious harassment of the fishing community by the government agents. We want a policy on that. 

Four, I come from a border area; Government has been talking about value addition to our crops and exporting jobs and animal feeds. But it has been only talk for the last 10 years. I would like to know how we are going to protect the peasants. Someone from Sebei yesterday said so; how are we going to protect our people from the Kenyan dealers? Kenyan trucks traverse our villages including my home; they do not fear to buy things from my mother at the price they want. You must organise the peasants so that they can sell to people with one voice and can also bargain. It is a policy that we need. 

Lastly on UCDA; I grew up on cotton money, even my education depended on cotton but these days, I do not see cotton anywhere yet we have had a person in charge of the Cotton Development Authority for 20 years. Who is this person who cannot be moved? I know how that person became the MD and I even wrote stories about her. Please, time has come for you, the Minister of Agriculture to move that MD. We would like to know what you are doing about that MD of the Cotton Development Authority. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us raise clarifications and if we see there is need for debate then we will debate. 

5.40
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the purpose of the Hansard, vote 121 was read as Shs 1 million but I think the chairperson meant Shs 1 billion. 

Secondly, sometimes I am not very comfortable with the terminologies used on the Floor of Parliament. We come from different backgrounds, so when the chairman was talking of the single spine, he should have told us which spine he meant. Is it the one we carry or another one? If you are comfortable with the terminology, at least explain it to the lay people like us so that we can understand what you are telling us. –(Interjections)– Do you mean ‘single spine’ is only for married people? - (Laughter) - Mr Speaker, can you defend me from the Government frontbench?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member has the full protection of the Chair. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interjections)– it is all about the frontbench, I do not know what is wrong with them. I think the Government Chief Whip is injecting them with something; they are getting very excited. They are the ones who made my tongue to slip to Madam Speaker. But the question I am trying to ask from the chairperson of the agriculture committee is that since he has come back in this budget to talk about the operationalization of NAADS, can we have a look at the policy framework that will make us feel comfortable on how the NAADS programme is going to be implemented?

Finally, I think it is high time - the chairperson of the committee on agriculture is popularly known in Northern Uganda as “Matia Okello” because he has visited the cotton gardens in the North and he has been associating with the cotton farmers for a long time. It is high time this House looked back to about 10 years to find out what we have been saying about CDA – 10 years ago, five years ago, and two years ago. They are the same concerns and yet nothing is done about it. May we now know whether that company belongs to some individual or to government and if so, can the government own it? The reason I am saying this is because I come from a cotton growing area and my school fees were paid from the sale of cotton. I also personally got involved in growing cotton. So, I know something about cotton.

But what worries me is that every year we come up with a budget for CDA – and Government declared it publicly and it is now captured on the Hansard that cotton farmers should get free seeds and yet the committee is aware that cotton farmers buy seeds but no nobody has told us where the proceeds from that purchase go. 

The money we budget here goes into buying pesticides for cotton and these pesticides are sold to the farmers. I am a cotton grower and I have been buying these pesticides because I have my receipts. So, can someone from the committee tell me onto which account the money goes - I mean the money from the sale of pesticides? How about the proceeds from the sale of tractors and all those other farm implements whose purchases are catered for in the budget as per the policy statement of the ministry? But you find all those things budgeted for are instead sold to farmers. All I am concerned about is a matter of accountability. Where does that money go? I would have expected the CDA to declare to us that from the sale of the farm implements, so much was realised and therefore, we are only asking for so much from Government.

Mr Speaker, as a man who also comes from a cotton area, you are aware that the CDA has been levying illegal taxes on farmers under the Cotton Seed Levy. We have talked about this issue but it is now being covered up as a contribution from the ginners yet that money is levied on farmers. In 2012, this money was given to ginners in cash form –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you now debating?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: I am not debating; I am only raising concerns for clarification. I want the committee to justify to the House and I, a cotton farmer, whether this company is working for Government or it is just a private company belonging to some individuals and if so, we would like to know who those individuals are and why Government should continue budgeting for that private company. That is the clarification I would like to seek from the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we agreed that we are going to do clarifications now and then see if we need to debate.

5.47
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Before I seek clarification, this idea has been running in my mind and let me say it first. If we closed the Ministry of Agriculture, would we be affected? [HON. MEMBERS: “We would not.”] There will be a lot of saving because the ministers will not be there. Also staff will be demobilised and that money can be invested into coffee, cotton and tea production because what is the relevance of this ministry? That is the issue that has been running in my mind.

Mr Speaker, some time back we budgeted for 500 tractors but now nobody is talking about them. Can I know where those 500 tractors that we budgeted for some time back are?

Two, and this has also been talked about by the Opposition Chief Whip, that yes, we have seen the budget talk about monies to be given. However, this budget does not talk about sectors that are collecting money. You know that money is collected from the cotton sector. We get money for UCDA and NARO but we are not seeing any budgeting line for these organisations. You are only talking about the expenditure but you are not talking about the incomes. So, can you give us the figures that these institutions generate so that we can knock off that before we approve the balance for you?

The other issue is about the fisheries sector. In Uganda, we don’t do background checks on people before we appoint them to some offices, which is very dangerous. Let me give examples. There are people with a history of mismanaging institutions but they are given other institutions to manage. Look at the fisheries sector; what has this minister done? You know where this ministry has come from. They are talking of corruption; surely, these people just make us cry. Where she was before, there are issues and even where she is now, there are issues and maybe where she will go next, there will be issues. (Laughter)
I am raising this because everybody is complaining about corruption in the fisheries sector. But you know what happened in the microfinance centre – the PAC report is there. Now everybody is complaining about corruption in the fisheries sector. When shall we handle this sector? You will also recall what happened to the landing sites –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the current Minister of State for Fisheries is a lady. The honourable member holding the Floor is referring to a she-minister of fisheries – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Procedure, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let us first deal with the point of order. We cannot deal with the two at the same time.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Hold the fire, please. Mr Speaker, I heard the honourable member holding the Floor insinuate that this current minister, wherever she has served, she has left problem’s there – issues of corruption yet I have served in the Office of the Prime Minister as a Minister of State for Luwero. I served in the Defence Ministry for eight years as a Minister of State for Defence, the first woman minister of State for Defence and I performed because I received awards and there were no allegations about misuse and abuse of office or corruption. I served as a Minister of State for Finance in charge of microfinance and as far as I am concerned, I have no cases there and Parliament has never debated any report and booked me on account of committing any crime there.

Currently, I am the Minister of State for Fisheries and I have made a record of carrying out the kind of activities I am carrying out for the longest period by engaging communities and putting to order the methods of fishing, which other people call harassing of communities. It is the other way round because the communities are harassing the young fish. (Laughter) But when we come here, we say that the minister is harassing the communities yet it is the communities that are harassing the young fish.

So, is the honourable member, therefore, in order to insinuate that the long-serving minister and Member of Parliament who has never been involved in any scandal is a problem? Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi of Budadiri West and former Leader of the Opposition in order really?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I listened very carefully to the statement from the honourable member for Budadiri West. He said that where that person was there was corruption. Where that person is, there is corruption and that where that person will be, there will be corruption. In other words, the honourable member is very sympathetic that there is a state of corruption operating everywhere. (Laughter) Where you were and where you will be, there is a state of corruption that is affecting everybody. That one I heard clearly. That means that even where you have not been, there is corruption and so do not think it is about blaming you but rather it is about sympathising with you and other people.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, for the wise ruling. I am sorry I was rising on a procedural issue because the minister for fisheries stood and when I looked at her legs she had no shoes; how can a minister stand without shoes –(Laughter)– but having said that, the committee raised an issue that there is a lot of corruption in fisheries. I don’t know when the minister in charge of fisheries will carry out a forensic audit as far as corruption is concerned in fisheries.

Mr Speaker, I come from the eastern side and there is a place called –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you come from Budadiri West and not the East; do not confuse the House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I come from the eastern side of Uganda; that is what I meant. There is a place in Tororo where there was agricultural activity and now NARO took over. If you are going to Busia, it is called Nalili or something like that. Mr Speaker, the land has been encroached on. The buildings are in a sorry state; even a goat cannot sleep there but staff stay there - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it still a point of clarification? Please raise the clarification. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: When will Government rehabilitate those buildings in Tororo under NARO and elsewhere and also reclaim our land which these other people have taken?

The other issue I want to raise is about NAADS. We are about 35 million people; the Ugandan army is between 60,000 to 100,000. The President of Uganda is supposed to be in charge of 35 million people or more but it looks like he is in charge of 100,000 army people because those are the ones he feels he can trust. The remaining Ugandans are untrustworthy and unruly. May be he even doesn’t trust our speaker. The question I am trying to raise is that when there was a problem in agriculture, we sent the army to look into it. When there is a problem in the roads sector such as Katosi road, they are going to send the army to go and do the road. You have seen the railway, it is the army people; you have seen IDs, it is army people; you saw the census, it was the Army people and even with the beauty contests, it is the army. The list is endless. How will 100,000 people really run this country? Does it mean that we should kill all government institutions and allow only the army to run this country?

I want to get clarification from the Minister of Agriculture; is it true that you are incompetent and that is why agriculture has been taken over by the army?

6.00
MR WILSON ASUPASA (NRM, Busiki County, Namatumba): I thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a tendency that has taken over the agricultural field. We normally hear about seminars being announced for payment of certain amounts of money for those who want to access them especially around Kampala. It is normally Shs 20,000 or 40,000. The clarification I am seeking is that this country had agricultural institutes almost in every region where farmers would seek proper and new methods of doing things so that they improve the agricultural field. Now that most of these institutions are not functional, people have innovatively got another way of fleecing farmers of their money by organising say a seminar to teach them how to grow mangoes. They are paying money and somehow it is now the trend.
The clarification I am seeking from the minister of agriculture is: when does he hope to revive these rather idle institutions whose land is being encroached on and help our peasants who cannot afford the Shs 20,000 or Shs 40,000 being asked by these other commercial providers of such services?

6.02
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is on NAADS. This programme replaced very good extension workers for agriculture who were training the farmers in the villages and NAADS came but now you are introducing another method. What is the difference between the first extension workers and the new ones that you are trying to introduce to replace NAADS?
Our cost of production is very expensive because of the cost of inputs. What is the logic behind taxing inputs to make our agriculture expensive? In developed countries they are giving incentives but for us we are taxing inputs. What is the logic, hon. Minister?

We want to mechanise our agriculture but so far people are still digging with the hand hoe. With the hand hoe you cannot dig big chunks of land; when shall we mechanise our agriculture? When shall we have tractors to do the work of a hand hoe? I thank you.

6.03
GEN. PHINEHAS KATIRIMA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for writing a good report and just before they concluded, they recommended that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should be split into two. I am wondering why it should not be split into three. The committee reported that the overall performance of the three sectors, crop livestock and fisheries had dwindled over the years due to lack of focused planning and budgeting. Is that the only problem or is it the leadership as well?

And they said, “Following the merger, the livestock and fisheries sectors have been generally marginalised in terms of programmes and budget allocation.” Who has been responsible for that marginalisation? We need to know from the chairperson and his committee and the minister why that must be done and yet we are all working for the country’s progress. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.06
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the minister if the involvement of the UPDF in the NAADS programme means the displacement of the local staff that have been doing their work. And where do they draw their salaries from; will they still be paid by the army or will they be under NAADS?

Secondly, about the local government grants to KCCA – that it should be withdrawn because KCCA is no longer a local government – that is true but I thought it is service to the people and we have urban farmers. So what kind of grants will replace the local government grants in the case of KCCA? Thank you.

6.07
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee chairperson for presenting this report. In the report, it looks like there was downsizing of staff at the NAADS Secretariat but at the same time, there was maintenance of the budget. I wonder what that one means -(Interjections)- I said, downsizing of the NAADS Secretariat happened but the funding remains the same – I want clarification on that one.

Secondly, the Ministry of Agriculture established a policy framework to guide agriculture extension workers – I have some extension workers, especially in the sugar industry – aren’t you looking at an instrument or could there be an instrument that could be used in the meantime as the policy is being developed to prevent people from being exploited by the arrogant fellows in the industry.

Thirdly, we welcome the forensic audit proposal and I think that one rhymes very well with hon. Nandala’s supposition in the Shs 9.4 billion expenditure in the – but are you looking at the alternative livelihood of people who are engaged in fisheries so that as you are removing the fishing pressure from the lake, people have alternatives to do. And relatedly, are you also looking at NAADS making provisions for the fisheries sector so they can access fishing gear that is legal? Thank you.

6.09
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee for the beautifully-worded report on agriculture. The committee said that there was an agriculture policy and so I am seeking clarification from the ministers as to why we do not have it. And what happened to the previous policy?

Secondly, I also want an explanation as to why the government does not honour its agreements. In the report, we read that we had the Maputo Declaration which requires that we fund agriculture to the tune of 10 percent of the budget; we had the Kyankwanzi resolution which agreed on 7 percent and the NDP, which talks of 5 percent - (Interjection) - the Kyankwanzi resolution agreed on 7 percent.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MS TAAKA: Then NDP agreed on 5 percent; but here, even in 2011/12, agriculture had 4 percent of the budget. But as of now – in the current budget, it has been allocated on 3.19 percent; where are we going? Thank you.

6.10
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Agriculture creates a value-chain – from research – as you mentioned – extension, production, storage, value-addition and marketing. However, as we noted, we still have major deficiencies in extension – we have tried the NAADS for 13 years but it has not worked; now we are back to square one – the single spine extension system. Even the strategy is not yet in place.

Secondly, we have serious problems in storage. Right now, we are experiencing a bumper harvest in maize. The silos which we used to have under PMD are still there but I do not know under whose ownership they are. This is because the silos would help in maintaining buffer stocks, which would help boost prices payable at farm-gate to the farmers. In fact they would provide an incentive for the people to produce more and more. If these buffer stocks were operating, we would not need very many other incentives in this sector. So the report does not address this serious problem of storage in the country yet it is very important.

Mr Speaker, there is the other problem – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you debating now?

MR LUGOLOBI: No, I am raising issues for clarification, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) 

The second issue I need clarification on are the institutional problems in the sector that have been prevailing for a long time – in fact, I felt at one point that we need a management audit, especially in the governance of this sector. This is because whatever amount of money you invest in the sector, the GDP growth rate for the agriculture sector almost remains stagnant and you keep wondering what is happening. And we know that there are real structural problems. So, Mr Speaker, I feel strongly that we should have a management audit in this sector to address the underlying problems that are inhibiting growth in the sector.

The third clarification I am seeking is on the issue of irrigation policy and strategy; each time we have serious shocks in our economy, they arise largely because we have had a drought. And we have always observed that we have serious climatic changes in this country. But up to now, we do not have an irrigation policy and strategy. One time, I had a meeting with the Ministry of Finance about funding this programme and they said there is no policy and strategy for us to provide the funding. I know the ministries of Water and Agriculture work together on this but I strongly feel that something must be seriously done and I hope the minister will be able to respond to this one.

Finally, on the issue of KCCA, where the chairperson said that KCCA is no longer a local government, we still have urban farmers in Kampala and there is a programme of urban farming. In fact, if you want to look at the most successful programme under NAADS, you will find it in Kampala. They have developed administration sites somewhere I think in Kiteezi, which is one of the most effective. There is urban farming in various locations of Kampala. So, I thought that this recommendation should not be approved. KCCA still needs its money. In fact, they have demonstrated that they have one of the most successful institutions under the NAADS programme. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Can we hear from the ministers then we see the gaps that are there? Please let us process this then we take more. 

6.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I want to thank the chairman and the committee for a detailed report. (Hon. Anywar rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are spending the time we should be using for these purposes. Let the minister respond to those issues then we can proceed with the rest of the things.

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I wish to say that in the first place, most of the recommendations are either on what we are doing, what we want to do or what we are sourcing for funds to do and we welcome all of them. Secondly, there are topical issues that came out prominently from many Members. I would like to start with those and also deal with the one that shocked me and then with the others.

The first one is an explanation on the “one single spine” structure. Honourable colleagues, when we introduced the NAADS programme, the assumption was that the farmers would demand for services. We reduced the number of extension workers and made sure that we had NAADS coordinators in all the districts up to the sub-county level. However, what came out very clearly is that majority of our farmers are still peasants and they cannot demand for the services and that this programme was only serving those people who were willing to participate. So, we had two parallel systems running; the NAADS for advisory services and agri-business and then the traditional extension workers who were seen on the ground.

The establishment of the one single spine structure for extension service is that those who have been handling NAADS are eligible to join extension workers and every farmer is supposed to be visited and served by the service.

Some members asked why we are changing from NAADS to extension; we had extension programmes, which were running perfectly. We had a shortcoming with extension some time back and it was related with funding. What we are doing now is really to strengthen extension service and make sure that the NAADS Secretariat sends agricultural inputs especially in strategic interventions to the production department at district level so that the extension workers can do crop husbandry, animal husbandry, fish regulation and fish farming.

I was also asked to come out with a clear statement on the involvement of the UPDF in the agricultural sector. Honourable colleagues, the UPDF is an arm of Government under the Ministry of Defence and when they came into this sector, we were specifically targeting the veterans. 

For quite some time, we had our brothers who had been working in the Army and since they retired, some of them were finding it very difficult to cope with –(Interjections)– so, the government wanted to reach out to these veterans and make them productive and so we came up with a plan to have commanders in the zones to lift their colleagues by making sure that we give them affirmative action to produce for both food security and income generation –(Interjections)– please, you asked me, let me explain.

In the process, we discovered that they had achieved some degree of output. The challenge we have now is that we are mixing issues. The UPDF is not in the agricultural sector as substitutes for extension and we are not spending any money on them. They are paid by Defence, they are deployed by Defence and while they are looking at the veterans, we are saying they should go ahead and see that the inputs that we are giving are also put to right use.

The challenge we have now is that when you have a government programme to distribute coffee seedlings, every farmer will line up even when they do not have gardens. So we want to make sure that these people help us to make sure that there is accountability. Yes, they have nothing to do with politics or crop husbandry –(Interjections)- please, I am giving wanted information. I am making a clarification. If you are not satisfied - (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague that one of the objectives of the UPDF is production and there is an institutional establishment - the National Enterprise Corporation (NEC) and under this NEC, there is a section that deals with agriculture more or less. This is under the NEC structures. If the government of the Republic of Uganda and in the wisdom of the President, we require the UPDF to participate in NAADS, it should have used that arm of the UPDF (NEC) but NEC is dying. How do you bring –(Interruption)

COL. KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, I patiently listened to my brother hon. Fungaroo and when we are not in the plenary, we sit with hon. Fungaroo in the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs where we had extensive discussions on matters relating to the Defence and Internal Affairs sectors. I just saw hon. Fungaroo trying to un-wrap the report of the committee he sits on, which is not yet before the House. Is it therefore in order that hon. Fungaroo should use his privileged position in his capacity as shadow Minister for Defence to bring the report of the committee here for debate before it is tabled?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it was brought as information to the honourable Minister of Agriculture.

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: So, honourable colleagues, the UPDF have been assigned as a strategic intervention to make sure that when we send inputs, they help us in supervision. They are not going to handle crop husbandry, they are not going to deliver - (Interruption) - let me first finish.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way and thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I am seeking clarification. What you are saying is very good. But I want to find out from you, is there a policy in place to guide what you are talking about? What you are talking about needs to be implemented following proper procedures and guidelines. Without any policy, how are we going to implement it? We would even be moving with you and probably informing the other people who are not here about what the UPDF is doing in that programme. So I need clarification on the policy. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we received the report of the committee, the feeling of House was that the report was so thorough that we only needed to raise points of clarification to the minister. That is why we are proceeding this way. They said the report was so clear that no debate on it was going to be required at this time. If you could seek points of clarification and the minister clarifies, that would be it –(Interjections)– yes, we were all here unless you have not been following the proceedings of the House, honourable member. I am the one in charge of this chair – (Laughter) – so please respect the House and its decorum. I heard from the Members that is why we started with issues of clarification from the minister. 

Ordinarily, I would have proposed the question for debate and then after the contributions, towards the end, I would have asked the shadow minister to speak and then I would ask the minister to respond. That is what would have happened. But the point was that there were issues that they said we need to only raise issues of clarification –(Interjections)– can any Member who was part of this speak on what I am saying? 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some of us have been here since morning and as you rightly stated, when the chairperson of the committee made the presentation, it was a general agreement that the report was well-written, articulated and detailed. That is why you asked us, Mr Speaker, to seek further clarifications where the report did not cover. That is why we are not in for debate but asking for clarification. We had actually asked for the question to be put and we proceed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is what happened when the report was read. Those who were paying attention were able to follow it. Those who were not are now raising issues behind the scenes. Those who followed the issues, those were the sentiments and that is why we are proceeding that way –(Interjections)– that includes the member for Lira; you see you can been in the House and not follow debate –(Laughter)– being in the House is no proof that you are following the debate. The Members said, “Let us raise clarifications to the minister then we proceed”. That is what it was; otherwise I would have proceeded another way but that was the sentiment of the House at that time. If it has changed, it should have just changed. So please respond to those issues. 

COL. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, those who are asking about a policy, we have been having different policies. We have put them together to form a national agricultural policy which we are launching tomorrow and I invite all Members to be present in Munyonyo tomorrow. 

Mr Speaker, the other issue is VAT on agricultural inputs. The Ministry of Finance has responded and I think he will respond in the other paper if you give him time to respond. Why don’t we have an agricultural policy? We have had various policies scattered in different sub-sectors. We have brought them together and incorporated the new challenges and vision for Uganda’s agricultural development and we are launching the policy tomorrow. 

The Leader of the Opposition talked about fake seeds. We have increased the number of inspectors and recommend farmers to buy seeds from licenced people. We have been more vigilant of recent and we have arrested so many people with fake seeds. We however advise farmers not to buy seeds anyhow. We refer them to subject matter specialists where there are no agencies because people have become smart; they even paint white maize with red to make money. 

We are also recruiting – we are forming an agricultural policy to make sure that those cases are prosecuted instantly in the different parts of the country. The feeds policy has been developed and formulated and standards have been set. We are working closely with the National Bureau of Standards. 

I have a problem with the CDO because there is a board of CDO and there is the Auditor-General. I have not seen a case where any person in the leadership has been implicated. We have taken note of the concerns of those who said that she has been there for a long time. But many people have been here for quite some time. But the issue is we must find fault first. 

Cotton is a strategic crop and that is why we put money into it. Otherwise, people have abandoned cotton production in preference of more lucrative enterprises –(Interruption) 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable minister. When you talk about cotton that is my area of concern; are you aware that the only ginnery in East Acholi, which is located in Kitgum is about to be taken over by an investor because the Union could not get 100 million for installation and they had written to H.E the President and a copy was sent to your office. Are you aware and are you ready to salvage the issue and boost cotton production?

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: You are actually confirming what I am saying that people with small holders do not find cotton very profitable. Cotton needs big pieces of land. If you have two hectares and you are growing cotton, you cannot have land for food. That is why government puts in money to avail seeds to farmers. But I have taken the concerns of the members; I will take it up with the agriculture committee. We even had a full day with the Members of Parliament and the board of CDO and at the end of the day, we identified challenges and found solutions accordingly. 

One honourable member said that I should explain a spine. I have explained it. On the policy framework on how NAADS is going to be implemented. We have not repealed the NAADS Act. We are actually trying to amend the law and when we come up with the final position, we shall have to discuss it with the committee and we shall bring it to Parliament for everybody to participate. What we are doing is to minimise unnecessary expenditure. As somebody rightly put it, we do not need to go in hotels to teach people how to grow bananas. But much of those conferences and seminars that they call around Kampala are for the NGOs. When an NGO is doing support services and they are giving money to the peasants, we cannot stop them but for quite some time now, we have been teaching people on farm field schools and demonstration schools and right into the gardens.

Hon. Wafula Oguttu asked something about tractors. Well, we gave tractors to sub-counties and this scheme did not last long because what belongs to everybody is nobody’s. Maintenance became a problem. The tractors were politicised and people would give them to their brothers and anybody not in the good books of the chairperson would not get the services of the tractor and the tractors got run down. So, we encouraged the private sector to own tractors. What we have done is to put a line of credit, through the Bank of Uganda, where people can access funding to buy tractors or even can use it for adding value to their products. You must have a bankable project. The problem is people think that you just walk into the bank and pick money; no, one has to have a bankable project and this is one of the challenges we have had with some of our farmers. We have had people –(Interjections)– the money is in 15 participating banks and I think the Minister of Finance should prepare maybe a session to take Members of Parliament through because –(Interjections)– can you let me finish before you seek clarification? Please, address the Speaker.

There was a question that shocked me and I am really surprised that the hon. Nandala-Mafabi has been imagining whether the Ministry of Agriculture should stay or be scrapped. Honourable colleagues, as you may know, the Hansard is a very good record. I have been attentively listening to hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s contribution asking for money for the agriculture sector but I am surprised that he now wants the ministry for which he was asking money, scrapped.

But honourable colleagues, even with the small funding in this sector, we have achieved something. The first achievement is that we are food sufficient, as a nation. The second is that we are rice sufficient. The 240,000 metric tonnes that we used to import – last year, production was 270,000 metric tonnes and particularly from the east –(Interjections)– yes everywhere. I one time in this House mentioned 36 research achievements. We are even applauded in Africa for doing some good work in agricultural research even with this little money.

We used to import powdered milk to reconstitute milk in Kampala but we are now self-sufficient and even exporting milk into the East, Central and abroad. (Applause)

In 1986, we had 4.8 million head of cattle but we now have 14 million head of cattle. Let me also tell you that we are not vegetable oil-deficient yet we used to import but we are now exporting. We did not have any recorded export of cocoa. Now we are exporting 17,000 metric tonnes of cocoa. Our tea industry has been revived –(Interjections) 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Minister, for informing us about those achievements. But I think you should write them down so that we can take you on to determine whether they are measurable. But the point of clarification is that when I was growing up in eastern Uganda, every home had a cow. But today, many children in Bugiri have never seen milk because there are no cows. What happened?

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, minister, for the achievements. However, allow me to give this information. In West Nile, we grow cassava particularly in Obongi and the neighbouring areas and we use the cassava stalks supplied under the NAADs programme. Therefore, the Ministry of Agriculture that you are praising are causing famine because they rot very fast and the indigenous varieties of cassava and maize are actually disappearing. Do you call that progress?

Honourable minister, famine is looming in West Nile. The milk you are talking about here as a sign of progress comes from one region of this country. Even Karamoja that has a lot of cattle does not have milk tonnes that you are talking about here.

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: But that is a debate; you are not giving information.

MR FUNGAROO: The information is that the agriculture sector is dead.

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Honourable colleagues, in fact I am also surprised that my brother is not comfortable with the army when I know for sure he has been supporting the retired Col. Kiiza Besigye as their leader in that district. I also –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are discussing issues for our country and we are worried and also farmers in the villages are worried about how the army, without proper guidelines, will work with the communities. They are scared of what will happen. So, is the honourable minister in order to drag my beloved former party President into this debate when he is not part of the army mobilised to take over NAADs? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is true that Col (Rtd) Dr Besigye was a UPDF officer; that is a fact. It is also true that you support him. What is not true is when the honourable minister would like to make that a relevant debate to the debate in the House. There is a rule on relevance. The debate on Col (Rtd) Dr Besigye is entirely irrelevant to this debate. (Applause)

COL. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. Mr Speaker, allow me to respond to what the hon. Babadiri raised – the issue of using hand hoes as opposed to tractors. We have popularised the use of farm power not limited to tractors. We also teach and encourage people to use ox-ploughs when they don’t have money. So –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. The procedural matter I want to raise – I have just got statistics here that the population of Uganda is growing at 3.4 percent while agriculture is growing at only 2.1 percent. The procedural issue I am raising, Mr Speaker is: should we really agree to the minister’s figures when he is lying to us that we are doing well when the country is doing badly? Is it procedurally right?

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, NAADS is shrinking but the budget has remained the same. This budget is going to also be transformed to support the recruitment of the extension workers and also agricultural inputs. 

Hon. Lugolobi raised a very important concern of post-harvest handling. It is true 40 percent in some parts of the country is lost through post-harvest handling. The silos you are referring to are under the Ministry of Trade and Industry but what we are doing as Ministry of Agriculture is to encourage people to teach them technologies for post-harvest handling and encourage them to have granaries for their food. We also give support through NAADS and other programmes to support primary processing, maize hullers, rice hullers, coffee hullers and processing plants and milk coolers.

That the GDP growth rate remained stagnant; why can’t we have management audit. You must also appreciate that we have continued to fund this sector with less because of our priorities and also to remind members that the other sectors have grown and it is not bad that the contribution of GDP has gone down if the production is going up. That means that the service sector and other sectors are growing taking part of the share. But you should also remember that most of our industries are agro-processing and agriculture has supported them in one way or the other. 

Irrigation policy; “MAAIF does not have an irrigation policy to sustain the irrigation systems, even those we have rehabilitated.” That is not true. As I indicated earlier, we have put all our policies together and we are launching our national policy tomorrow, it was approved by cabinet and it will be laid on Table in the very near future. 

I want to thank the honourable members for their contribution and their support and I thank the committee – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need to hear from Fisheries then we open again.

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, the government has been honouring its pledges in most cases and where we have not honoured them, it means we are in the process. This came as a result of the Maputo Declaration which stipulated that we give 10 percent to the agricultural sector and Kyankwanzi agreed on 7 percent but now it is 3 percent. Honourable colleagues, there is order of precedence. If you must dress up, I think you need to wear the socks first and then the shoes but if it is the other way round, I think it will look funny. The government invested in infrastructure. Infrastructure provided a pool for agriculture production in many ways; where we have put roads and a bunch of matooke was Shs 5,000 it has shot up to Shs 10,000. Where a bag of rice was Shs 12,000 it is now Shs 25,000. So, in one way or another, roads boost agricultural production and access to market.

The other one is electricity; without the agro-processing industry here, what we produce will go to waste. So, the government rightly so has invested too much money in the energy sector and we, in agriculture, as long as the nerve is on and we are sure that tomorrow we are going to receive this money at an appropriate time; where we have to take this crop for industry we have to find market for what we produce. I think we need to strike a balance. I think I have tried to explain and I want to thank honourable members for their cooperation. I want to call my colleague to talk about what was reported about fisheries.

6.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (FISHERIES) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank colleagues and the members of the Committee on Agriculture for the report. I want to agree with the committee’s recommendation for a value-for-money forensic audit into how we utilised the Shs 9.4 billion. I have no problem with that. I support it because we all want to know how that money was utilised. 

Secondly, we are working around the programme on streamlining the deployment and recruitment of enforcement officers. We have been working with the Ministry of Internal Affairs for a very long time but I am happy to note that last month – in August - the National Security Committee apportioned us time to appear before them and we thoroughly discussed the concept of the MAAIF enforcement police which is going to help us regulate through carrying out enforcement through the three sectors - that is crop, livestock and fisheries. It will help us to streamline.

On further information on the policy of fishermen which was raised by hon. Wafula Oguttu when he said that there is a lot of harassment of fishing communities, we are guided by statutory instrument number 33. It stipulates the dos and the don’ts in the fisheries sub-sector and that is what we are enforcing. But as you are aware, you cannot do enforcement and people do not complain because you are removing the gears which they have bought using loans and you are burning them. It hurts but you have nothing to do. On the other hand, the fishermen themselves are also tough if you are not protected. If you handle them with kid gloves, you may end up losing your life. We have cases where fishermen have attacked the enforcement officers and we have to appreciate that it is not easy. So, what we are doing is to make sure that we are moving on with sensitisation of leaders and the fishing communities until we come to an understanding and appreciation of the principle of core management and –(Interruption)

MS ONGOM: Thank you so much for responding to this. Mr Speaker, you will realise that I was a little harsh. We have the Beach Management Unit and the enforcement officers and there are circumstances when the young fish are caught and sometimes even smoked but the enforcement officers just look on. They pack and go on to sell. In my district, the workers and those who deal in fish have suffered and they were about to storm this Parliament. In a situation where enforcement officers see these people catch the small fish, smoke it and they allow them to pack to go and sell and they are impounded from them and if they are impounded they are never destroyed and they find their way to the market and the people have suffered, they have got loans. Are you aware of this? What effort have you put on these beach management enforcement officers? You see them smoking small fish, they pass them to sell and it is these people who buy that suffer it all.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for giving way. Is it possible for you to produce a list of your team – the enforcement officers - and how you recruited them, their qualifications, how you have been remunerating them and how you have been monitoring what they do? Because I have got a file of complaints; I am the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum on Fisheries and I have got a file of sobre criminals – convicts - who have been recruited into killing and carrying out these activities and so, people have been wondering whether they have the qualifications to even check for immature fish or not. Their work has always been to impound, confiscate or get a bribe, send it and then communicate further; “We have sent that one to you” and another day begins and they arrest then they leave until the fish reaches the market. Are you aware of this kind of mechanism?

MR FUNGAROO: Hon. Minister, thank you. I know we have agricultural research facilities in this country like Namulonge; in Moyo District, I first received information from the people of Obongi and Adjumani and to interest myself in some activity which I became concerned about which I would like to bring to your attention, of a white man with a team on a motorised boat sailing from the area of Zoka Forest in Adjumani District and to River Nile in Obongi who was fishing and then injecting the fish. You get to see him holding an injection, catches the fish and throws it back into the river. This appeared strange to the fishermen. They reported to me and I asked them to inform me if this white man came again so that I would go and see for myself. So, one time indeed when I was in Obongi, this white man came with his boat, anchored in the middle of the river and started performing these activities. The obongians called and I went and witnessed it but when I inquired from Moyo District Local Government and Adjumani, they said they were not aware of anybody authorised to operate in that area in that manner. I would like now to ask, have you as a minister in that ministry, authorised anybody to do some kind of research – to catch fish and inject it with something which people do not understand and then release it back into the water? Will this not become harmful in the long run to the people who will subsequently consume the fish? Who are these people operating in the area of Zoka Forest and in the River Nile and in the areas of Obongi and Adjumani? Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: If I can begin with what ndugu Fungaroo has raised, I can only say that I will consult the competent authority who is the commissioner authorised to give licences to people who do sport fishing. We do have a statutory instrument that allows for sport fishing where tourists come and pay for licences to do sport fishing. They get fish and throw it back. I am not aware of injecting – (Interjections) - he is telling us what happened and it is his word against mine because I was not there and he too does not know, he was just told. So, the story is long. We shall have to investigate but as far as capturing fish and returning it is concerned, that is what we call sport fishing. Anybody whether a foreign or indigenous tourist is allowed to do sport fishing for as long as they pay. 

As for Dr Lulume, you asked whether I can produce a team. Yes, everybody whom I send into the teams, I retain a copy of the letter introducing that person to the local leaders and they are supposed to work with the district security committee because they are not armed. They need security; they are supposed to work with the district fisheries officers but some officers are not cooperative because they connive with the transporters of immature fish. So, when you want assistance from such a person, sometimes they resist. – (Interjections) - yes, I can do that. I can even produce recommendations from you, colleagues, because I have colleagues who have been recommending people of good character and the law allows that. The Constitution allows any citizen to really help the state in doing enforcement. We can interact on that, I have no problem.

Beach Management Units are like LC I executive committees and they were established with the help of a European Union grant. They were established through elections, through a Beach Management Statute passed by Parliament and they were supposed to voluntarily do enforcement using the principle of core management but along the way, when the grant got exhausted, we did not put in money to maintain sensitisation and training of these people. So, they abandoned that core responsibility of managing their natural resource and joined the illegalities throughout the country. Most of these BMUs just look on when these illegalities are taking place. So, the issue of core management here is very important because there is no way a minister can monitor what is happening right from Entebbe to Wakawaka without using the local leadership and communities. So, I have been grappling with this. I have cases of indiscipline, I have people I have dismissed, the cases are there and the challenges are enormous. So, I think the MAAIF Police will help in streamlining this because we really lack human resource. 

I will end by commenting on whether NAADS is catering for the fishing industry whereby we can also get wood fishing gears. NAADS has also had an input into the fisheries industry by providing fish fingerlings and by also providing for hatcheries where we assist private farmers who have come up with fishery hatcheries for fingerlings. 

In some districts like Amolatar, we bought woods nets. In some districts like Kalangala and Mpigi, we had an input into mukene drying racks. NAADS included fish because fish is amongst the 10 top commodities that we are laying emphasis on. 

DR BAYIGGA: What about Buikwe?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Buikwe has a programme for mukene –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please let us not be negotiating across. This is the House proceeding; there are no private negotiations in this matter.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: They are asking me about Buikwe and I am not responding because I am looking for your –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, you are the one holding the Floor.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much. NAADS is having an input by provision of what I have mentioned. The honourable Minister of Agriculture told you that NAADS was demand driven. We cannot build a bridge where there is no water. So where we have received requisitions, we have tried to make an input and I have mentioned a few of them.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, on alternative livelihood, the fishing communities are not exempted from other agricultural programmes that are taking place. There are no people who are sleeping on the waters; they are sleeping in the islands. So, they are free to benefit from other agricultural programmes but the gist is that we must be firm and tell our fishing communities that they are over fishing, that the lake has to rest and that the population is too much. People come from wherever and gather at landing sites.

I just want to end by thanking my colleagues who have supported me and called me whenever there is a problem but I also request that we become bold and tell our communities that if you go to the market to buy food and you pass by a stall full of immature fish, make it a point to stop there and sensitise those people and say, “You are carrying immature fish.” Immature fish is visible; 11 inches for tilapia, 20 inches for Nile perch. It is all in our Statutory Instrument No. 33. It does not require rocket science to know the size of fish. So let it be the responsibility of all of us to make sure that we help our communities to appreciate why we must save our natural resources. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Finance is here but there is a particular issue that needs to be raised by the shadow minister, which has to be handled by the Minister of Finance. I will ask him to raise it so that when the minister is responding, he can respond to that one as well.

7.06
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Francis Epetait): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for adopting a number of proposals that we made in our statement as the Opposition. I would like to comment on the issue of tax. 

Honourable colleagues, the Minister of Finance is aware of a tool called the Computable General Equilibrium Model, 2012. Analysis on the impact of VAT on agricultural inputs has been made and we have shocking results. One, it will lead to increased consumer prices by 4.1 percent. It will lead to increased export prices of agricultural commodities by 2.8 percent thereby lowering exports by 12 percent. It will lead to increase in unemployment, which is already a problem by 4.9 percent. Finally among others, it will actually lead to reduced real GDP growth by 2.7 percent. 

Whoever misadvised Government to come up with that tax on agricultural inputs, aware that it would make many farmers abandon farming and thereby lead to food insecurity, should actually be investigated. The best Government can do for now is withdraw that tax if we must help our GDP to grow.

Mr Speaker, there was a matter to do with the justification for the split of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. This is not a new phenomenon or a new demand. On 6 April 1999, there was a heated debate in Parliament on a motion moved by the late hon. Okullo Epak and seconded by hon. Elly Karuhanga to the effect of splitting the ministry and the justifications have remained the same. 

Similar recommendations have been made by subsequent agriculture committees. In 2003, the Committee on Agriculture made a similar recommendation. On 2 September 2009, another resolution was taken by Parliament and you can check this. What is happening is that whereas we all cry that the agriculture sector is generally underfunded, it is astonishing to note that within agriculture, the livestock and the fisheries sub-sectors are the most vulnerable. They are the ones suffering most because 75 percent of the allocation to Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries goes to crop. The other two entities share 25 percent. Is that fair? No wonder the two - the livestock and the fisheries sectors - are the ones which have registered the highest decline in progress.

I will give you an example; foot and mouth disease (FMD) is endemic in Uganda. It is therefore imperative on Government to annually make efforts to vaccinate against FMD. We have more than 14 million head of cattle but in the last financial year, money was available to procure only 571,000 doses of vaccine. Can you imagine that this financial year, the whole of eastern Uganda is under quarantine because of FMD? People are not eating meat and they cannot sell their animals to take children to school. The quarantine has been enforced but there is no concurrent vaccination programme going on. What we have budgeted for this financial year for FMD vaccines is a mere 250,000 doses for the whole country, which has 14 million head of cattle. It is ridiculous.

So that is why we are saying - I could go on and on because it is in black and white in the ministerial policy statement. There is a lot of public outcry and if we do not do something in order to have focussed planning and budgeting to redirect these entities, we are doomed. 

We therefore demand that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should be split because before the merger in 1991, the two separate entities were doing quite well. Each of them was making progress but immediately they were merged, even the poor performance in the livestock and fisheries sectors has culminated into general decline of the entire sector. Let us revive our economy by having a better institutional framework.

On that note, honourable members, I have attached in the response of the Opposition to Agriculture statement, an annex, which states the farms that we have under agriculture throughout the country, district by district. I would interest you to crosscheck what is happening in the so-called quarantine stations in various places which unfortunately - I call them so-called because they have become dysfunctional on account of lack of funding. So my colleague, hon. Katirima, this is not a new call for the Executive to take action to redirect the agriculture sector.

Let me complete as I am already being warned about time. Finally, there is the issue of land grabbing. Already some information has reached my office and I am going to follow it up with the Ministry of Agriculture that some very important person has grabbed the Hoima Agricultural Mechanisation Workshop. This is very unfortunate. We must be very vigilant and protect what belongs to our government; protect what belongs to the state.

Mr Speaker, we thought the KCCA issue – once upon a time KCC was in local government and therefore qualified to get appropriation through those votes 501 to 850 which is local government agriculture conditional grants. Since it metamorphosed to an authority under the centre, it is actually directly supervised by the Ministry of the Presidency; there is no way we can appropriate money meant for local government to KCCA. If anything, we support urban agriculture. They can still go ahead and request for it through their supervisory organ, the Ministry for Presidency, but not through other votes where they were off loaded. I need to clarify that, Mr Speaker. 

7.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the House for this report. The figures on page 27 of the committee report do not take into consideration addendum one and two and we request that this be recognised and reconciled with the figures that will be given by the budget committee. 

However, if you permit me to read the correct figures I will; however, they will be recognised when they are reconciled with the budget committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you adopt the report of the committee, as I always give a rider, the figures will be the final figures that will come from the budget committee for supply. But we still adopt the report of the committee at the right time and then those figures are harmonised at the budget committee and brought for supply. 

MR OMACH: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Hon. Dr Epetait has raised our appetite and we shall be pro-active. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can we have Buliisa; but be brief please. 

7.16
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, the Committee on Agriculture and the Ministry of Agriculture –the reports on the policy statement is informing the year five of NDP I and the ministry is not telling us how much they have achieved in transforming agriculture, commercialising agriculture and agro-processing. 

At the end of the quest for transformation inclusive of gross, when talking of post MDG, we cannot quote agriculture development or growth comparing it to when Uganda had 15 million people. We are about 37 million people and in 24 years, we are hitting 100 million people. So as we do the last NDP year five and go to NDP II, I would be happy if the agriculture sector showed what they want in NDP II. Are you up to that task of giving food security for 100 million people? We are talking of agriculture as if we are planting on Mars; there is no reference to land. You must deal with the land question, the fertility issue and urbanisation if you are really up to the task. Short of that, we are massaging poverty and we are preserving peasantry and we can hold the Ministry of Agriculture responsible for backwardness in this country. It is very important. 

And on NAADS, if you asked for the last nine years, what has been the cost of NAADS and what have we got in return? What did we stop PMA – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please assist the House, follow the trend we were following. 

MR MUKITALE: Yes, Mr Speaker, I have no choice but to proceed in further inquiry. Government terminated PMA and introduced ad hoc NAADS which became responsible for procurement and was full of corruption due to their attempt to do everything. Why don’t you give this Parliament hope that in NDP II we are going back to PMA?

When you look at the recommendations of the chairman, they are all on the seven pillars; from the input, crop finance and value addition – everything is in the PMA. So why don’t we re-introduce PMA? Why did you listen to the donor who stopped PMA? The answer is in PMA and commercialising agriculture, not agriculture just for peasants to get food. Your population does not allow for that luxury. You are being caught up on the secondary school economics of Malsus. 

Now on fisheries, I come from the lake region. If there is anything I am apologetic for as a member of this Parliament is the management of fisheries that we have. I wish the money for NAADs had been put in replenishing the lakes, in caging; we would have had more results than from NAADS. We are hunters and gatherers; we have fish exports without investing anything in fish production. We are doing the same in tourism. Even in animal husbandry; we are talking of animal husbandry but Government does not vaccinate for us. How can we continue being hunters and gatherers in this age of the Ninth Parliament; it is unfortunate. So, we should stand firm and oppose some of this backwardness. Agriculture is so critical – you must have agro-processing. Can we talk of specialisation in some of these areas? You cannot talk of CDO for the last eight years –(Member timed out_)

7.21
MR HARUN KYEYUNE (Independent, Kyotera County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the committee for the wonderful report. May I know, honourable minister, whether you are aware that banana farmers are affected by banana wilt bacteria and coffee growers are being affected by the coffee wilt disease? 

In your report, you have not shown any mechanism to curb that problem. However much we distribute coffee seedlings, if we do not devise means of controlling these diseases, we are doing nothing. The farmers plant coffee and the following day they are attacked by the bacteria. Honourable minister, tell us so we can go and tell the farmers that now the minister has got the resources to help us come up with a mechanism of curbing that problem.  

7.23
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the committee. One big problem we have in Acholi sub-region is the Aswa Ranch, the Acholi Ranch and Pagere Ranch. These ranches lie on over 105,000 acres of land. I believe that the minister should clarify on this matter very clearly because it is a very big pain that now even some rudimentary work is going on that land yet when I looked at NAGRIC on page 8 – I tried to find out whether these ranches were covered in this report. In the supplementary budget, something about Aswa Ranch came up. Could the minister really clarify on what is happening and why they are going through RISU, GISU, DISU, instead of taking the right channels? 

The security of every project is the community. If the community is completely kept out and remains completely green – can the minister clarify whether this NAGRIC project that is supposed to be there but does not appear in the report, is going to succeed when the community is not involved.

On NAADs, we have very young people who were employed in this project. But we have heard that it is going to be managed by the UPDF and we have also heard that it is going to be redesigned to come to the central region. I wonder whether the honourable minister knows anything about unemployment in Uganda. What happens to a person who has been dropped from work where they might have been earning something small? And instead of decentralising it to sub-county level, you still want to centralise it to - when you centralised for example tractor hiring under the PRDP, it was the most useless project. Why do you want to centralise NAADS again?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want the minister to clarify further on the issue of storage. Storage imparts on the quality of the product and hence the value of the agricultural output. When I travel to my constituency in areas like Bweyale during this season, you find people drying the millet on the ground. So, will the government interest itself in trying to institute storage at the household level? What about the storage areas that are available; what is the procedure of location so that at household level, people can benefit.

Two, could the Minister of State for Fisheries clarify what is happening with the properties that were formerly used by the Uganda Fisheries Enterprises Limited. Madam Minister, I am addressing myself to your sector and I worked in that sector as a depot manager and I can give an example of Luweero Depot where I was the manager for 14 years. Since I left, that property has never been operational; it is in isolation. So, what is happening to this property formerly used by the Uganda Fisheries Enterprise Limited? Thank you.

MR JUNJURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, just raise the clarification.

7.29
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Mr Speaker, the issue upon which I would like to seek clarification from the minister is in regard to the NAADS shift from the old fashion to the single spine extension system. I am particularly concerned because when I read the report of the committee, I realised that this programme has not been consulted. Many programmes in agriculture have failed simply because there is a tendency for top-down planning and not down-top planning that ensures the involvement of the beneficiaries.

Some time ago, I was in my constituency and I realised that we seem to be moving to areas that will make our people lazy. I discussed this with my electorate. For example, an area where you need the input and participation of our people is in regard to agricultural inputs. In Bunyoro sub-region, if you came with your cassava or sweet potato cuttings and you think you are intervening, you will be seen to be unserious. In fact this is the point where we are making our people lazy. Traditionally, our people used to grow crops from which they would replant. But we are now letting them to imagine that you can plant an acre of maize and eat or sell all without planning for the next season. I am looking at a situation where in this coming programme – (Member timed out.)

7.31
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. My concern is about the lack of policies to guide the sector especially when it comes to the issue of pesticides, acaricides and generally value-addition and post-harvest. Honourable minister, you are aware that the coffee exports, like they have said, have gone down in terms of value. This is as a result of the pests that have been attacking coffee plants and all those issues that were mentioned have been raised here on several occasions. So, I want to know what the ministry has come up with to protect the coffee such that our coffee beans can become competitive on the international market.

The other concern is about the post-harvest handling of our crops. If we are not careful, we are all going to die of cancer. This is because what the local people do now in post-harvest preservation of beans, maize and other crops is to use rat poison to prevent pests from destroying the crops such that during the time when there is low supply of these crops, they can protect them. And I believe that is very dangerous to our lives. No wonder our people now suffer from cancer so much these days.

7.33
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is also about NAADS because in Kabale, we are seeing the budget going back to as big as finding 90 percent of it in advisory services while only 10 percent is for farmers. Now that we have the UPDF coming in and since the UPDF have their own salaries, are we going to see a scenario where the monies that would have gone into paying salaries to NAADS officials will go into non-wage bills? Will this money go into non-wage bills such as machinery, seeds such that we see agriculture improving and doing much better? I thank you.

7.34
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. NAADS has been a challenge for 14 years and we have all been complaining. Now the Executive arm of Government has decided that we use soldiers and we are still questioning the use of soldiers to run NAADS or to implement the programme. Honourable members, should we preoccupy ourselves with a question of who is going to do what or should we be asking ourselves what is going to be done. As individuals, we all want to see this NAADS stuff succeed. We are tired of money from NAADS being stolen. Let us try those who have been tried and tested. If the UPDF can do the work, why not? Why should we politicise these services? I stand to support the use of UPDF soldiers. I believe they can do more than what we are seeing. Whether you say no or not and I do not know whether you have any choice but that is the only reason I rose up.

7.36
MR WILLIAM NZHOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Mr Speaker, overall the report by the committee has indicated that there was a decline in both crop and animal production. The issues which I want the minister to clarify on are the following:

There was a decline in production of crops even when there were no taxes on the agricultural inputs and yet the sector has indicated that it wants to increase production. How do you convince this House that production will increase amidst taxes and yet production declined when there were no taxes on agricultural inputs?

The committee proposed that the ministry should be split into two and the other issue of clarification that I would like to get from the minister is how they plan to finance the second ministry in terms of public administration costs if the ministry is still grappling with a small budget.

The banning of the sale of raw milk – for instance, in my place there are no facilities at the farmers’ disposal that can guarantee them not to sell raw milk in their villages. What alternatives has the minister put in place to protect those farmers who cannot access facilities that can therefore guarantee them not to sell raw milk in their areas?

Finally, what competences does the Office of the President have over KCCA to take over the agricultural budget that is currently under KCCA that the committee was proposing and not KCCA that has a structure that is clear and technical?

7.38
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To the minister, why is the Executive planning to give out Namulonge land and yet there is no more room to accommodate a lot of research still going on under the agricultural sector? 

Two, what are you doing about the quarantine especially in Kaberamaido? When do you plan to lift it? 

How much nutrients are lost on the soil due to soil erosion every year? Now that agriculture is majorly a research field and you have many research stations, what are doing about the loss of soil nutrients?

What research is done about the rate at which nutrients are being lost due to other reasons other than soil erosion?

Lastly, to what extent does the Ministry of Agriculture liaise with other ministries in order to help farmers out on how to market their crops other than being exploited by the middlemen? I thank you very much.

7.39
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to ask the ministry why they have failed and delayed to create a fisheries authority in the ministry yet it was needed yesterday given the enormous challenges in the ministry? 

7.40
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the budget strategies for this financial year, the government wants to emphasise among other things leveraging agriculture and ensuring that we boost not only agricultural output but also commercialising it but in the proposed budget estimate, you will find that it is mainly recurrent. For example, vote 010 has only Shs 7 billion, 121 has Shs 1 billion, 125 has no capital development. In other words, the provision for capital development is extremely minimal and given the questions raised by my colleagues, there is no way we can develop and have the right impact without the capital development aspect. Most of this money is only on recurrent. So, honourable minister, how do you hope to bring about the required changes and necessary developments which you are trying to talk about without this capital development fund?

GEN. PHINEHAS KATIRIMA (UPDF Representative): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the committee and maybe also from the minister. Where are the agriculturalists and the vets who have qualified so many years after I left agriculture in 1981 in Makerere? Are we using them? Would the committee and the minister like to comment about the vets? Why has the veterinary profession died? Veterinary medicine was one of the highly prized courses at Makerere University. Some of us failed to get there but over the years the vets have fizzled out and disappeared. Is it because of the merger of the ministry where the veterinary officers and animal husbandry and other groups are not doing their work? 

I would like to know what the ministry is doing about the acaricides and the pesticides that are not effective now because the ticks or the diseases have gained resistance over the years. You may find neighbouring farmers for instance Katirima here and hon. Bugembe here in neighbouring farms using two types of acaricides –(Member timed out.)

7.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker and members for your contribution. Fortunately, I had answered most of the questions and they came in different forms. Hon. Kasolo, on banana bacterial wilt, at least I was in Rakai on a programme against banana bacterial wilt and we have continued to publish books and to send money to districts for awareness. Bacteria wilt is like jiggers, you have to fight it all throughout. It is like ticks; you must be on the farm to fight the wilt because we don’t have pesticides. The only solution available is to uproot and protect further infections.

Ranches in Aswa and in northern Uganda: in the past we had government ranches all over the country. Unfortunately, because of wars, they got destocked especially in the 1979 war and Government has not had enough money to restock and rehabilitate them at ago. We have been able to rehabilitate those which were not in the war zones but with peace coming to northern Uganda, we have not found adequate money but we are moving to those ranches. However, also because of the war, some of them have been encroached on and on the issue raised about the way they are coming in, to the best of my knowledge – I will write to the RDC and the chairman LCV and I think those are the local leaders at the district. Of recent, we are engaging Members of Parliament. I have been with Members of Parliament from Apac where we stocked Maruzi and I have engaged the committee. We are planning to go to Aswa. We are doing something but we do not have the money. The money for NAGRIC is only Shs 4 billion and for Shs 4 billion to really rehabilitate that ranch, honourable colleagues, is like a drop in the ocean. We shall try to raise money and restock these areas for the people of northern Uganda. In any case, we are carrying out restocking programmes. We must run support services in the region. 

On the young people and why they have lost jobs and what plans we have, this is a very good concern. We have written circulars to say that those who were under the NAADS programme and they have the competencies - either they are agricultural officers, harvest officers or are fisheries officers, entomology - they will be recruited in extension services and as you saw in the budget, we have not withdrawn the money. 

The Member for Busongora asked, “Without taxes, we were not doing very well; are we going to do well with taxes?” Really the issue of production and productivity is to look at farming as a business. If you have planted the same crop three times in the same garden, you certainly know the soils are getting exhausted. You need to put some fertilisers, you need to leave it to fallow, and you need to do sub-soiling. So, on taxes on agricultural inputs, I think we agreed here and the minister has already listened to the advice of the Speaker and we have captured the concerns of the House.

Hon. Ibi asked why we are giving out Namulonge? Hon. Ibi, I am not part of the group that is giving out Namulonge and the Ministry of Agriculture is trying to recover it. In fact, what we are doing as a ministry is to recover lost land. I thank Members of Parliament – I don’t want to name them – those that have supported us to recover land from some of these sharks who want to get free government land. People are using the law to beat us but we have also now come up with a law to deal with them.

On the quarantine in eastern Uganda, it is very unfortunate that you have quarantine especially in your area but since it has come, we have to deal with it professionally. It is within your interest that we keep quarantine - at least a total quarantine for three months and partial quarantine for six months. A total quarantine means that you are not trading and transporting animals or animal products from or through infected areas. A partial quarantine is that where we have vaccinated your animals, even when the healing process has been completed, after three months the animals can be able to infect others which have not been vaccinated. So, we allow internal business. You can sell meat, you can sell cows but not in the market because if you go to the market, you will meet cows from other areas and you will increase the spread. So we are constantly monitoring and the good news is that we availed fairly good doses of vaccines to eastern Uganda. 

“What are you doing about soil erosion and loss of nutrients?” Government cannot buy fertilisers for farmers. Farmers must know that they have a responsibility to feed their children, themselves and earn money from their farms. What we avail is technology and we have been on the ground and that is why Government is recruiting more extension workers to make sure they do crop husbandry and soil management science transfer to the farmers.

“To what extent do you liaise with other ministries to protect farmers from being exploited by traders?” I want to thank you so much, hon. Ibi. You have raised a very serious and relevant question to the peasants. It is true if we don’t come in to regulate the peasants, they will be exploited. What we are doing as a government and MAAIF in particular is to encourage farmers to form cooperatives. When they form cooperatives, they have the numbers, they get public support and we also help them to deal with post-harvesting issues. We have also intervened by holding meetings and also regulating to protect them. A case in point is the dairy farmers; they have suffered because of this. 

Hon. Isabirye wanted to know why we have delayed to create a fisheries authority. Really, there is a commissioner for fisheries who is responsible by law to regulate the lakes. What was lacking was the manpower. As you heard from the minister responsible, we have recruited fairly good staff and we are also considering the creation of the authority. I would like to inform the House that there has been a move by civil servants to create these authorities because they create more payment as opposed to civil servants. One would wonder why the same people would do better under a fisheries authority and they cannot do better under a department and yet they are empowered. So, this debate is going on and one of the challenges we had in NAADS was actually that abnormal money against other civil servants. In the district, the NAADS coordinator was the most paid officer above the CAO, above the Chairman and above the RDC. So, when creating these authorities now in Government, we are very careful. You must weigh why the same people think they can do better in the authority and they cannot do better now when they actually have all the tools. 

Hon. Mulongo on why there is no capital development in the budget; we do appropriation in this Parliament together. It is true there is some visible starvation in some areas especially in the livestock sector as highlighted by hon. Epetait, but what we can do as Parliament and the Executive is to find where our priorities are, as I did indicate. We need to draw our priorities and see where we put the money.

Hon. Katirima asked, “Where are the vets? Are you using them?” Yes, we are using them. We are not absorbing all of them but we have some of them. I am sure when you move your cows you get permits from vets but we would wish to have many more although we still have problems of budget ceiling.

Another question was asked, what is the minister doing with acaricides and pesticides that have become resistant? This regulation concerning acaricides is within the National Drug Authority. We had a challenge to do with what you highlighted where you have farmers in the same area using different acaricides and at one time. When ticks become resistant, you have no substitute because you cannot move to another acaricide. 

The idea of zoning cannot work at this moment because zoning was done when we were still controlling acaricides in the Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries but now with the liberalised economy, people buy different acaricides. So, zoning can be very dangerous because you can force people to take acaricides that are not working. So, we have published some guidelines for farmers to understand the formulation of acaricides and how to reach veterinary officers for advice which farmers should use so that eventually, we can go to zoning.

We are also working closely with the National Drug Authority to inform the manufacturers and the agencies about those acaricides that are not working. We are also telling farmers about the experiments we carry out and which acaricides they should not use. Some of the acaricides are not bio-degradable and we do not encourage them to be used but what we have done is that we have got a new PH machine and we test the potency of each acaricide and we give information to the farmers.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much and I want to thank the members for supporting the agriculture sector. Your advice and recommendations are taken seriously and we are sure together we shall revolutionise agriculture.

I want to call upon all of you, honourable colleagues, that tomorrow we should take off time and witness the launch of the long awaited National Agriculture Policy. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Fisheries, any response or is there nothing outstanding?

7.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (FISHERIES) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, hon. Beatrice Anywar asked about Uganda Fisheries Enterprise Limited as a company. The information I have is that this was a private company owned by Egyptians who were dealing in manufacturing boats and other fisheries implements. They closed in 1990 and we have been trying to find out what to do with the property that they left behind. There is a company which came claiming that they were the owners but it was later found that they are not the rightful owners. However, I promise to go and dig for thorough information so that I can respond appropriately to the issues that the honourable has raised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Any rebuttal from Finance? You have no issue? Mr Chairman, one minute to restate your prayer.

MR MATHIAS KASAMBA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and colleagues for the serious input in the agriculture sector. I only want to state that agriculture is the only business that every human soul cannot postpone. Every human soul in this country must eat. Food must be there in quality and quantity. So I appeal that it is no longer business as usual; let us put up a spirited fight to ensure that the agricultural system in this country changes through PMA and through the new National Development Programme. We should put our stake together to introduce a new business model, which will transform the peasantry into commercial agriculture. I thank you all and I appeal for a continuous tight marking approach to ensure that things work out. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and thank you members of this committee. I think you have really done a good job that has restructured the nature of debate of the House because you have basically exhausted all the issues that required our attention and the clarifications have generated more knowledge about what needs to be done.

I thank the ministers for making those responses; I thank the shadow minister for making those rather passionate appeals and submissions on these issues that remain outstanding. I thank all of you for staying this far and for making those very committed contributions to this debate. I thank you all very much. 

Honourable members, I had proposed the motion for debate. Now I put the question to this motion that the report of the sectoral Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2014/2015 be adopted. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, tomorrow we resume at 10 O’clock and we close at midday. We want to see if we can handle the two reports because the one on the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee is fairly a short one and we could be able to accommodate it quickly but we also have the one on Defence and Internal Affairs. So let us see how we will progress tomorrow. I urge you that we come at 10 O’clock so that we can make progress and see how far we can go with these matters.

Again, thank you very much. So this House will sit half day tomorrow, it being a Friday. This House stands adjourned to tomorrow, 10 O’clock.

(The House rose at 8.03 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 5 September 2014 at 10.00 a.m.) 
