Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Tuesday, 10 September 2019

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. You recall that last week when I communicated the situation in South Africa, Members of the Pan-African Parliament gave notice to this House that they would make a statement today on the same. That statement, however, is not reflected on the Order Paper. Therefore, I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate that statement by the Ugandan delegation to the Pan-African Parliament against xenophobic violence in South Africa. Clerk, take note, please. Secondly, we also have a petition by hon. Ssekitoleko, which will be received. 

The Order Paper is, therefore, amended accordingly to accommodate these two items. Thank you.

The honourable member for Kalungu County West had asked for the Floor. 

2.07
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and it is in line with education.

Mr Speaker, this Parliament enacted the Higher Education Students’ Financing Board law and it was intended to help the young people who cannot afford to pay school fees. The minister announced last week that 7,310 students applied for the loan scheme. 

Their applications are first considered after they have got admissions in university, and these are basically science students. Out of all these, the Higher Education Students’ Financing Board manages to take on only 1,800 students, leaving out 5,476 students. The information I have is that these students who were not taken on have petitioned the board because they do not have any other alternative. About 4,000 of them have appealed. 

What can we do as Parliament for all these students who have been admitted to universities but they have no money to study? After all, the students will pay back the money they will borrow from the loan scheme after they have graduated. As of now, they are stranded. The board starts paying them after they are admitted and are studying. So, the students who are already in university are not going to study because the board could not afford to get money for this big number. That is the matter I am raising. 

I pray that as Parliament, we find what to do for these young people who have no money but are needy. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you are praying to Parliament?

MR SSEWUNGU: Of course, my prayer goes to us and the Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you cannot pray to Parliament. Parliament never proposes a budget. Parliament cannot raise a supplementary budget, if that is what you are asking for. There is another branch of Government that does that. 

MR SSEWUNGU: I am praying to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who is in front of us here. The money taken by these students will be paid back. Since it is a loan scheme, Government cannot fail to get money so that the students borrow and they study. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, 5,000 students are stranded. They do not have money to pay fees and yet we have a students’ loan scheme supported by the Government. They could not be accommodated by the funds available. That is the matter. 

2.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable member for raising this issue. 

As you recall, this matter came up a few months ago and the Minister of Education and Sports made a statement about the loan scheme. However, we were not kept abreast with this information. I am going to get in touch with the Minister of Education and Sports and then we will come back to the House to see how we can address this matter. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the minister comes back, I have the following proposals: The statistics show that only 12 per cent of the students who were admitted come from the north. It came to our attention that the ministry later issued guidelines that were outside the advertisement that students who are above 28 years old should not qualify.

Given the peculiar situation of northern Uganda, where there were interruptions and most of the students went to school late, I would pray that the ministry brings to this House and lays on the Table the additional criterion that was considered. 

I propose that Government gives affirmative action within the scheme itself to ensure that students from the north can actually access the scheme. This is because 25 per cent of the students admitted were from central Uganda, 25 per cent from eastern Uganda and 38 per cent from western Uganda. This information, therefore, would help us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Someone has to be holding the Floor for you to raise a point of information. That is the rule. 

MR TUMURAMYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is that this issue was raised here on this Floor a few weeks ago by a Member and because it is so paramount to all of us, this House requested that a supplementary budget be made to that effect. 

It is quite important to note, Mr Speaker, that those who applied for the loan scheme are from needy families. Most importantly, they all passed and have been admitted in both Government and private universities. Therefore, the procedural matter I am raising is whether it would not be better a supplementary budget to be passed so that we can have this matter resolved. These are our people and they need to be helped so that they can pursue their higher education. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was here when a Member raised the matter and it was in relation to notices and deadlines. There was no way that a matter of a supplementary budget could have been raised that day.

Today, there is a specific issue that there are 5,000 students who qualify to get this loan but there is no money given to them. Five thousand students is a big number, and that is why we are asking the minister to do - Of course, Parliament cannot raise a supplementary budget. It is hon. Bahati who has the prerogative. Please, honourable minister, could you guide the House on how we should handle this matter?

2.17
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We need to invest a lot in our people and not just the buildings. We need the buildings and roads but we need investment in our population more than any other thing. That is required so that the big population will not be a time bomb for us. Therefore, it is important for the honourable minister, or the Rt Hon. Prime Minister if he was here, to assure us and accept that this even needs immediate borrowing because it is almost a response to a calamity. It is a calamity; we cannot wait for over 5000 students to be left out there.

Therefore, honourable minister, you are here on behalf of the Prime Minister; assure us. Sometimes we even borrow for less important issues. Let us borrow or have a supplementary budget for this. It is the responsibility of Cabinet to bring us a supplementary request and we will not hesitate to pass it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, please conclude this matter.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as I said, I have just received this information about the number of students who qualify but have not been assisted by the student loan scheme.  I said that we are going to get in touch with the Ministry of Education and Sports and see how to handle this matter. 

We understand the urgency of the matter as raised by the Member. However, also understand that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Government has got to be moved to make sure that we raise the resources and help, and also ascertain whether the numbers as alleged are real -(Interjections)- Whatever the numbers, we are going to sit as Government.

Therefore, the assurance is that this situation is going to be handled and Parliament will be updated accordingly. It might not be handled in a day or two but we shall attend to the matter and give it the importance it deserves.

RESPONSE BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION TO THE STATE-OF-THE-NATION ADDRESS, 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Leader of the Opposition, I see you have a 30-page document. I hope you have a summary of it because if you are to finish reading the 30 pages, we will not do any other business.
 
2.17
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Mr Speaker, when we are responding to the State-of-the-Nation Address, we need to be given time. If the President had five hours and you give us -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When the President was doing that, there was no other business of Parliament. We now have other Parliament business. Proceed, Madam.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity -(Interjections)-  You should just give me your ears. 

Mr Speaker, it is an honour for me to address this august House on the state of the nation as viewed by us, the Opposition Government. Before that, allow me to –

1. 	Thank the Almighty God who touched the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, with His healing hand and enabled us to be with her. We give Him the glory for that as we continue to pray for her total and complete healing.

2. 	Take this opportunity to commend Uganda Cranes whose wonderful performance in the Africa Cup of Nations (AFCON) Cairo 2019 made Uganda proud. We also congratulate the She Cranes for raising the Uganda flag even higher when they finished seventh at the Netball World Cup in the United Kingdom. 

	We draw lessons from the event and our teams’ performance in respect to what investments are needed to further strengthen them. The continued marginalisation of women’s football should, however, not be lost on us despite existence of policies which promote gender equality. When the She Cranes returned home from their amazing exploits, the President did not treat them the same way he treated the Uganda Cranes. Our government will completely do away with such inequitable treatment.

3. 	Remind us of the sad passing of our colleagues and other national leaders who have departed from us since last year. These include the Rt Hon. Apolo Nsibambi, former Prime Minister; hon. lbrahim Abiriga, former Member of Parliament for Arua Municipality; Rt Rev Bishop Cyprian Bamwoze, the former Bishop of Busoga Diocese; Rt Rev Bishop Augustine Arapiano, the former Bishop of Sebei Diocese; Ambassador Julius Onen, a former prominent civil servant and Permanent Secretary; Muhammad Kirumira, a former police commander with an avid sense of justice who was brutally shot dead; victims of the Bududa mudslides; other victims of gruesome murders, notably women in Wakiso District; victims of road carnage; and other Ugandans who have departed over the past year.

I request that the House observes a moment of silence in their honour.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence)

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, the State-of-the-Nation Address, which traditionally comes a week before the budget for the following financial year is presented to this august House, is meant to give the government of the day, in particular the President, an opportunity to account to the country about: what was accomplished in the ending financial year; what challenges have been experienced or lie ahead; what opportunities exist for us; and what is to be done in the year to follow. The big promises the Government made for the year need to be evaluated; environmental factors that impact on our country’s progress assessed; and a legitimate projection of the direction that the country is on laid bare before Ugandans. 

Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, the President chose to do the opposite in what he called his State-of-the-Nation Address presented on 6 June 2019. He indulged in his usual chest thumping about his exploits during the bush war that led him to power; he used his five-hour address to make hostile comments against those opposed to his rule. He opted not to speak to the aches and hassle that citizens go through every day, around which their leaders are expected to be accountable.

Mr Speaker, we can use this opportunity to respond to the heavily diversionary speech that the President made in this House on 6th June. The choice is for us, as the Opposition, to seize this opportunity to propose to Ugandans an alternative vision, a better future for us and those to come after us. We chose the latter option for we believe the urgent need for this country to transcend the politics pursued by the Government of the day, which is more about survival in office than the future of our Pearl of Africa.

In our response to the State-of-the-Nation Address, we systemically go sector by sector, highlighting what we believe is wrong and how we propose to rectify it. We will also reserve a moment to comment on what we believe to be the most pressing challenge our country faces today - peaceful transitioning from the plateaued rule of Mr Yoweri Museveni without plunging our country into chaos.

The Economy

Mr Speaker, we cannot emphasise enough the importance of the economy. Individuals and societies have, throughout the course of history, ruled over others or been subordinated due to their relative economic prowess. Writing in the 19th Century, Karl Marx referred to the tendency for those who control the economy to establish lordship over others as “Economic Determinism.”

Ugandans have watched, with pain, for many years now, as those who captured power use every trick in the book to create a class of wealthy individuals while the masses sink deeper into poverty. Too many Ugandans have amassed wealth without a trace of exceptional hard work or enterprise, while the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Government has not done much to ensure that hardworking Ugandan farmers, fishermen, civil servants and others get the worth of their labour and prosper.

Mr Speaker, we want to note and bring to the attention of this House and to the citizens of Uganda that while our economy has registered impressive figures of growth, often boasting above six per cent Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate per year, this economy has not worked for everyone. There are glaring disparities at individual, community and regional levels as a result of the failed policies that the Government has insisted on pursuing. The number of Ugandans living below the poverty line had fallen to 19.7 per cent in the financial year 2012/2013, but the same increased to 21.4 per cent in financial year 2016/2017. 

The eastern and northern regions of Uganda have the highest levels of poverty, with households classified as “poor” standing at 34 per cent to 42 per cent. In the Karamoja Sub-region, the figures stand at 60 per cent as poor, according to Uganda National Household Survey (UNHS) Report 2016/2017.

Mr Speaker, there are several reasons why the economy is not working for all. The economy that is praised for just the rise in GDP, citing developments in infrastructure, most especially roads, does not show the whole picture. Some of these roads hardly carry trucks transporting locally produced goods. One of the reasons for this is that our economy is dominated by foreigners who benefit from excessive incentives, to the chagrin of the citizens. 

The liberalisation policy has alienated many Ugandans who would have been its beneficiaries. The current infrastructural development largely uses foreign money, labour, materials and technology. This disadvantages the country in many ways, including in improvement of skills and innovation, increased earnings for the locals, consumption of local materials and building for the future. We are also aware that at the heart of this is the lack of investable funds, as a result of the way we raise local revenue, and the mismanagement of public expenditure that has worked to increase our indebtedness to astronomical figures, making us a mortgaged country.

We have, in the past, advised and still consider that a recapitalised and well managed Uganda Development Bank (UDB), alongside a well-structured Uganda Development Corporation (UDC), with revamped cooperatives targeting new production initiatives, can make the economy grow and serve the citizens in an inclusive manner. However, this cannot be realised with the current chronic corruption, the high cost of doing business, high taxes targeting the defenceless low income earners, and the Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU) concept that is largely rhetoric to fool the citizens. Have the presidential directives on BUBU over the years been fully implemented? The answer is a resounding “No”.

Mr Speaker, it is high time we halted the inhuman liberalisation idea to promote local capacity as we promote Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Reliable Time-Bound (SMART) private and public partnerships. 

We need to ensure adequate investment in the critical areas of education, agriculture, health, energy, transport, industry and the inevitable urbanisation so that our growth is not only holistic but impacts on the growth and development of the citizens of this country. Investment in urbanisation will ensure that our towns and cities do not simply develop into expansive slums but rather grow into modern metropolis.

Our national budget must be refocused and centred on the people.
The development plan should deliberately aim at job creation, skills development and transformation against which the much talked about middle income status can be achieved.

Land and Agriculture

Mr Speaker, the second issue aching Ugandans is land. Land wealth refers to all commonly shared resources from land, that is, agricultural, water, forestry and land itself. In Uganda, land employs about 75 per cent in agriculture. Other people are employed in fisheries, forestry and water. Agriculture remains Uganda's most important sector, employing over 33.75 million out of the 40 million Ugandans. 

Rich in its soils, Uganda produces the much sought after organic coffee, tea, bananas, maize, tobacco, rice, sugarcane, cotton and horticultural products. There are also animal products such as milk and beef. Uganda also produces fish for export. Previously, agriculture was the highest export earner. However, due to neglect and corruption, the agricultural sector has continued to dwindle, currently contributing a mere 24 per cent to the economy.

Mr Speaker, for many years, the budgetary allocation for agriculture has remained at about three per cent against the 10 per cent recommended by the Maputo Declaration, to which Uganda is a signatory. Farming and cultivation is still done through the crude traditional handheld hoe and often, there is poor yield because of over reliance on natural weather as opposed to modern methods of farming. The increasing Ugandan population, which is largely unskilled, has caused much pressure on the land, fragmentation and exhaustion.

Mr Speaker, the country continues to export raw materials, which fetch very little on the world market compared to finished goods. Because of the little proceeds fetched from agriculture, the youth have abandoned it and opted to move into towns to ride boda bodas, make chapati or work at construction sites for pittance.

Land acquisition and ownership continues to face unprecedented instability as agencies for its registration and establishment connive with beneficiaries of ill-gotten wealth and greedy people to rob communities of their land, causing untold suffering to citizens, instability, insecurity and disruption to production.

Mr Speaker, we propose the following interventions in this critical area:

1. 	An urgent demand to review the underlying causes to current instabilities in land acquisition, registration and ownership by citizens. The Government has to abandon its hanging loop on citizens’ land, seeking to take over ownership and complete their impoverishment agenda. Citizens need reassurance that indeed “land belongs to the people”.

2. 	Budgetary allocation to the agricultural sector needs to be raised to 10 per cent over a period of three years so that investments in modern practices, equipment, research and training of sector support staff are undertaken with the view to modernise agriculture.

3. 	Establishment of cooperative societies and unions should be fast tracked to take on production, skills development, storage and marketing. The current Savings and Credit Cooperative Organisations (SACCOs) and their sister, Operation Wealth Creation (OWC), are tailored to manage handouts and not creation of real wealth. These will not create a wealthy population. Cooperative societies and unions proved their performance in this country when they existed and even the few surviving ones have shown them as effective avenues for rural development.

4. 	The Cooperative Bank should be reinstated to improve agricultural financing needs for farmers. The un-concluded inquiries need to be sorted so that confidence in the bank is equally restored.

5. 	Develop and deploy increased numbers of skilled and professional extension workers as opposed to the mockery of soldiers who are earning more or less free money as they mismanage the otherwise failed OWC programmes.

6. 	Ensure supply of proper animal feeds and drugs, and help farmers countrywide to improve the breeds of their animals and processing and marketing of animal products. Animal husbandry should be an avenue for increased incomes.

7. 	Build silos to store our produce for food security and price stabilisation.

8. 	Zoning the country should be actualised so that production focuses on where the zone enjoys proven advantage. This stimulates largescale commercial production.

Water Sector

Mr Speaker, Uganda's surface water coverage is at least 15.3 per cent, with the country boasting of Lake Victoria and the great River Nile, among other water bodies. We know how lucky we are with our abundant fresh water sources. Ours are as fresh as they are abundant. 

The luck that nature bestowed on us, however, has been abused in many ways, with the leadership unable to raise a finger to defend our treasure. As a result, Uganda’s fresh waters have been polluted due to destruction of catchment areas in many places. When you walk around Kampala, you will be accosted by the repulsive stench emanating from the Nakivubo Channel, into which sewage and other waste is deposited and it flows untreated into Lake Victoria. 

Ironically, while Uganda has all these natural water bodies, the water has not been used for agricultural production. An area like Busoga is virtually a large island surrounded by lakes and big rivers, yet many Ugandans still depend on rainwater and often suffer from drought and famine whenever the rains fail or delay.

The Government, in the second National Development Plan (NDP II), projected that access to safe water supply would improve from 65 per cent in 2015 to 77 per cent in rural areas, and from 73 per cent in 2015 to 100 per cent in urban areas by the end of financial year 2015/2016. However, even with this maintained target from 2012 (NDP I), the Ministry of Water and Environment’s sector performance report, 2016 indicated that access to safe water only increased to 67 per cent in rural areas and declined to 71 per cent in urban areas by the end of financial year 2015/16.

This is testimony that even going by the Government’s own figures, a lot still has to be done to improve the situation in the water sector. However, the situation will get worse, not better, going by what the NRM Government is doing. I will show you why. For the financial year 2019/20, the allocation to the water and environment sector is Shs 764 billion exclusive of appropriation in aid. That allocation is three per cent of the national budget, which has dropped from five per cent in financial year 2018/19.

Mr Speaker, we propose the following for better use of our water resources:

1. 	Harvest rain water for both domestic and agricultural use.

2. 	Swamps that have been destroyed should be restored to protect our water sources.

3. 	More ferries and ships should be constructed to improve water transport. One quick way is to source investors and offer incentives to them to set up boat building factories, primarily using fibre. This will make our waters safer and also save our forests.

4. 	Improvement of fishing in national waters and conservation of fishing areas should be a national project as opposed to making waters a war zone, pitting fishermen who have to live off the water bodies against soldiers who seek to replace them with foreigners.

Social Services Sector

Since the inception of Universal Primary Education (UPE) and subsequently Universal Secondary Education (USE), the education standards in the country have taken a negative turn. The introduction of UPE and USE, a global initiative of the World Bank, and its poor implementation in our country boosted the setting up of private schools. Subsequently, there has been unequal education were children of the few rich are taken to private schools where they get better facilities compared to the majority from poor families that cannot afford private schools. 

Honourable members, as you may be aware, education in Uganda is a tool for exclusion. Children who study from the top private primary schools continue to top private secondary schools and end up with sponsorship in Ugandan Government universities or get scholarships to study abroad. On the other hand, children from poor homes study in UPE and USE schools and often have to pay for college education, if they are lucky to slip through the sieving net and get admitted.

Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education are characterised by congestion in classes, inadequate education materials, poor hygiene, - girls are challenged with menstrual hygiene - high teacher absenteeism, low pay for teachers, and above all, children and students have to study on empty stomachs. Universities are equally struggling with congestion in lecture rooms and poor pay for lecturers.

Consequently, there is low literacy and numeracy attainment in schools; high school dropout rates in primary, secondary and universities; low morale amongst teachers and lecturers; and unending strikes in education institutions.

We propose the following towards resuscitating the country's education system:

1. 	A programme to feed children at school has to be prioritised. Well-fed children comprehend better and provide a reservoir for a national thinking young people, a hope for the nation

2. 	Increase the teachers’ pay without any further delay. In 2016, the Opposition had proposed that the starting salary for a primary school teacher should be Shs 650,000 and Shs 1,000,000 for secondary school teachers.

3. 	Strengthen Parents Teachers Associations (PTAs) to achieve greater quality control in schools. 

4. 	Build more classes to attain the desired 50 pupils per classroom ratio. Pupils studying under tree shades and those in overcrowded classrooms and sitting on dusty floors do not reflect the importance of education to national development and prosperity. It is a national shame.

5. 	Make the teaching profession more attractive by investing in teacher training and recruitment of more teachers to reduce the pupil to teacher ratio, so that education standards can be improved nationally, not only in the urban areas.

6. 	Urgently avail sanitary pads to the girl child to reduce on the rates of school dropouts.

7. 	Strengthen the schools inspectorate section; at least have an inspector for every 50 schools. This inspector should be well facilitated to ensure that every school is regularly inspected any time without notice.

8. 	Make technical education attractive to students rather than have them all pursuing university education.

9. 	Make tertiary education funding, state sponsorship and loans accessible to every student who qualifies and gets admitted in college. This system of Government sponsoring mostly children of the rich at college must stop. We have just been talking about it.

10. 	Government should plan in all sectors to project job opportunities in each for a given period to be known to students. Career guidance should be reemphasized and strengthened.

11. 	Introduce Government-facilitated internship programmes for all college students to be carried out in both public and private departments and enterprises.

Sports

Games and sports play a pivotal role first in the development of children and later in the prevention of non-communicable diseases. Games and sports are catalysts for team building and work, but importantly, many countries have cultivated sports talent to make it a key foreign exchange earner.

In Uganda, sports and other extracurricular activities are undermined and underfunded. Schools no longer engage children in extracurricular activities but rather concentrate on passing of exams. Government officials have encroached on all public playground spaces where recre6ation used to take place. Many stadia in different parts of the country have been left to waste or been turned into potato gardens!

We would like to propose as follows:

1. 	Put emphasis on sports and games in schools and communities.

2. 	Reclaim school land and all public land previously used for recreation.

3. 	Equip schools and communities with games and sports fields and equipment.

4. 	Set up regional sports academies; at least one sports academy in each of the regions.

5. 	Encourage school and inter-community sports competitions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Leader of the Opposition, you might drink some water while I recognise some children who have come.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Mengya Primary School from Kween District. They are represented by hon. Lydia Chekwel and hon. Lawrence Cherop Mangusho. They are here to observe the proceedings, so please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause) 

In the public gallery also, we have pupils and teachers of Moyok Primary School from Kween District also represented by the same honourable members, hon. Lydia Chekwel and hon. Lawrence Cherop. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are now on health sector. 

Like in the education sector, there is a dual health system. We have those that can afford treatment in well-equipped private hospitals or are ferried abroad while the majority of Ugandans are left to go to the ailing public health centres and hospitals that are largely dilapidated, ill equipped and have limited health professionals.

The health system in Uganda is more inclined to curative rather than preventive healthcare. There is an increase in non-communicable diseases. Mortuaries without the required refrigeration are a ghastly sight. The sector has also been riddled with corruption; the little there is disappears in the hands of the poorly paid health workers, leaving the population helpless. In this environment, many health workers have left the country to find better working conditions elsewhere. This has created a gap in that the remaining health workers have to work long hours without incentives. Today, the doctor to patient ratio is 1 to 15,000 compared to the recommended 1 to 10,000 by World Health Organisation (WHO).

Instead of prioritising health in the country, Government spends up to Shs 400 billion on treatment of the privileged few abroad. It is no wonder that at least 19 women lose lives every day in childbirth related cases. Also, out of the 1,000 children born, 1.83 per cent of them do not have the pleasure of celebrating their 5th birthday. Many of them are lost to preventable and curable diseases. It is needless to emphasise that the health of a nation is the sum total of the health of its citizens. This has an impact on the ability to learn and develop skills, innovation and production output.

We propose the following to urgently tackle this dilemma:

1. 	Train more health professionals and remunerate them well to avoid brain drain. Also, urgently improve the working environment and provide tools, equipment, medicines and nearby housing to medical workers. We propose a starting salary of Shs 650,000 for a nurse and Shs 3.5 million for a medical doctor. This, coupled with improved health facilities infrastructure (wards, labs and theatres), could ultimately save the country over Shs 400 billion which is spent annually to treat our privileged persons abroad. 

2. 	Decongest health centres by focusing on preventive healthcare but also encouraging home-based care - the barefoot doctor system, which worked very well in China. 

3. 	Limit medical expenditure abroad to only very highly specialised needs, and it must be availed to all citizens, not only to the highly connected. 

4. 	Government should operationalise the health insurance scheme for everyone.

Security

Mr Speaker, security seems to be a pet subject for Mr Museveni. At every State-of-the-Nation Address, he assures the country how security has been restored and how the remaining criminals will be dealt with. However, the security in the country remains worrying because no one feels safe any longer.

After the 2016 elections, the Obusinga (Kingdom) bwa Rwenzururu in Kasese was invaded by the national security forces on orders of Gen. (Rtd) Museveni and hundreds of people were killed in the palace. There was also the shooting dead of prominent people like the late Assistant Inspector General of Police, Andrew Kaweesi, hon. Ibrahim Abiriga, many Muslim leaders and young women. This year alone, the defence and security sector took a colossal share of Shs 3.6 trillion of the budget allocation.

There are a number of reasons that explain the breakdown of security in the country and the earlier we address them, the better for the country. The first and perhaps main one has been the dysfunctional, amorphous and proliferated security institutions with personal loyalties. These arose as a result of Mr Museveni focusing on regime survival rather than effective national security. Members of the amorphous security are today part of the problem. 

During or before every general election, Gen. Museveni recruits militia to terrorise the voters and assist him to rig elections. Many crimes are committed by these security institutions either directly or indirectly.

The second reason is the collapse of the economy and public service systems. The collapse of the rural economy has caused rural-urban migration, yet many youth migrate to urban centres but find themselves with no work. The lack of employment makes the youth vulnerable to recruitment by criminal gangs.

Thirdly, the Local Council I (LC I) leadership that was a well thought-out system for curbing insecurity within communities has been politicised. The recent manipulated elections imposed unpopular, sometimes criminal, gangs on the villages in the name of having NRM at the grassroots.

Mr Speaker, Amin’s State Research Bureau (SRB) has finally got a good competitor in the Internal Security Organisation (ISO) whose operatives can abduct people in broad daylight and in the full glare of cameras. Furthermore, the many wars and insurgencies in the country for the last 30 years have caused the breakdown of communities and families. There are now many children growing up outside the traditional value systems and networks.

The current standoff between Uganda and Rwanda does not sit well for our national security and the security of the region. Engagement in foreign security missions with no clear and prior briefing to the relevant organs of Government also casts doubt to the intentions of the leadership; for example, our soldiers were sent to Equatorial Guinea to protect a dictator, who no longer trusts his own army.

Mr Speaker, restoring security in the country requires immediate mid-term and long-term solutions. The immediate solution should be the identification of the many people that had been recruited in the disbanded outfits like Police Flying Squad, Police Crime Preventers and other security sections. There is need to know who these people are and what they do for a living.

We propose the following interventions:

1. 	Strengthening institutions like the police and LCs I; 

2. 	Creating a national inclusive economy.

3. 	Rebuilding families.

4. 	Planning urbanisation and building the rural economy to reduce population pressure of unemployed youth in urban centres.

5. 	Structure security institutions and eradicate personal militias.

6. 	Improve the welfare of the police and the army. The Opposition still proposes the starting salary for the men and women in uniform at Shs 650,000.

7. 	Restore professionalism in the police and the army.

Constitutionalism, Justice, Law and Order

Mr Speaker, justice has become very expensive and prohibitive. Many times, courts demand millions of shillings before someone is released on bail. This is worse for political candidates who seek justice in courts. Many candidates who unfairly lose elections and seek justice from courts are subjected to heavy fines that some of the candidates have had to flee the country while others have been jailed. 

Therefore, we need to: 

1. 	Carry out a constitutional review to make the Constitution a defender of the citizens, not just the rich few.

2. 	Strengthen both the police and the Judiciary to ensure there is justice for all citizens in the country

3. 	Build an independent and professional Judiciary and police.

Energy, Natural Resources, Environment and Climate Change

Mr Speaker, apart from the good weather, green scenery and abundant water bodies, Uganda is also endowed with a lot of natural resources that would increase wealth for the country if used well. Unfortunately, the NRM regime has been very selfishly secretive and possessive about the oil wealth. 

Secondly, there is a greedy approach to possession of mineral resources. Minerals have become a source of displacement of many families. A good example can be found in Mubende, where many have been displaced from the area believed to have gold deposits.

Oil Industry

It is estimated that there are 6.5 billion barrels of oil in the Albertine region. Unfortunately, the regime has been secretive about oil contracts. Citizens have instead witnessed corruption scandals coming from the sector. When Uganda won the taxation case against Tullow in the UK, Government officials just shared part of the money in what has been named “the handshake”. This matter has never been concluded.

Government is not open in awarding of mineral exploration licences. Many parts of the country have secretly been parcelled out to highly connected individuals without the knowledge of the indigenous people. Owners of the land in Bunyoro affected by the oil exploration were paid peanuts and many have not yet been compensated - with the peanuts. 

The other debate around the oil industry is how the money from oil should be used. The regime has maintained that all oil proceeds should be used on infrastructure buildings, yet senior citizens like Dr Ezra Suruma think that a percentage of this money should be used to improve the welfare of vulnerable people like the old and the very poor.

We, therefore, propose the following:

1. 	More transparency and accountability in handling matters of this important sector, to which we have been told our future is hinged. 

2. 	Review the compensation system for the affected persons to the internationally accepted best practices which prioritise the owners of the land.

3. 	Oil money should be spent on both infrastructure and social services and any other deserving areas as determined by Parliament.

4. 	Implement the law on local content that requires companies to provide a plan for training and employment of Ugandans in the sector during application for licences.

Gold Industry

Mr Speaker, gold is widely spread around the country. However, extraction has been handed largely to foreigners under dubious arrangements. The gold industry is also shrouded in illegal markets. There is also lack of clarity on ownership and operations of the Entebbe based African Gold Refinery (AGR).

We propose an enforcement of the regulatory framework for gold and other minerals so that contractors do not cheat locals or ignore them. Secondly, there is need to conduct and respect the environmental impact assessment guidelines. Give contracts to certified and reputed contractors and ensure transparency and accountability.

Electricity

Mr Speaker, electricity in Uganda is one of the most lucrative sectors for the thieves and corrupt people in authority. While Uganda is endowed with immense water bodies, abundant sunshine and a lot of fossils for biogas and thermal power, only about 26.7 per cent of Ugandans have access to electricity. This is comprised of 18 per cent of the rural and 57 per cent of the urban populations.

Ugandans also face high power rates due to the expensive cost of power generation, expensive loans and inflated costs in contracts. The unbundling of Uganda Electricity Board (UEB) into four different power companies duplicates services and makes running costs and tariffs high.

Bujagali Dam, for example, was initially contracted at a cost of US$ 520 million when a replica dam in India cost only US$ 250 million. Later, this cost was surprisingly revised upwards to US$ 1.3 billion - borrowed money which was to be recovered in less than 20 years! Although EAS, the originally contracted company, had already been advanced US$ 75 million to compensate locals living around, which they did, Aga Khan’s power development firm, which finally built the dam, was also given compensation money by the Government. The regime has been talking of borrowing money to compensate Aga Khan so that Government takes over ownership and management of the generation in order to cut down the electricity costs.

The government in waiting, that is, the Opposition government, would – 

1. 	Invest more in solar energy for lighting in homes and rural areas;

2. 	Explore other energy sources like biogas, geothermal energy, solar cooking stoves to safeguard the environment;

3. 	Curb corruption in the energy sector in order to reduce power tariffs and costs; 

4. 	Restore the original Uganda Electricity Board by merging the unnecessary agencies.

Environment and Climate Change

Mr Speaker, our country’s environment has been destroyed and natural cover depleted by lumbering, destruction of forests, pollution from old cars, plastic materials (kaveera), dust and destruction of wetlands, over tilling of land, dumping of expired and counterfeit products – especially electronics – pollution from factories, unethical mining methods and unplanned housing. 

Mr Speaker, experts have said Uganda is at risk of losing all its forests; that if deforestation continues at its present rate, there will be no forests left in 40 years. Already, we have lost two-thirds of our forests that existed in 1990 in just over 20 years. This means the NRM Government has overseen the biggest destruction of our forest cover without any serious efforts to stop it. The people at the forefront of cutting down our forests are the highly connected; they are in the army and in business (investors). We are already beginning to see the results of this destruction in increased flooding, drought and unpredictable weather patterns. 

Uganda’s urbanisation is at 4.5 per cent with about six million people living in urban centres. It is estimated that eight million people will be living in urban centres in the next five years. This rapid urbanisation and reliance on charcoal for cooking has led to depletion of trees and forests in the countryside. We must halt and avert this environmental tragedy by: 

    a) Restricting tree cutting and encouraging tree planting.
    b) Promoting use of solar, biogas and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) as energy sources for urban centres. 
    c) Recycling wastes, including plastics, metals and sewerage 
    d) Gazetting and regulating mining areas. 
    e) Strictly implementing policies on environmental pollution; it does not make sense seeking to remove Butaleja rice farmers from wetlands as you allocate wetlands in Lwera and Masaka to the Chinese investors! 
    f) Phasing out grass-thatched houses through a systematic rural development programme. 
    g) Restoring wetlands and green spaces in urban centres. 
    h) Encouraging planting trees on all hilltops and land boundaries.

International Trade

Mr Speaker, today Uganda’s debt burden stands at Shs 43 trillion, while the national budget stands at Shs 40.5 trillion. The debt burden has been growing majorly because of the trade imbalances. Uganda depends on export of raw materials that fetch very low prices on the world market, yet the country has to import finished goods at expensive prices.

Besides dependence on importation of raw materials, the other challenges in the trade sector are poor terms of trade where our goods are restricted in the international market. The destruction of cooperatives has left Ugandan farmers very vulnerable because there are no strong bodies to lobby for favourable inputs in agriculture as well as good and stable prices for their produce.

We, therefore, need to- 

    a) negotiate for favourable terms of trade in the foreign markets;
    b) take the issue of reviving cooperatives as a national priority to increase production, quality and quantity, stability of prices and value addition;
    c) diversify sources that can earn the country more foreign exchange;
    d) focus on value addition so that the products can fetch more on the market.

Let us go to the difficult one - politics and governance

Mr Speaker, the biggest obstacle to our development is the issue of a failed outmoded leadership. There is a serious leadership deficit in almost all our spheres of influence – from pastors who fake miracles to teachers who defile their pupils and to doctors who leave gauze while delivering mothers, to policemen who rob factories they are deployed to guard. When it comes to political leadership, it is a very sad story. Sad because it is at political leadership level that effective decisions are made. 

Politics is crucial. When the politics goes wrong, the economy, social services and security also go wrong as a result. This is what is called “the law of necessary conformity”. You cannot effectively reverse the outcomes of a failed leadership without interrogating the principal cause of leadership failure.

Mr Speaker, our democratisation process has been running in circles. Political space is increasingly getting suffocated. Our country is clearly under a dictatorship. Each time we take one step forward, we take two backwards. When we raise concern over their slow speed, our leaders are happy to remind us of how they fought in Luweero. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the NRA's five-year bush war was fought against a stolen election. Today, however, elections are stolen in broad daylight, characterised by inflated voter registers, manipulated electronic biometric machines in safe houses away from the national tally centre, removal of opponents’ names from the register, ballot stuffing, multiple voting and outright announcement of wrong results. 

A lot of effort has been put into proposals for legal and administrative reforms towards enabling a free and fair election, only to be rudely ignored and without any consequences on the part of the duty bearers. Uganda the country is led like the traditional Ugandan family where the whole family creates the wealth only for it to be misappropriated by and to benefit the family head who is always a drunkard.

Mr Speaker, the duty bearers seem to bear no responsibility to the rights’ holders nor do the rights’ holders hold their leaders sufficiently accountable. We can no longer safely talk of supporters and followers as what matters is the capacity to rent support for selfish gains. Ours is a history of violence. No known leader or President has democratically and peacefully handed over to a successor. They all come into power using force of guns and wait for the force of guns to throw them out.

Consequently, our country that is endowed in every way has remained relatively undeveloped. There is decline in almost all spheres that support decent living toward the middle income status that we are told we will achieve. 

The reality is that the middle class under this regime is largely created out of primitive accumulation; that is stealing and plundering of public resources.

Our human rights record too is bad. Our political leadership lacks legitimacy. This therefore calls for a re-evaluation of our leadership; the one we have and the one we think we should have.

We need servant leaders whose motivation for seeking leadership is to serve others yet clearly the ones in charge are not near this type of leadership. They have denied, on record, being servants of the people. With the issue of leadership unresolved, it is clear all other initiatives, including our suggestions and recommendations herein, will come to naught. 

All these need a listening leadership. Listening is a virtue of the democratic governance. The capture of state institutions by the incumbent ruling party has exacerbated the problem of failed policies by breeding institutionalised incompetence and endemic corruption. 

Patronage has surpassed performance and pursuing regime survival is prioritised over building a merit-based system of managing public affairs.

In the circumstances, therefore, it becomes more patriotic and nationalistic to recommend the following:

Dialogue

History of political party dialogue in Uganda

Mr Speaker, following the Election Observer Mission Report after the 2006 elections that recommended for electoral reforms in the country before another election, all parties agreed that there was need to push for joint electoral reforms. 

In 2008, all parties came under the umbrella of Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD). The parties worked on a national electoral agenda that was presented to Parliament in September 2009.

When the electoral reforms were tabled in Parliament, the then Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi dismissed and referred to them as “Corridor whispers.” Where is he now? Yet his NRM party was highly represented in IPOD. 

Out of all the proposed reforms, the regime only changed the name of the then Electoral Commission to “Independent Electoral Commission” and said it was too late to work on other reforms.

Mr Speaker, from 2012 to 2015, a joint group of members of the Inter-Religious Council, the civil society and political parties including some members of the NRM party, went around the country soliciting views on the necessary reforms that would deliver free and fair elections and ensure harmony in Uganda. 

When the report of the findings in form of a compact were presented at Hotel Africana for signing, the NRM boycotted and therefore, did not append their signature on the people's compact yet about 40 per cent of the people who had been consulted were members of the NRM.

There have been different and varied initiatives towards a meaningful dialogue but all have collapsed due to the intransigence of the leadership of NRM. 

We think that dialogue is not only a cheap option but also gives opportunity to all citizens to bring their issues on the table. But not all dialogue is productive. 

Ill-conceived and manipulated dialogue can only make us lose valuable and irrecoverable opportunity and time. We have made our contribution to the on-going dialogue initiatives, flawed as they are. In particular, for any meaningful dialogue in our history and circumstances, that dialogue must have the following:

i) 	An agreed agenda by all participants in the dialogue 
ii) 	Agreed participants for the dialogue by all participating entities/persons
iii) 	An agreed and independent mediator, and
iv) 	An agreed guarantor of the implementation of the outcome of the dialogue.

Transition

There is need for a transition to redirect Uganda to a democratic path. This is critical to address flaws and fraud in our leadership and to restore the country to constitutionalism and the rule of law. The transition should be run by a Government of national unity and the assignment shall be inter-alia, to- 

(i) 	put in place a national truth-telling and reconciliation mechanism;
(ii) 	undertake constitutional reforms;
(iii)	 re-organise and rebuild broken pillars of the state; and
(iv) 	organise free and fair elections within an agreed feasible time-frame.

Uganda is now a deeply divided country and citizens have hurt each other. There have been so many deaths whose explanations have never been known. From the massacres in the Luweero Triangle, the Mukura deaths in a train wagon, the Barlonyo, Buchoro and Atiak massacres, the Kasese massacres, the death of Muslim clerics, the death of high profile people, the death of women and the deaths of many other people. 

Communities and relatives of all these people have unanswered questions. Therefore, a truth-telling and reconciliation process would be an avenue for durable peace and unity. Uganda needs healing before meaningful unity can be attained. However, this healing can only take place when the truth is known so that citizens can choose to forgive the perpetuators out of the reality of knowledge. Ugandans, we need each other!

Constitutional Reforms

The 1995 Uganda Constitution has now remained a shell of its old self. All that there was to safeguard abuse of power, security and development of the country has been systematically removed in the interest of one citizen.

This has ranged from bribery of NRM-leaning MPs to remove two-term limit and age limit on the presidency to the draconian laws under the Police Act, Public Order Management Act and et cetera. 

There is need to write a new Constitution, which centres power in the hands of the people and ensures that leaders are accountable to them. 

Rebuilding Institutions

Mr Speaker, there is no institution we can say is independent of the influence of Mr Museveni and functioning properly. A good example is when he sent security personnel, commanded by his guards, the SFC, to beat up opposition Members of Parliament who were making it difficult for him to remove the presidential age limit.

In police, before the apparent fallout with the former IGP, Gen. Kale Kayihura, Mr Museveni had several occasions to praise the General as a good cadre of the NRM and the regime. There is, therefore, a need to turn public institutions from being institutions of the leader and his small clique to being institutions of the people. 

Honourable members, it is now clear to Ugandans that it is impossible to have strong and credible institutions under a dictatorship. Our own institution provides live example. 

Free and Fair Elections

Mr Speaker, when all institutions such as Electoral Commission, the police and the army and political parties are being reclaimed from the dictatorship and rebuilt, it is then possible that free and fair elections can be held and the outcome respected and honoured by all players.

It is after this that we shall hold free and fair elections. The holding of free and fair elections would mark the end of the transition by the Government of National Unity. 

Mr Speaker, the state of our nation poses great challenges on us as leaders. It is impossible that piecemeal reforms can be explored to restore sanity.  The big problem, however, is the ruling party, which is adamant, dictatorial, exclusive, arrogant, intolerant, discriminatory and unwilling to listen to advice and those with dissenting views from theirs. 

Mr Speaker, for our country to move forward without violence and destruction, meaningful dialogue is the best option to pave way for a transition to Uganda we deserve –(Interjections)– You will also deserve that. Where is hon. Amama? (Laughter)

Fortunately, the Opposition has, over the years, sufficiently prepared the nation for this to happen smoothly. It will take leadership - take it or ignore it. Whatever decision taken, we must know that the choices carry consequences. 

We call upon Ugandans and particularly our colleagues in the NRM to choose a smooth transition. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. (Applause) 

For those who were not in the Ninth Parliament, go and ask hon. Amama Mbabazi who just ignored us, saying what we used to tell him were corridor whispers. Where is he? 

Mr Speaker, I now lay the response to the State of the Nation Address 2019 on the Table. 

For those NRM members, who think that they set traps for the opposition, shame on you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the Leader of the Opposition, for that response to the His Excellency the President’s State-of-the-Nation Address. Honourable members, Rule 25 (k) and the active Rule 52, allow the Leader of the Opposition to make the statement in relation to the State-of-the-Nation Address, Budget Framework Paper, the budget itself and also any other matter. 

Rule 52 (2) allows a debate. However, as you can see, this is a response to the State of the Nation Address, 2019 delivered to the Tenth Parliament by the His Excellency the President. We cannot, therefore, debate it. Usually in the past, we used to allow this statement just before the motion for recording thanks for the delivery of the State of the Nation Address by the President so that they are debated together. 

This speech was delivered in June and today, we are receiving the response from the Leader of the Opposition. However, we do not have a motion to debate the State of the Nation Address itself through which this response was made. We will not be able to, therefore, debate it as such but we will wait when the motion for the State of the Nation Address itself is moved, and then we will have this debate jointly. We will be able to pass that motion in accordance with what we will have received. 

Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition, for putting this on record. We will proceed to the next item on the Order Paper.

LAYING OF PAPERS

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UPTO EUROS 20,622,435 FROM THE CORPORATE INTERNATIONALIZATION FUND OF SPAIN FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROJECT “AIRBORNE GEOPHYSICAL SURVEY AND GEOLOGICAL MAPPING OF KARAMOJA” 

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the proposal to borrow up to Euros 20,622,435 from the Corporate Internationalization Fund of Spain for the implementation of the project “Airborne Geophysical Survey and Geological Mapping of Karamoja”. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. We refer this to our Committee on National Economy to examine and report.

STATEMENT TO PARLIAMENT BY THE UGANDAN DELEGATION TO THE PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT AGAINST XENOPHOBIC VIOLENCE IN SOUTH AFRICA

3.43
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I would like to make a statement to Parliament on behalf of the Pan African Parliament delegation against the xenophobic violence in South Africa.

Mr Speaker, the Pan African Parliament Ugandan delegation, has with most concern noted the on-going xenophobia in South Africa resulting into killings, maiming of people and destruction of their property.

Xenophobia is a fear or hatred towards the perceived foreigners. South African natives are attacking foreign African nationals, their businesses and property, which is likely to reverse all gains and freedoms enjoyed by the Africans as our forefathers were advocating for African unity.

The Ugandan delegation condemns these attacks and calls on the Government of South Africa to do all within their means to end the violence and guarantee the safety of all foreigners as well as locals and their property.

It should be noted that in the recent sitting of the Members of the Pan African Parliament, we unanimously condemned the xenophobic violence in South Africa and equally appealed to the South African Government and African Union to find means where Africans can live together in peace.

We were in Midrand, South Africa, where PAP meetings were held in August this year. We had successful committee meetings and we left the country without any incident of violence against non-natives. We hope peace is restored for everyone ahead of the next PAP meetings in October 2019.

Our Prayers

We urge the South African Government through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to settle the unrest in the shortest time possible.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ugandan diplomatic facility should guarantee safety of Ugandans who are in South Africa and those who intend to travel to South Africa.

Through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, we wish the Government of Uganda to cooperate with the Government of South Africa to prosecute the perpetrators since the killings are recorded on cameras and are done in the broad daylight.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs through the Embassy of Uganda in South Africa should document the number of Ugandans who have lost their lives and property and assist them appropriately.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs should forward the concerns of the Parliament of Uganda and the people of Uganda to the Government of South Africa to ensure that Pan Africanism is promoted as per our motto of the African Union “One Africa One Voice.”

Mr Speaker, below I present the statement issued by the President of the Pan African Parliament, regarding the violence in South Africa:

“The Pan-African Parliament has learnt with sadness-“

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, just lay it on the Table.

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I would like to lay the statement that was also read by the President of the Pan African Parliament regarding the violence in South Africa. As a team, I believe this is regrettable. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, hon. Amongin for this report. Honourable members, we have been handling this issue in piecemeal and in such a way that does not facilitate a debate. I am sure members would like to give speeches on this issue which is affecting the unity of Africa as a continent.

I am also informed that though I did not see it personally, that there are some activities that took place in Nigeria relating to these happenings in South Africa that now show that is could have far reaching consequences if these matters are not arrested.

Therefore, we can have a debate if the Minister of Foreign Affairs could come and brief the House about the situation so that we have an engagement with them and then take it from there. However, the way these are coming up, they do not facilitate a debate and hence we would not be able to debate this statement. 

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. OKUPA ELIJAH ON INCREASING DEATHS OF DOMESTIC LIVESTOCK OCCASIONED BY WILD ANIMALS IN SERERE DISTRICT 

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (TOURISM) (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At the 21st sitting of first meeting of the fourth session of the tenth Parliament, hon. Elijah Okupa raised the concern over increasing deaths of livestock occasioned by wildlife animals in some parts of Serere District. 

We investigated over this and on 2 July 2019, we had received information from the Resident District Commissioner and the chairperson LC V of Serere District, informing my wildlife department through my office of Elgon conservation area warden that we have incidents of wildlife that had invaded the communities.

On 3 July 2019, Uganda Wildlife Authority deployed a team of six rangers to carryout assessment on the presence of the suspected wildlife in the area. During the tracking, the team was able to observe footprints of wildlife in the area. 

We got some reinforcement from UPDF and the communities that led us to a total search of wildlife into this area.  On 12 August 2019, Uganda Wildlife Authority increased on numbers and the local communities and other security agencies joined us.

Finally on 21 August, we spotted a hyena that was identified and we put it out of action. The carcass of this male spotted hyena was shown to the communities and later taken to be disposed in Angisa in Pian Upe Wildlife Reserve. 

We would like to apologise for the delay but due to the vast land in Serere and the thicket, we could not identify this animal as soon as possible. I commend the support and the Member of Parliament hon. Elijah Okupa for raising this here on the Floor of Parliament. I also urge other Members of Parliament that whenever we get such incidences in our constituencies to alert us in time. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, honourable minister. Hon. Okupa is not here to ask supplementary questions. Therefore, next item.

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. ROSETTE KAJUNGU ON THE INVASION OF THE WATER HYACINTH ON RIVER RWIZI THAT HAS AFFECTED THE LIVELIHOODS OF THE RESIDENTS OF MBARARA DISTRICT 

3.52
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Mr Speaker, I refer to the issue raised on 08 August 2019 by hon. Kajungu Rosette Mutambi, the Woman Representative for Mbarara District on the invasion of the water hyacinth on River Rwizi in South Western Uganda.

Mr Speaker, the water hyacinth was first noticed in River Rwizi system in South Western Uganda in 2016. The weed has spread over to approximately a 40 kilometre stretch of the river from Mbarara Municipality. Currently, a big mass of the water hyacinth stops at Kagogo-Nakivale Wetlands at the mouth of Lake Mburo.

It is believed that the water hyacinth was manually introduced into the River Rwizi system. It has been able to multiply so fast due to the high nutrient load in the river, mainly caused by use of agro-chemicals and discharge of untreated municipal influent into the river.

Also, high filtration levels of River Rwizi and the tropical weather conditions are believed to promote multiplication of the water hyacinth easily.

Currently, my ministry is doing the following: one is that we are working with stakeholders and the leadership of the district through, which River Rwizi flows. These are Mbarara, Bushenyi, Shema, Ntungamo and Isingiro. 

Two, we also have taken both preventive and management measures to address the problem as follows:

1. 	The banks of River Rwizi are being demarcated and restored so that they filter the water and reduce the nutrient flow into the river.

2. 	About eight wetlands have been restored to improve storage of water of the River Rwizi catchment and to perform treatment functions of the waste water.

3. 	Technical support and guidance has been provided to industries, abattoirs, hospitals and hotels in Mbarara town to enable them reduce the amount of waste water they generate and also improve its quality before it is discharged into the river.

4. 	The local community in River Rwizi catchment has been sensitised on the importance of demarcation of the river buffer zone and the development of the management and utilisation plan of that buffer zone.

5. 	The local community is also doing manual clean-up of the river together with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries who also have plans to intervene using the equipment that was donated by the Egyptian Government.

Mr Speaker, those are the interventions that we are taking on this river. My ministry is treating this as a serious matter because this is the main source of water to Mbarara town, which will become a city soon. I beg to submit.

the DEputy Speaker:  Thank you. Has hon. Mutambi delegated a Member to ask a supplementary question? There being none, let us go to the next item.

RESPONSE TO an ISSUE RAISED by Hon. Rwakoojo Gureme Robinah ON Rampant forest destruction and tree cutting for charcoal business in Gomba District

3.57
The Minister of state for Water and Environment (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Mr Speaker, at the 21st Sitting of the First Meeting of the 4th Session of the 10th Parliament of Uganda, held on 13 August 2019, hon. Robinah Rwakoojo Gureme, Member of Parliament for Gomba County West, raised a concern over the rampant tree cutting for charcoal business that has destroyed the forest cover and some parts of Gomba District. I would like to respond as follows:

Gomba District has six local forest reserves managed by the district forestry service. These include: Budugadde, Buzimba, Kalo, Kaswera, Sembula and Wabiraga. All these reserves have been heavily encroached on. 

Gomba District also has 11 central forest reserves, which are managed by the National Forest Authority. Two of these - include Kalombe and Nsowe - are grass-bush land forests. These two are encroached on with settlements of about 160 households.

In the north of Nsowe are vast previously livestock farms that are being converted into gardens thereby destroying the shrubs and few trees that existed.

The cleared shrubs and trees are being converted into charcoal. Charcoal production has also encroached on parts of Nsowe Central Forest Reserve but this has been stopped.

Gomba District heavily depends on revenue from charcoal and livestock trade. Over 300 bags of charcoal are transported every day, from farms that are being cleared for cultivation. 

Charcoal production and transportation is a key revenue source for the district. Unfortunately, the principle of sustainable production is not put into consideration because the production is tendered out to the highest bidder who, if they are to recover their money, must ensure more charcoal is produced and transported.

To address the deforestation in the central forestry reserve, National Forestry Authority has engaged the encroachers to start tree planting under collaborative forest management.

Demarcation of plots is also ongoing for commercial tree planting. Sensitisation of the community is also ongoing for the encroachers to voluntarily leave the central forest reserve to pave way for tree planting and restoration activities.

I call upon my colleagues from the district to render all the necessary support to my ministry and NFA during this exercise.

There is need for the district local government to regulate or suspend charcoal production and transportation as the mechanism for sustainability is being sought. This may have legal implications depending on the contractual obligations to the tenderers.

Mr Speaker, this is our response to this very important activity. As a ministry, in addition, I am yet to table a paper to Cabinet to see how we can reduce taxes on gas to enable the town dwellers, who mostly use this charcoal, revert to gas. Once we have done that, we believe that the charcoal burners will have nowhere to sell the charcoal and we will have addressed some of the pressure. I beg to submit.

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rwakoojo, do you have a supplementary question?

4.01
Ms robinah rwakoojo (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am 25 per cent satisfied with the answer because –(Interjections)- just listen to me. I think it is dangerous for us to have deforestation at the rate it is happening in Gomba. 

I sat in a meeting for three hours and three Lorries full of charcoal passed. That means that we can have 24 Lorries passing in a day. You have heard about the 300 bags of charcoal they are talking about from land cleared for cultivation. 

I think that if we can come up with alternative sources instead of charcoal and then Government reduces taxes on gas, it would assist a lot. However, as a Member of Parliament to sit and keep quiet because the district wants to make easy revenue would mean that I am not a rightful leader. 

The district had better think of alternatives other than charcoal because cattle can provide that. Let them think outside the box. How dare they even talk about revenue from charcoal? Can you imagine how narrow-minded - I am sorry to use that but they can think outside the box and get revenue elsewhere. That is an easy source for now it is already causing problems with rainfall. We have bad vegetation. 

Therefore, we already have these people coming back to us and asking for boreholes. They try to drill boreholes and find no water at the base. Therefore, we need to have valley dams and those are difficult to construct.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a supplementary question?

MS RWAKOOJO: No. I was wondering whether we could ally with United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) so that we get something for easy cooking. 

Then for the district local government and the population are to be sensitised by the ministry, specifically, if you could do a programme for Gomba because it is a bigger problem than you would think. You need to come down and see what is happening. Thank you.

MS KITUTU: Mr Speaker, I will first begin by thanking the colleague for actually taking concern and raising this. At the ministry, we are taking this very seriously for the whole cattle corridor because when we talk of climate change, that is the area which is most vulnerable in terms of water availability and drying up of water sources.

I thank her for what she has given - [Hon. Odonga-Otto rose]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed honourable minister. Honourable member, this question is from Gomba and it was a question that was urgent, so this is the response to that.

MS KITUTU: Mr Speaker, what I also have to inform the House is that charcoal burning is done as a source of livelihood. Therefore, some of the interventions that we are putting are to address the drivers - I have already met even the charcoal burners themselves and encouraged them to get alternatives like planting their own trees for burning.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister please wind up.

MS KITUTU: Therefore, I think as a ministry, we do accept that deforestation is a problem. We have raised it in the papers even on the floor of Cabinet. We are taking charge and we shall be able to address the issue. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Next item.

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. ROBERT NTENDE ON THE STATUS OF PLEDGES BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF INDIA, H.E NARENDRA MODI DURING HIS ADDRESS TO THE HOUSE ON 25 JULY 2018, NOTABLY BUILDING A CONFERENCE CENTER IN JINJA IN MEMORY OF MAHATMA GANDHI AND CREDIT EXTENSION TO UGANDA TO ESTABLISH COTTAGE INDUSTRIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this question will be handled tomorrow. The minister has given notice that she will not be able to do it today.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE SUGAR BILL, 2019 AS RETURNED BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3)(B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

4.07
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES  (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, as far as the motion for reconsideration of the Sugar Bill, 2019 as returned by the President in accordance with Article 91(3) (b) of the Constitution is concerned, consultations are still under way. Mr Speaker, I beg to be given more time so that we can exhaust the consultation and submit a more comprehensive report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, on the 30th April, this matter came up and the Government Chief Whip assured this House that in four weeks, they would be able to come back and deal with this matter.  In addition, I made some communication how we need to go back and look at this thing again and find a better way forward to it than it had come out - that is 30th April. I do not know what date it is now - 10th September. I think you need to put this thing together and give us a timeframe when you will come back to this Parliament; because as I said earlier, honourable minister, we have rules that govern returned Bills. We have violated all the provisions of those rules with this particular Bill. You need to help this Parliament. When do you intend to come back?

MS KYAMBADDE: Mr Speaker, the exercise proved to be more tedious than we anticipated because we had to consult several stakeholders. I beg to be given at least three weeks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three weeks. Thank you. This matter will back here in three weeks. Next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General.

4.10
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, it is true the Bill was read the first time and referred to the committee. We interfaced with the committee but in the middle, we discovered that there is a lot of ground we have not yet covered. During the deliberations before the committee, we held a number of workshops and the more we discussed, the more we discovered that we need to harmonise even more.

I interacted with the chairperson of the committee, hon. Oboth Oboth and we both agreed that we seek your indulgence to give us more time to tie the knots that are yet to be tied.

Mr Speaker, I am sorry hon. Oboth Oboth is not here, he has lost a relative and has gone for a funeral but I am authorised to present this statement to you and to quote him on our agreement. Therefore, I pray that we should be given another time, maybe 30 days within which to harmonise everything.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please Clerk, extract those minutes and forward them to the ministers concerned. They have made those undertakings that will come back in three weeks in case of the Bill returned- Sugar Bill and in the case of the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 by the learned Deputy Attorney-General 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAW REVISION BILL, 2019

4.12
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I am prepared to move the motion but I do not see the chairperson of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Law Revision Bill, 2019” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion Seconded)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by the Members for Samia-Bugwe and Kinkizi East. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the object of the Bill is: 

    i. To provide for the revision of laws in Uganda by the Uganda Law Reform Commission. 
    ii. To empower the Attorney-General to cut off dates for the enactments to be contained in the law revision. 
    iii. To appoint the date for coming into force of the revised edition. 
    iv. It is also intended to prescribe the validity of the released laws. 
    v. To make consequential amendments to the Parliament Act, and 
    vi. To provide for other related matters. 

The Uganda Law Reform Commission has been undertaking that mandate, without a specific law to authorise it to do so and providing for the modality of doing so. 

Therefore, we identified some deficits in the existing laws and those are the ones that the Bill intends to address.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision Bill, 2019” be read for the second time. That is the motion for your debate. 

To kick off our debate, we normally take the report of the committee to advise us what their findings are on the principles of the Bill and possible areas they think improvements should be made. 

Is there a committee member or revised chairperson who is ready to proceed with this? Is there any member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs? 
  
MS RWAKOOJO: Mr Speaker, I have no instructions to proceed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you do not need instructions but you have my authority to proceed. Do you have the report? 

MS RWAKOOJO: No, I do not. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, maybe that is a better reason. You do not have the report. 

Honourable members, we will wait for the chairperson of the committee to report to the House, which report will guide the debate on this motion for second reading of this Bill. Thank you very much.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

4.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by members from Samia-Bugwe, Igara, Dokolo South, Moyo West and Katikamu. Would you like to speak to your motion?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In 2010, this Parliament passed the Physical Planning Act, a Bill which became an Act of Parliament. This Act of Parliament has been in existence since that time. 

We do appreciate that physical planning is extremely important, if we are to develop as a country. Government, through our Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, has found challenges implementing this law.

One of the challenges we realised was that the law creates a National Physical Planning Board, which is supposed to superintend over physical planning issues in the country. 

The law also created physical planning committees at local government level, mainly at the district level, municipal level, town councils and subcounties. However, when the functions of the National Physical Planning Board were outlined, it was not clear they link with the lower level physical planning committees. 

Therefore, in our local governments, you find that at times, our leaders are unable to enforce physical planning for various reasons. Then, the National Physical Planning Board does not have sufficient power from the law to order them or superintend over them and direct them on what to do. 

One of the areas which we are proposing in this law is to strengthen the National Physical Planning Board so that it has an oversight responsibility over the lower level physical planning committees. For instance, you find a mayor, probably because of political considerations, failing to effect physical planning functions in a municipality or town council; probably the building to be brought down is of a voter. 

Nevertheless, we are saying that in such a situation, the National Physical Planning Board should have sufficient powers to direct effecting of physical planning activities at the lower levels.

One of the areas which we are addressing, through this Bill, is to strengthen the National Physical Planning Board and also give it full time secretariat for it to have effective functioning as we handle physical planning. Therefore, we are strengthening this board, creating a secretariat and also further empowering the lower level physical planning committees for them to be effective. 

Mr Speaker, as you know, Uganda has one of the highest rates of urbanisation. We would want this urbanisation to be planned and organised. We would not want to see the growth of slums and informal settlements in our towns and rural areas. Therefore, the function of physical planning is important. We would like to strengthen the law so that all the settlements and developments occurring in the country, especially in the urban areas are organised, planned and are directed by the physical planning institutions, especially the board and the committees. 

In a nutshell, those are some of the gaps which we saw in the law. That is why we brought the amendments to Parliament so that we can strengthen that function of physical planning in the country. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that, the Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill 2018, be read for the second time. To kick off our debate, the chairperson of the committee can report on what their findings are and how they can guide our discussions. 

MR KUMAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to communicate that the committee is not yet ready with the report and we request that we present our committee report on Thursday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it Thursday this week?
 
MR KUMAMA: We are signing it tomorrow so by Thursday, we shall be ready with the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we will be able to deal with this report of the committee and then finalise with the debate on the principles of the Bill and see how we proceed with this Bill. Thank you very much. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL GRADUATE SCHEME BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is hon. Majegere here? Honourable members, I communicated on this Bill earlier and we seem to be having issues so I do not know how we will proceed. It is a Private Member’s Bill so he should be able to proceed with it. 

We have had occasions where private members have complained about delays in processes that slow down the work of private members, especially when they want to propose Bills. 

However, this is a unique case where the delay is being occasioned by – but we will leave it at that. It will stay on the Order Paper. We will find out from the chairperson and deal with it tomorrow. If the member is now reluctant to pursue the Bill, he should give us notice so that we can have it formally withdrawn from the record of Parliament. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO DEVISE LONG-TERM MEANS OF STOPPING THE RAMPANT MURDERS AND ROBBERIES SUFFERED BY BODA BODA RIDERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was only waiting for a response from the Minister of Internal Affairs and other security related ministries, which I am informed have agreed that only the Minister of Internal Affairs would report on this matter to help us take the final decision. 

I see the mover of the motion but I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs, which means we may not be able to conclude this matter because that response was critical on what shape the decision of Parliament would be on this motion. Can we also stay this and wait? The person in charge of the Government activities today, please, notify the Minister of Internal Affairs that this matter should be finalised tomorrow. The minister should come and make his statement in response to the issues raised in the course of the debate so that we can finalise with this matter. It has been on the Order Paper for too long, unnecessarily.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPRECIATE THE PLANNED HANDOVER BY FACE TECHNOLOGIES (PTY) LTD TO GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA

4.24
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, this motion is moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you state the motion in full?

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, the motion reads:

“WHEREAS Government of Uganda represented by Ministry of Works and Transport entered into a contract with Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd to design, print and supply computerised driving permits;

NOTING that since 2003, Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd has been operating on a self-financing, Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT) basis;

APPRECIATING that Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd is one of the most efficient public service providers in an expedient, efficient and transparent manner unlike many other public service providers;

AWARE that Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd is supposed to handover the project to the Government of Uganda at the expiry of the contract in May 2020;

NOTING that Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd software is supported by third party agreements and the Government of Uganda has to acquire the proprietary software rights at the end of the contract period;

FURTHER NOTING that at the expiry of the current contract between the Government of Uganda and Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd, the training of Ugandans aspect as per Build, Operate and Transfer, would not have been concluded;

CONCERNED that the current Ugandan staff have only been trained on the first and second level of system maintenance procedures;

FURTHER CONCERNED that Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd established a data centre for all permits in Uganda and the software system has interfaces with the express penalty system ticket used by Uganda Police Force; 

NOTING THAT Ministry of Works and Transport and Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd have decided that the facility be moved from the currently rented facility at Kyambogo to Government land at Uganda Railway main station building;

FURTHER NOTING that the construction and transfer of a state of art facility to the Government owned land would take time;

AWARE THAT Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd has already established seven country wide offices in Kampala, Jinja, Mbale, Arua, Gulu, Fort portal and Mbarara for issuance of driving permits;

FURTHER AWARE that there is need to establish a proper mechanism and arrangements for Government to take up the facilities like staff recruitment, salary structure as approved by this Parliament;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1. 	Parliament urges Government through the Ministry of Works and Transport, to at the expiration of the existing contract consider entering into a transitional management contract with Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd, for a period of five years to allow for a smooth transition.

2. 	That Government utilises the proposed transitional management contract period with Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd, to train and prepare Ugandans to manage the facility.

3. 	Parliament urges Ministry of Works and Transport and Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd, to open more branches in at least the traditional 14 regions of Uganda for ease of accessibility during the transitional period.

4. 	That the Minister of Works and Transport reports to Parliament on the progress of the implementation of these resolutions by the end of November 2019.” 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose) Okay, it is seconded by Member for Aruu County, Member for Nwoya County, Member for Kasese District, Member for Otuke, Member for Busia, workers’ representative and a UPDF representative. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, this motion draws its legitimacy from the fact that under the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998, as (Amended), the Ministry of Works and Transport, is mandated to regulate the function or manage the processes, production and issuance of driving permits to the general public in Uganda.

In the fulfilment of the above statutory mandate, Government represented by the Ministry of Works and Transport entered into a contract with Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd in 2003. 

There is a culture in this country - and I would like to state from the onset and on record that compared to other companies in the same sector, once we give credit, credit must be given where it is due, where there is comparative analysis that must be made for Members to appreciate that the facts we are stating are factual. 

When you look at the Rift Valley Railways, this Parliament is aware that under the same sector, there is a contractual obligation. However, this contractual obligation is riddled with challenges of non-performance. When we look at the Standard Gauge Railway, we realise that it is punctuated with implementation delays. When we look at SGS Uganda Ltd, we had almost the whole afternoon debating whose contract, acting on the recommendation of this House, will either be suspended or cancelled. 

Mr Speaker, we have debated the National Identification and Registration Authority and the processes it takes for one to get a national identity card. Immigration with passports - Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd has registered, under the same docket, a number of achievements under the BOT They did the self-financing, they did the building, they are operating. We are now moving to the point of transfer where within the contract, there are issues of software rights. 

Let me state for the record of Parliament the areas where they have achieved.

    1. For the last three financial years, 2016/2017, 2017/2018, 2018/2019, this company collected non-tax revenue for Government of Uganda to a tune of Shs 110 billion. This is only from issuance of driving permits, in addition to other services that they render. 
    2. They are currently employing over 130 and over 3000 Ugandans directly and indirectly respectively. 
    3. They have issued over 900,000 driving permits to the general public in Uganda. 

Members, you are aware that for those who have attempted to forge driving permits, most of them have landed in the long arm of the law. Those who still have them have not yet landed into the hands of the law enforcers. 

There are no brokers in getting a driving license in Uganda. One must personally move to one of the offices. There are no third parties. 

    4. They have established and operationalised seven regional offices as stated.
    5. They have successfully implemented the self-financing, build, operate and transfer contract delivery mechanism. 
    6. The software system they are currently using supports the express penalty scheme used by Uganda Police Force. It further supports the automated licensing system. It also supports the public service drivers badge system for all drivers under the public service. 

Just like where there is the hand of Jesus, Satan hovers; where there is heaven, there is hell; where there are achievements, there are challenges. Let me state two for the record of Parliament.

The issue of few branches as opposed to the demand for the services: Many sub regions are calling for opening of more branches. A case in point is Lango sub region. With nine districts now, we have to move to either Gulu or Mbale. We are saying that we are also people. If such an arrangement can be made, why don’t you establish another regional office in Lira, Soroti, Kabale, Moroto or Kotido? To mention but a few.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will be a very new definition of regional. (Laughter)

MR OBUA: The other challenge is the driving permit cost. We believe that Parliament should make a call for the reduction in the cost for Ugandans to afford it.

Under the notion of self-financing, build, operate and transfer, the spirit of this motion as contained in the head note and the prayers takes into consideration the question of cost-benefit analysis. The infrastructural investment already put in place by this company, the issue of continuity and institutional memory and the time factor. 

It seeks to urge Government in totality and the Ministry of Works and Transport specifically, that in the consideration of any transitional management contract, maintain the status quo and do not bring a new service provider that will impose a huge charge on the taxpayers’ money of Uganda while starting from square zero. 

Bringing on board a new service provider to handle the transitional period would mean that under the software rights, this new company will have to start from zero. 

What this company is saying is that they have accepted to hand over to Government of Uganda to own it but the management of the transitional period should be left to them. They are saying, “we have delivered; you gave us, we financed it, we built, we operated and we are willing and ready to transfer to you at the end of our contractual obligation. Then why would you give the opportunity of managing that little transitional period to another company and yet we are here? We have recruited and trained your own people. We have delivered.” 

This is the whole gist of this motion. It is good to give credit where it is due. 

I would like to make a wakeup call. As Government, many a time, when there is transition, we mess it up. There are cases. I would like to call upon Government that when Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd finally hands over to us, let us ensure that the child they have nurtured, groomed and mentored will fly even higher and higher. I beg to submit.

4.39
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to be on record for seconding the motion. 

I have been here for 19 years and I have opposed almost everything that even my face looks negative now because we have had scandals. (Laughter)

I was among the members of Parliament that went to Karamoja to see the valley dams. When we arrived there, we found a hill. There was nothing like a dam and yet millions of dollars were spent. 

As if that was not enough, $ 30 million meant for reconstruction of Northern Uganda under Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) ended up in scandals. 

The bicycles, which the President directed should be bought for LC1 chairpersons, 60 per cent of the country has not received them to date and the people who stole the money are at large. 

Today, I am happy to be the seconder of the motion, that under a model of build, operate and transfer, finally, Uganda Government and Uganda Police will own the system of permit production. 

When we say build, operate and transfer, for those who may not know, it means you put up the facility, then you operate it, after operating it in the contract period, then you transfer it to the final user. 

We have so many BOT arrangements with Government of Uganda. Unfortunately, with some of the BOT agreements we have, some have gone up to 50 years. Hon. Attorney-General, you know that there are some BOT contracts where the handover will be when we have already left this planet. (Laughter)

In this case, the year is 2020 when Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd is finally handing over. If this motion had said that they needed an extension of 10 more years, it would be in bad taste but for heaven’s sake, the motion is saying they are handing over to Government of Uganda and they only need time to train the local staff to handle the software, to give them management rights, to involve Uganda police so that at the end of the day, if you have fake permit in place, you blame the Government of Uganda. That is why I support this motion.

Mr Speaker, I would like to raise some two legal issues because I was privy to the documents as opposed to the submission of my good friend, hon. Mawanda. (Laughter) One, there is a running contract and it is very engaging that Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd cannot again give more time to start training the Government. They have obligations under the existing contract to produce a certain number of permits up to 2020. To ask them “as you finish that contract, give us some more time for the transition” is asking for too much and it would mean some delays in the issuance of the permits that should be continuous.

What this motion, which I am seconding, is seeking to do is to say, “well, if your contract ends, what alternatives does the Government of Uganda have?” Theoretically, there are three alternatives. One alternative can be very reckless, which is to say, give the facility to Government in 2020 and it starts producing permits. However, that presupposes there has to be training. 

The other alternative would be to have fresh bidding by going to the whole world, saying: “This contract has ended. We want new companies to come and start the whole process again.” There are people who may be inclined to that alternative. However, let us look at these implications.

Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd has the national database, which should have been owned by NIRA and Uganda Police Force. No arrangement has been made for that company to hand it over to the Government at the expiration of the contract. This means that all the existing permits you have may have to expire if the software rights that Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd has with their proprietors are not handled cautiously. This is a very serious legal issue. If we say, “leave in 2020”, it means many permits will be invalidated.

Secondly, we have also established that the Uganda Railways Corporation land, which is just opposite Parliament, is where the one-stop centre for processing driving permits will be. I was privy to look at some documents indicating that they are going to begin building because where we are in Kyambogo is a rented property owned by some Indian. If they are building a facility here – I think it would be very nice for Government to own a centre of its own, not a rented property.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, today, I was in the Committee on Public Accounts and the Uganda Police Force presented very huge figures of non-tax revenue. We were concerned as a committee –(Interruption)

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I have been informed that there is a running contract, which is going on until May 2020, yet we have a motion seeking the authority of Parliament to vary the terms of the existing contract. I, therefore, would like to ask whether we are proceeding rightly to debate a motion to vary terms of a contract when there is already a running contract with terms and conditions thereto. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I must confess that I did not have the document in advance but I have read it. The learned Deputy Attorney-General has also just consulted on the same issue. What the motion is saying is that at the expiration of the existing contract, they should consider entering into a transitional management contract. As the contract ends, they are talking about managing a transition but they would hand over the facility to Government at the end of the contract. However, they are proposing that Government should consider a transitional arrangement so that they continue to manage. It has nothing to do with the existing contract – I do not know whether it is in the contract or not. If it was in the contract, they would not be proposing it. They are saying that at the end of the contract Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd would be handing over the facility to the Government of Uganda.

MR MAWANDA:  Mr Speaker, as hon. Okot-Ogong has said, there is a running contract. We are not privy to what the contract is talking about. They have brought a motion and want us to discuss it but we do not know what is in the contract. Actually, the contract is saying that after the expiration of their period, they should hand over but under what terms? They should give us a background for us to be able to discuss those terms, which we do not know as of now. 

They are bringing a motion to hoodwink Parliament and Government to discuss and take a decision. I have heard in the motion that the minister should come and update Parliament in November but on what? 

Is it procedurally right to discuss something where members of Parliament are not privy to the agreement that was signed? In addition, these people were supposed to have handed over five years ago. (Laughter) It is enough time for them to do whatever they are doing and pack their bags and go. 

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I believe our colleagues are moving in good faith. However, wouldn’t it have been right for us to ask the minister in charge of that docket to come and tell us the transition plans they have after the expiry of the contracts? If we find a gap – for example, if they have not prepared for a transition, we could say: “Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd has done a good job, why don’t you extend their contract?” What if in the contracts there are transition plans already?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I just want to add to what my colleague has said. The motion is counteracting what the minister is doing. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we send this to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to interact with the ministry and know what is in the contract? According to the motion, the minister is the one trying to deny Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd the interim period. Let the committee interact with the ministry and know the exact contractual terms and come back and report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think any of those things are procedural matters. They are issues that are asking for facts on a contract that I have not seen. I am sure the movers of the motion have more information than I do. Therefore, I will ask the Member who was holding the Floor to deal with these issues so that Members can understand and we see how to proceed. It is not technically a procedural matter.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for more time to explain some of those issues as raised. Members need to know that the contract for Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd was first signed in 2003. Upon expiry, it has been renewed by Ministry of Works and Transport for various reasons and I wish the minister could speak for herself.

Anyhow, where we are now is that if we wait up to 2020 - when hon. Okot-Ogong knows that at that time, we will be heading toward a very important ceremony, the whole country will wake up one morning to hear that the contract with Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd  expired and has not been renewed and we may start going through a fresh bidding process.

If I may explain further,  what this motion is asking for is: how are we going to manage the transition period? I know that there are very many international companies that are already lobbying for Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd to be kicked out and they come in and one of them is called Veridos. 

Anyhow, the point we are saying, which I would challenge any Member to give me information on other than the minister is: what are you going to do with this database that the private company has collected? It is not property of Uganda Government, according to the contract that I have seen.

Today, I was in the Public Accounts Committee and the police appeared. I saw a very interesting figure of non-tax revenue, where Uganda Police is generating over Shs 300 billion in express penalties.

When you look through this contract, that I would request the minister to lay for the benefit of the Members, you realise that if you commit an offence, the police scans your permit, the system is tracked and Government can get you no matter how long it takes, if you do not pay. Now, if this database is being held by a private company and a proper transition is not managed, it would be a total disaster. One is that all our permits will be invalidated; two, Copyright issues will emerge and three, this money Uganda Police is bragging about today will disappear in thin air.

Lastly, as I second the motion, I would like to say that it would have been very wild if we authorised a 10-years’ extension for the same company. I personally want to see my Government issuing permits to me, not a private company.

However, what levels of training would we prepare Uganda Police to issue those permits to Uganda? Otherwise, I urge Members to support this motion and to know that it will be very costly to have another company start the work afresh.

As we move to our private premises, as the motion has stated, it is a little too much for Ugandans to get permits at half a million shillings. Now as the facility will be moving to Government premises, we hope the cost of permits will reduce and that more permit centres will be opened all around the country and run by the Government of Uganda. I beg to second the motion. Thank you.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and staff from Pandwong Primary School from Kitgum District represented by hon. Margaret Lamwaka and hon. Beatrice Anywar Atim. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 


The motion that I propose for your debate is that Parliament by a resolution appreciates the planned handover by Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd to the Government of Uganda. That is the motion and debate starts now.

4.57
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover and seconder of the motion. I would like to know from the Minister of Works and Transport what is included in the memorandum of understanding or the contract, which talks about the transition period.
	
The contract with Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd was extended and now, we will be going into a second extension. So, may we know what is included there and whether we are prepared to take over?

Currently, the issuing of driving permits is very efficient but we would not like to get into a situation where chaos, confusion, forgery and all sorts of things will come in. 
	
We support this motion because it is asking about the preparedness of Government to take over from Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd. If we are not prepared, I would then think that Parliament would suggest a smooth transition.

Otherwise, I am looking at a period of five years as being too much. We would consider three years so that Government is able to take over. 

I would like Members to know that if we do not take interest in this, they will be surprised, over time, that the so called mafia will kick out Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd and bring in other people to take over, which will set us into confusion.

Therefore, to say that Parliament should not have a say over a contract, which is ending in about seven or eight months, we would be deceiving ourselves. 

This is not something very difficult for us to deal with as the contract is ending. We want to have an effective system to issue driving permits and collect revenue. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.00
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are things I appreciate about Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd. I paid for renewal of my permit and got it on the same day.

However, on the extension, the Attorney-General must come at play because the extension involves legal issues. I have no problem with the extension though I have fears that the mafia might take this up. The Attorney-General and the responsible minister must come in to show us the legal implications.

Otherwise, there is no problem. I am happy with Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd only that I was disappointed with one thing: I do not know how they bypassed Masaka and opened up their offices in Mbarara, causing people from Masaka to move up to Mbarara yet Masaka is a senior town.
	
Otherwise, I pray that the Attorney-General - and I have been facing him - this is your area. They are now looking for an extension and smooth handover to Government and without preparation, anything can happen.

Otherwise, I am going to reserve my comments until this airline starts moving well. We need to get some guidance. I support the motion because we definitely need that smooth transition. I pray so. Thank you.

5.01
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, initially I was a bit uncomfortable but having listened, I got to realise that the motion is not seeking to extend the contract but saying that when the contract expires, give these people a management agreement to manage.

It is not uncommon in contracts of this nature because when you need a good transition, as the movers say, we need these people to train our citizens and a smooth continuity. That is what I get from the motion. So, for that matter, I do not see it interfering, in any way, in the enforcement of the contract. What we are trying to do is to put in place a smooth transition.

Secondly, they are not saying we do it now. The motion is clear. They are saying when the contract expires. Therefore, legally, there is no impediment to this motion. It can go ahead depending on the implementing ministry. It is up to the ministry to decide on how they want to treat the transition.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of this motion and second it. In May 2020, as they are saying, some of us NRM cadres will be busy in our party primaries. 

When we handle the issue of permits now, we shall be safe because our voters during campaigns need to get permits to ride. I do not have any clarification. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us debate.

MR WALUSWAKA: Mr Speaker, since they are just transferring and training, I think this is brought in good faith. Five years from 2020 – if you want, it should not be done not beyond December. Otherwise, next year, we shall be busy in campaigns and NRM is 75 per cent in the national elections. 

So, I would like to support this motion. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and staff from Kortek Junior Primary School in Kongasis county, Bukwo District. They are represented by hon. Paul Chelimo and hon. Evelyn Chemutai. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. 

5.05
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. 

There is no one in this country, I believe, who can refute the success that Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd has registered ever since they came on the scene. The company we are talking about, as already mentioned, has registered overwhelming success. 
If we may recall, we had a lot of incidences of forgery when it comes to permits. Today, as we talk, our police are advancing in terms of technology each and every day. We now have express penalties, which was made possible by Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd. The application and software that Face Technologies(Pty) Ltd is using is compatible and usable by the Uganda Police Force, which are the main beneficiary and users of our permits. 

If I may make some further elaboration, Government is in charge because Face Technologies entered the contract with them. Like the Attorney-General said, this motion is entirely coming in good faith. The only question is, how prepared is Government in taking over? If Government has a plan for the takeover, then, I think we are moving in the right direction.

This motion is coming to answer this question. As Government prepares to take over, can we have a proper transition management process in a period that is well defined and agreed upon by both parties? It is upon this background that the motion is before us to give guidance on how we can move forward.  

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to add my voice to urge Government to receive this motion in good faith and take the positivity in it such that we do not reach 2020 and find ourselves in confusion and we fail to proceed with the achievement that Face Technologies(Pty) Ltd has helped us to register so far. Today, you can easily walk to Kyambogo, Mbale or Mbarara and get a computerised driving permit in just a day. 

Right now, we have a software and application that is used by police. You simply need to know your permit number and you are safe. It is against this background that I stand to second the motion. Thank you.

5.09
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not want to comment on the spirit in which the motion was brought. I will reserve that. I will only restrict myself as to whether we are doing the right thing, first, as Parliament.

The motion seeks to speak to the transition period but BOT, in its very nature as it sounds is Build, Operate and Transfer. It means that the build, operate and transfer agreement must have envisaged the situation that at the expiry of the contractual period, there would be transfer of the same.

We are not dealing with something new. Government of Uganda has lost colossal sums of money on Aggreko on the transformers in Namanve. We signed the BOT and at the expiry of the term – of course, the technical people within Government from the ministry kept playing this game.

I would like to underscore one thing. In an agreement of that nature, the terms are very different because the person doing the build, operate and transfer gets a higher percentage because this contract was financing itself, arising from the fact that there was a percentage they were getting and retaining as the people financing the agreement.

Therefore, if we sit in this Parliament and say we have extended the management during the transfer, it means the contractor is going to maintain the same cost of processing a driving permit and yet, it was assumed that at the expiry of the contract, Uganda would own these processes and even the prices would go down.

Having said that, there is no doubt that Face Technologies(Pty) Ltd has improved the service. That is not an issue. What we are debating is as to whether Parliament has the authority to do what we are about to do in a manner being brought in the motion. 

I would propose that since the spirit is good, we create some time and look at the BOT contract so that we scrutinise the terms. What is the contract saying about the BOT terms? 

If what we are doing is in the interest of the country, then I would be inclined to support the motion. However, in the current form, I would like to withhold my support in the meantime. Thank you.

5.14
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue at hand is the transitional plan. When the contract of face technology was renewed last time, Ministry of Works and Transport should have used this period as a transitional period. However, that was never done.

The ministry continued working and operating as if Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd still has more 50 years to operate in Uganda. They knew very well that after five years, the contract would come to an end but they never prepared to takeover. The question is why did the ministry fail to know that they are supposed to have a transitional programme?

Mr Speaker, my fear is there is this name, which keeps coming and I have been having sleepless nights over it; the Veridos Company. Assuming we do not support this motion and the contract comes to an end, then, Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd packs its bags and goes back and then, then we have another company coming in. You will have to start from square one and that is my biggest fear.

Why didn’t the Government make this a transitional period? There must be something sinister going on in that ministry. I unreservedly support this motion for the simple reason that we need to handle this as a transitional window. Give this for a period of time to prepare Government of Uganda to takeover.

I do not want a situation where the minister comes back here to Parliament and requests that because we are not prepared, so, we allow another company to takeover in the transitional phase. That is one issue that I am very fearful about and it is for the same reason that I support this motion, so that we give Face Technology (Pty) Ltd a transitional window to prepare and handover directly to Government of Uganda instead of handing over to another shoddy company, which will also give us sleepless nights here and taking us back to the days of delays and so on.

Mr Speaker, I believe that this motion is in good faith. I do not have any conflict of interest whatsoever. I have no business with any of these companies but what I fear is to move away from Face Technology (Pty) Ltd to another company. We have already heard of this name Veridos coming up every other time and I am sure even the committee has been interrogating this issue of Veridos. Why is it that there is a company called Veridos in the corridors? This is our fear. I thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am constrained to debate on this motion because the movers seem not to have information from the responsible ministry. Since the minister in charge of this docket is within the House, wouldn’t it be procedurally correct that we ask him to tell us what the status is instead of -(Interruption)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I am raising on the point of order. Throughout this debate, I have seen the demeanour of hon. Michael Mawanda from Igara East. He is swearing, cursing and re-echoing people. Therefore, is it in order for the honourable member to go on behaving like that when we are engaged in a sober and important debate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mawanda is just eager to speak and I am going to give him an opportunity to do so but not now. However, you can see that he really wants to speak.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was on the point of procedure and I was saying that the movers of the motion are moving in good faith but they seem not to have sufficient information from the responsible ministry of what the plans are.

Since the line sector minister is within the House, wouldn’t it be procedurally correct that he tells us? Many questions are pointing to the minister on what the ministry is doing. Would it be proper that we ask him to give us a statement now or in few days’ time so that he can put down the anxiety that we have about the transitional arrangements in place?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Honourable members, that is a very good proposal. However, usually in the course of debate, ministers responsible for sectors have a right of response at the end. However, in the course of the debate, if the Member does not rise to make a contribution, it is very difficult for the Speaker to force a Member to speak.

The honourable minister is here and he is following. If he wanted to give information on something, he could have risen and I would have allowed him to address us. Therefore, honourable minister, do you want to speak now?

5.18
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter before this august House is a matter that we have been handling at the ministry. I would like to allay fears of colleagues and this august House that the matter is being handled in the interest of the people of Uganda.  

The contract is supposed to come to an end around 20 May 2020. This contract was previously extended because the operator had not recouped their resources. However, this was worked on because they keep monitoring how much money has been - because the system is automated. It calibrates and gives information of how many driving permits have been issued, the money that goes to the operator and to Uganda Revenue Authority.

Uganda Revenue Authority and Uganda Police Force have their people at the facility because this is a facility that handles sensitive information and documentation. Ministry of Works and Transport has got its staff at the facility to monitor exactly what goes on.

When we learnt that it is about to come to an end, these are the steps that we have taken: The first thing is that the facility is in a private building where they pay a lot of money annually that if Government took over, it would be too much for Government. Therefore, we took a step and directed that we start on the process of getting the facility out of the private facility in Kyambogo to a Government facility. 

Also, we engage the service provider on the modalities of acquiring the software rights and prepare to commence the negotiations for acquisition.

Mr Speaker, at the inception and contract stage when the contract was signed, the element of the ownership of the software remained with the service provider. That puts us at catch 22 because if we take over and they go with the software, it will mean we have to get a hollow – (Interjections) - actually empty. Of course, this was 15 years ago and we have not gone into the modalities of who negotiated. Anyhow, we directed our technical people to start on the process of seeing how we can get the software.

Thirdly, the service provider gets engaged on the transitional modalities, which include training and review of operational costs. We are doing this and it is somewhere. We have the information.

More to that, funds should be identified to renovate the buildings at the Uganda Railways Corporation where we got the buildings in order to be able to move from the Kyambogo facility in January next year.

The minister also agreed to consider entering into a new contract - we cannot extend it - but a new contract with the service provider for a period sufficient for them to recoup the cost of the software rights. (Interjections) Of course, there is software and the hardware. The software in the contract remained their property. There are other transitional modalities but details of the contract are yet to be ironed out.

What has been accomplished so far? 

A notice of termination of tenancy for the Kyambogo premises has been issued by the building owner. The facility should move to the Government premises by end of January.

Again, the minister has acquired Uganda Railways Corporation premises and commenced the renovation in preparation for moving the facility. 

The negotiations for acquiring the software have commenced but are not yet concluded. 

What is pending now is the ministry is yet to discuss transitional modalities, which include the third level training and review of operational technicalities with a service provider but this should be undertaken soon.

The other is a discussion regarding the software and operation costs that are yet to also be finalised. In principle, the ministry agrees with the proposal to grant a contract to the service provider to carry out the transitional modalities. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, let us first process this before we scatter what the minister said. Let us get this, if I understand it properly.

One, the honourable minister has stated that there is no transitional arrangement as of now – no, not that there is no need – there is no arrangement as of now, come 20 May 2020. Two, the software right remains with Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd; three, they would like to give another contract to Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd for it to be able to recoup money, which will pay for its software rights; and four, that they cannot renew this contract. They are going to do a new contract with the current service providers. 

Have I given a good summary of what the minister has said?

Hon. members: Yes. 

The Deputy Speaker: The motion states that there should be a transitional period after 20 May 2020. They are proposing that the transitional arrangement should be by a management contract, which they suggest Government should consider giving to Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd. However, the minister has said they are going to give it because they have not recouped all their money. Is there a contradiction?
 
Hon. members: No. 

The Deputy Speaker: The motion states that Parliament should be on record on this. That is all they are doing, in my opinion – yes, on what matter? The minister is saying that they are going to make a new contract but the motion states that the contract should be for management. 

Whatever you call it or whatever the purpose, give it to Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd to recover software rights. Is there a contradiction? 

5.28
Mr jonathan odur (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The facts are now clear except for a point that the ministry is not ready to receive the facility and operate it.

I would like to amend the motion to the effect that we include a provision that the Ministry of Works and Transport must prepare during that period because we do not want to reach the end of the management contract and find ourselves in the same situation. 

In the motion, we should have a provision to the effect that the ministry should put in place mechanisms and structures so that at the end, they are able to receive – it should be part of this motion and that they should update Parliament after a certain period how they are prepared to receive the contract and operate it at the end. 

The Deputy Speaker: Is that okay, honourable members?

Hon. members: Yes.

The Deputy Speaker: Can we take a decision on the matter of what has been proposed? Is the amendment sustainable?

Hon. members: Yes.

The Deputy Speaker: I put the question to the amendment proposed by the Member of Parliament for Erute County South.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Deputy Speaker: I put the question that the motion for a resolution of Parliament to appreciate the planned handover by Face Technologies (Pty) Ltd to Government of Uganda be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

The Deputy Speaker:  Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have representatives of petitioners from Kabulo, Nakifuma Constituency represented by hon. Robert Kafeero Ssekitoleko and hon. Peace Kusasira Mubiru. They are here to observe the proceedings, particularly a petition that is coming. You are welcome. (Applause)

Have you recorded the petition? I amended the Order Paper to allow for a petition.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY THE RESIDENTS OF KABULO, KABAWALA, NKULAGIRIRE AND MAKUKUBA VILLAGES IN MUKONO DISTRICT

5.31 
MR ROBERT KAFEERO SSEKITOLEKO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a petition under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The humble petition of the residents of Kabulo, Kabawala, Nkulagirire and Makukuba villages in Mukono District presented by hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko, MP Nakifuma County:

Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners are residents of Kabulo, Kabawala, Nkulagirire and Makukuba villages in Mukono District who are expressing their grievance against land grabbing and eminent eviction from Block 40 plot 58 Nakifuma, Kyagwe in Mukono District.

Your petitioners aver that the imminent land grabbing and the evection scheme is being spear headed by one Mr Kabagambe Nicholas a grandson of late Guluddene Andrew the original kibanja owner.

They have many issues as enlisted from 01 up to 16. In the interest of time, I will not go through one by one.

However, Mr Speaker and honourable members, here are the prayers;

The petitioner therefore, humbly pray that:

    1. Parliament carries out an investigation into the registration of the land into the different land titles especially the freehold title of 2018 given that it is Kabaka’s land and take appropriate action.
    2. Parliament allows the relevant committee to visit the disputed land to establish facts about it.
    3.  That Parliament orders the Resident District Commissioner Mukono and Nagalama Police to halt any pending eviction on this land until investigations into the matter are finalised.

Mr Speaker, your petitioners have appended their signatures on the petition, which I would like to lay on Table. Also attached on the petition is evidence of their fulfilment of payment of busulu as required by the law. We have also attached the said freehold certificate of title for that land dated 13 December 2018. Also attached is the certificate of title of the leasehold dated 01 August 1990. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the petition and attached documents.

MR KAFEERO SSEKITOLEKO: Mr Speaker, as I wind up, no Ugandan whether from Nakifuma or elsewhere-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are supposed to present the petition which you have done. You will speak properly when the committee reports on this matter.

Honourable members, on prayer No. 3, I have a little challenge with the word - can Parliament order the RDC, Police? You might have to find a way of rephrasing it. You can say the process of any eviction should be halted without giving any specific orders to anybody. Maybe, you want to look at it again? 
You are saying Parliament orders the RDC of Mukono and Nagalama Police to halt any pending evection. I would rather you say; to facilitate this investigations, all pending evictions should be halted to allow Parliament do its work. Maybe, it would be better. Do you want to do it properly?  

MR KAFEERO SSEKITOLEKO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. We can re-adjust to remove the word “order.” We pray that all pending evictions be halted until Parliament finalises the investigation on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think that captures the spirit of what you want to achieve. Honourable members, that is the petition presented by the Member for Nakifuma. The concerned people are in the House. We have just recognised them. I refer this petition to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to handle within- but now, you are the petitioner and you are also the chairperson.

MR KAFEERO SSEKITOLEKO: Mr Speaker, I have a vice chairperson.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. This matter is referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to handle expeditiously because with delays, things can go wrong. Therefore, handle it expeditiously, come, and advise the House on what decision we should take to help the people who are affected by this pending eviction and other activities. It is so referred.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO EXTEND THE DISTRICT QUOTA POLICY FOR AWARD OF THE GOVERNMENT SCHOLARSHIPS TO OTHER LOWER INSTITUTIONS OF LEARNING

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are the honourable members here? I see the honourable member for Koboko District, the seconder of the motion. Is she ready to present the motion? You cannot present the motion. Honourable member for Bunyole East, can you present the motion? Okay, it looks like there is no presenter for this motion. 

Honourable members, we will defer until the honourable member for Lamwo District comes to the House to present this motion. There being no other business, we might have to pause here. 

However, honourable members, tomorrow, we have to finalise with the Supplementary Appropriation Bill as I had guided so that we can close that chapter. I had asked the committee to go back and harmonise the figures how they fit in the Bill and how they fit with what Parliament previously approved through the supplementary schedules that were presented before Parliament. 

If there are variations, we go with what we approved and we do not take anything else because we would not have approved it. What we are doing is just supplying what we initially approved through the supplementary schedules that we already took a decision on. 

Honourable members, this House now stands adjourned until tomorrow 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.39 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 11 September 2019 at 2.00 p.m.)
