

Tuesday, 18 September 2018

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have a few announcements to make. The Secretary of the Pharmaceutical Society of Uganda requests Members of Parliament and staff to participate in the Sickle Cell Masters Run on 23 September 2018 at Kyadondo Rugby Club at 7.00 a.m. We have been supporting many causes, so I would like to invite all those who are able to attend that important run. 

Secondly, at the start of the Third Session of Parliament, we indicated that we were changing our way of work and that the First Meetings will be majorly dedicated to legislation. I would like to notify the following committees that they are late in delivering these pieces of legislation: 

    1. The Committee on Budget has two Bills, the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2017 and the Supplementary Appropriation Bill No.2, 2017. You have gone well over the required 45 days.

    2. The Committee on Presidential Affairs recently requested for an extension, which was granted by this House. 

    3. The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development is late with the Minimum Wages Bill, 2016 by over 700 days. No request for extension has been brought to this House. 

    4. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development is late with the Retirement Benefits Liberalisation Bill, the Investment Code Bill and lately, the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill. You are late by 732 days on the first one; the Investment Code Bill is late by 433 days; and you are over your time with the Excise Duty Bill by 34 days.

    5. The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry is late by over 500 days with the Wildlife Bill and the Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Bill is late by 700 days. However, you have not yet sought an extension. 

    6. I hope the Committee on Health is ready with the Indigenous and Complementary Medicine Bill, 2015, which is on the Order Paper, because you are late.

    7. The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is late by 122 days on the Security, Interest and Immovable Property Bill, 2018; the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 is late by 49 days. This morning, the Uganda Law Society reminded me that they want that law done before the end of this year. You are late with the Sexual Offences Bill by 602 days and also with the Law Revision Penalties in Criminal Matters by 602 days, and you have not sought for an extension. You are also late with the Human Rights Enforcement Bill by over 600 days. You need to either ask for permission or we put you on the Order Paper.

    8. The Committee on Natural Resources are late with the National Environment Bill by over 45 days. 

    9. The Committee on Physical Infrastructure are late by 440 days with the Civil Aviation Authority Bill. You have not come to request for an extension.

    10. The Committee on Information and Communication Technology is late with the Data Protection Privacy Bill by 650 days, and your request for permission has not yet come to us.

    11. The Committee on Health has a petition by the Pharmacy Owners Association and the results of that petition will feed into the licensing issue for the next financial year. You have had it for over 45 days and have not yet sought for an extension.

    12. The Committee on Infrastructure is late with the following petitions:
        a) The petition by the Bagungu on compensation has taken 197 days;

        b) The petition by the occupants of Kimogoro Ranch, Kiryandongo, is late by more than 45 days; 

        c) The petition by the residents of Rubaga about evictions by Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) is late; 

        d) The petition from Bujumba Constituency in Kalangala against the Kalangala Infrastructure Services Limited for infrastructure services on Bugala Island is also late; 

        e) The petition against encroachment of community land by the Uganda Wildlife Authority is late; 

        f) The petition on the irregular allocation of land by Uganda Land Commission in Mbale is also late.

    13. The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development is late by 300 days with the petition by elderly persons on the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE). The petition by the former workers of the Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation (UPTC) is late by 300 days.

    14. The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline has some reports which are late by over 45 days. We need you to come back to us with them as quickly as possible or seek extension if you are not able to handle them.

Honourable members, by the time we go for the Independence break, the Bills that are outstanding will have to be done because the Second Sitting will be for reports from the standing committees and others. The situation is dire and I would like to inform you that we have developed a computer application, which will track your work in the committees and will also inform the public. If you are late, a notice will come out indicating that you are late and it will be on the website. There is no more hiding when you are not doing our work. Please, take our work seriously. 

There were a few matters of national concern. Quickly use two minutes each. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. I am a member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. You talked about some Bills that have delayed with the committee. However, the Uganda Investment Code Bill, for example, came to the House and was debated but you said that there must be some harmonisation. Where does the committee’s problem lie if they presented the report to the House? This is not even exceptional; there are very many. If the reports of committees on Bills have been presented to the House, do you blame the committees or the House?

THE SPEAKER: Just check with your committee.

3.01	
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the second time I am presenting this matter on the Floor of Parliament. 

In May this year, I presented two critical issues affecting my constituency. One was on the issue of land compensation and the forceful grabbing of land by the Ministry of Defence to the tune of 196 acres. The second issue, which is similar to that, is that against both a subcounty and district council resolution which said that there was no land in that area, the ministry went ahead and wanted to acquire four square miles of land to set up a barracks. 

Madam Speaker, you ruled on this matter and indicated clearly that the Ministry of Defence should come up with a statement that can be substantially debated in this House. However, since May, nothing has happened. What is the problem? I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Well, there are three ministers in that ministry. May to September is four months. The minister must come tomorrow and respond to that issue; it is long overdue. 

3.03
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the 300 motorised pumps for spraying fruit farms, which have been lying idle now for a year in Soroti Fruit Factory. 

For close to a year, these pumps have been lying in the stores and yet they were procured to serve as an intervention for the diseases that have attacked the orange farms in the Teso and adjoining subregions. We are wondering what the intentions of the concerned people are. Farmers are crying and the machines are lying idle. The factory is about to open but there are no oranges because they are sick.

My prayers are:

1. 	Can the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries tell us why this equipment, which was meant to be for urgent intervention, has remained in the stores?

2. 	I would suggest that you intervene and let the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries investigate how much was used to procure these machines and also check their adequacy for the job that they were procured for. This may be one of the procurements gone bad. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries come and update us on, first of all, whether he knows that these pumps are there and if he does, why are they still lying in the stores? We would like to get an answer on Tuesday next week.

3.04
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding the deteriorating security situation in Rukungiri. 

I would like to draw the attention of this House to yet another gruesome murder. Ms Shivan Keshara, a student of Bugangari Secondary School, was murdered on Tuesday night, 11 September, in Kashenyi Trading Centre in Bugangari Subcounty. The late Shivan was aged 17 years and she was in Senior 3. She was a daughter of Mr Cornelius Matabaru and Jolly of Kashenyi Trading Centre in Bugangari Subcounty, Rujumbura in Rukungiri District.

Madam Speaker, the style in which Shivan was killed is similar to what we have seen with the murders of the other over 20 women in the areas of Kampala and Wakiso. They kidnap, rape, and then kill them before dumping their bodies in thick bushes. The late Shivan was discovered after two days by children who were looking for mangoes. Shivan becomes about the 24th woman to be murdered in the recent past.

The whole of the Rujumbura community and Rukungiri are in panic. Students, especially young girls, are running away from school. They fear to go to school and parents are worried because they do not know which young life of a girl-child is going to be taken next.

Our prayer is that that Government, and particularly the Minister of Internal Affairs, assures the people of Rukungiri District of their security. The police should also investigate this matter and bring the culprits to book. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Minister of Internal Affairs would like to say something.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, I have just been received this information from the colleague like other Members. I will get in touch and by Tuesday or Wednesday we shall give an answer as to what investigations the police have done as far as this particular incident is concerned and the general situation of law and order in Rukungiri. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We expect an answer on Tuesday.

3.08
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the people of Bukooli Island. 

Sometime back, I brought a matter before this House that caused anguish to my people, and this was regarding the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) protecting the lake. The enforcement officers have instead turned a big burden to the fishermen of Bukooli Island. On 3 August 2017, two people were killed, Omondi Fredrick and Othieno George. 

The UPDF is operating together with an organisation called Association of Fishers and Lake Users of Uganda (AFALU). These people have become extortionists. They are dealing a person called Joseph Lukwago who calls himself JB. He has gone to the lake beating our people and extorting money from them. Last month, he took fish worth Shs 9 million and the issue was taken to Namayingo Police Station.

Madam Speaker, I would like to name the following people who are conniving with the UPDF to torture and extort money from our people: Raphael Wanyama, Joseph Lukwago, Joseph Mangunyu, William Amooti, Edrisa and many others. Apart from extorting money, there is forceful grabbing of fish, after which they sell to the tycoons. 

Lastly, we are representatives of the people but when we bring issues to this House, our lives are threatened. Capt. Ssebukeera is threatening our lives.

Our prayer is that these people who are beating our people should be brought to book and that this army should be transferred from the waters.  (Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House and the country at large that I was lucky to be at the burial of the mother of our honourable colleague but what I discovered is that there is a very big problem. As an NRM Member of Parliament, I shouted “NRM Oyee!” and I was abused because of the atrocities committed by the soldiers on the waters.

I would like to inform you that the actions of the soldiers on the lake have made the support of my great party deteriorate. Something should be done so that we put our system right. I know that we have other Members of Parliament from the lake who are here keeping quiet, but you are sitting on fire. We have only two and a half years to go and face those people; something should be put right. Thank you. (Applause) 
 
THE SPEAKER: Did you finish your prayers?

MR OUMA: My prayer is that the head of operations, Capt. Ssebukeera, should be transferred and that those people who are extorting money should be investigated. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a pity that the Prime Minister is not here, but the issues raised by hon. Ouma are exceedingly grave. On Sunday, I was in Namayingo and two Members of Parliament from Kenya, hon. Wanjala of Budalangi Constituency and hon. Ochanda of Bondo Constituency, came with their county representatives to complain about the UPDF brutality on the lake in the Kenyan waters. They asked me why we were exporting brutality to Kenya – Yes! In fact, they thought the UPDF was harassing only them, only to find that they first harass Ugandans and then they cross the border and harass the Kenyans as well.

Yesterday, I had to speak to the President about this matter. We cannot continue brutalising Ugandans because of exporting fish. (Applause) They have stopped them from smoking fish. You know these people like hon. Ouma here like to eat fish for breakfast, lunch and dinner, but their fish is being grabbed. We want action. Those people are known.

Last Tuesday, I invited the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries together with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the UPDF here to our boardroom to discuss their conduct against the population. When the people went back, nine of them were arrested for coming to Parliament. They were arrested for coming here and speaking to us. So, where would you expect Ugandans to go? Where would they really go?

The Minister of Defence has failed to come to answer questions about the vehicles grabbed from the fishing community. They have been in Nakasongola for the last three years. He has not come. 

I want a commitment from the Prime Minister that these people - Col Nuwagaba, Capt. Ssebukeera and many others – will be arrested. They must be arrested. Ugandans cannot live as if they are slaves. I talked to the President yesterday and I have sent a letter today. However, I would like the Prime Minister to commit here that action shall be taken against these people. We have spoken for all of you - Buvuma, Kalangala, Nakasongola, Buyende. I have spoken for all of you. (Laughter)  That is it.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I notice that in this House, the soldiers that are tormenting Ugandans are represented here. We have Members of Parliament here representing that constituency. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Members of Parliament representing the Army, which is tormenting Ugandans, to make a statement on why they are tormenting our neighbours? Wouldn’t it be proper and right that these Members of Parliament, representing a now dangerous constituency, make a statement in the House? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, where is hon. Lakot? She is the leader of the UPDF. Lt Gen. Koreta, many times you have been here when these complaints are raised.

3.16
LT GEN. IVAN KORETA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member and the House that there are tactical matters, there are operational matters, and also strategic matters. (Interruption) 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, with pain, I rise on a point of order against my respected honourable colleague. I sympathise with him. However, I detest, in the strongest terms possible, when we raise constitutional matters like freedom from torture - Article 44 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda states that it is a non-derogable right – and Members of Parliament ask you to state why you are torturing the citizens and exporting torture to Kenya, then you come here on the Floor of the House and say, “it is a tactical matter”. Is he in order to overthrow the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, even in our face? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not only the UPDF which is on the waters. There is no complaint about the Tanzania military or the Kenya military. The complaints are only about the Uganda military. It is only about Uganda. Therefore, Lt Gen. Koreta, please answer our question. Why are you brutalising people?

LT GEN. KORETA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish some of our Members could wait and hear what I wanted to say, instead of jumping up to threaten me. I feel threatened. Protect me, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

Tactical matters happen on the ground. Locally, operational matters come at a medium level and strategic matters come at a national and regional level. Allow me to explain. What is going on in the lake are acts of indiscipline on the individual level. It is not condoned nor supported or agreed upon by the command of the UPDF.

Madam Speaker, I would, therefore, request the House to get hold of our commanders from the ministerial level and the command of the UPDF itself to make a formal statement. Personally, I would not be in a position to satisfy this House with an adequate explanation.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the military are not impressed by that conduct, what have you done about it? We have raised this matter four times in this same session. There is no action taken, no ministerial statement made. The ministers all disappear; they are not here even today.

MR HENRY KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When there is something that is not going right in the constituencies that we represent, we go back to those constituencies and have an in-house discussion. The UPDF representatives here must also be doing the same when they go back to the barracks. 

The issue of the UPDF burning houses on those islands does not only end with hearsay. We have seen this on television. We have seen people being thrown in the water. We have seen people being killed and everybody has really shouted not only in one month or one week, but it has been going on for more than a year. 

The people we have here are the top cream of the UPDF including the former Chief of Defence Forces (CDF). When we cry and our colleagues come here and “romance” with statements claiming that it is not the UPDF and that they are normal people and yet they move with guns - In Uganda, we know that the only people who have a right to move with guns in broad daylight are soldiers. Now you come here and say this! When we cry the other side, you beat us and when we cry this side, you torture the civilians. We are now crying because the fish mongers are being killed. Now, what shall we say? 

MR SIMEO NSUBUGA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing a little bit of debate on this matter.

I come from Mubende but right now it is Kassanda District. Last year, over 60,000 people were evicted from Mubende mines. Those were civilians evicted from the mines. Since the eviction, the mines were taken over by the UPDF. The UPDF has since last year been mining gold. I do not know whether the stories we hear from the mines are the tactical or strategic ones. 

Our people are being tortured by the army day in, day out. They hire them and some people sneak into the mine. However, when they get them, they are tortured and all sorts of things are done to them. I am saddened to hear the same story is going on in the waters. 

These are natural resources of this country, for the people of Uganda. The message that is being sent out by the UPDF is that probably, it is only the right of the UPDF to exploit the natural resources of this country because wherever you hear about natural resources, that is where you find the UPDF. You will find them in sand mining, forests and other places.

You hear the name, “Uganda People’s Defence Forces” but what we have today is torture of Members of Parliament, down to the wanainchi. Madam Speaker, this is not a matter for us to just look on as a Parliament. We must do something serious about this force which is torturing the people of Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Prime Minister is directed to come tomorrow and address us on this impunity which we have been raising for the last three months. We have raised it for three months and the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs has not come. Therefore, the Prime Minister should come tomorrow without fail.

3.26
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Last week, Government, in activities presided over by His Excellency the President of Uganda, launched programmes within Kampala in which cheques amounting to hundreds of millions of shillings were extended to various groups of people. 

One of our cardinal roles as Members of Parliament is to oversee the implementation of Government programmes and the use of public funds within our respective constituencies first. Cheques directly drawn from the Bank of Uganda were given out to various groups of people in Kampala. Surprisingly, none of the Members of Parliament from Kampala were invited for these activities. 

Getting funds directly from the central bank of the country is charging the Consolidated Fund – 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, my colleague is complaining of cheques “flying” left and right within central Kampala City from Bank of Uganda. I do not know whether the Member of Parliament is in order to talk about this money when our constituencies that voted for the National Resistance Movement (NRM) 90 per cent have not got anything. Is the honourable member in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Actually, I was going to congratulate you. You are lucky. (Laughter) I have not seen cheques on the other side of the Nile. 

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker and Members, the point I am trying to make is this: This money has brought a lot of stampedes within our constituencies and the information we are getting is that cheques are reportedly torn within the fracas that ensues. I stand to request Government to explain the following:

    1. The details of this arrangement. Is this a revolving fund?
    2. Were the beneficiaries adequately selected?
    3. Couldn’t it be that they brought people to Kampala to benefit? We do not know some of the people that got this money. (Interruption)

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, honourable member. We read in the newspapers and it was even announced by the minister in charge of Kampala that the President will be distributing some finances to the ghetto youth for “immunization” against poverty. However, the beneficiaries of this, according to the information I got from Katwe and Ndeeba which I represent, are people above 50 years old. The cheques were handed over to these people. I do not know how these people of over 50 years - (Member timed out.)

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, this money was charged on the Consolidated Fund account and there is no doubt about that because these cheques were brought from Bank of Uganda. It is taxpayers’ money. 

We would like to know which agency of Government is in charge of this. This morning, I contacted the Lord Mayor, His Lordship Erias Lukwago, and he was not in the know of this money. Is it the Kampala ministry in charge? Is it Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning? Is it Ministry of Local Government? Is it the youth ministry? Which agency is drawing from the Consolidated Fund and giving it out to beneficiaries that we do not know? Could it be some relatives and friends of officials who were moving with His Excellency? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, can you say something about this bonanza for Kampala? 

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you recall, in this House we appropriated resources under the State House vote. The President is using these resources to help the youth of Kampala and indeed, the programme is starting from with Kampala and will spread all over the country. 

It is very unfortunate that the people who are representing these young people who are being helped can come here to scandalise this matter.

3.32
THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Beti Kamya): Madam Speaker, the norm is to thank an honourable member for raising a matter in this House, so I will thank my colleague, the Member of Parliament representing Rubaga North, who is actually my Member of Parliament. 

I am shocked that instead of the Member thanking Government for bringing this pilot project to Kampala first, the Member is questioning the President’s goodwill in Kampala. That being said, Madam Speaker, the cheques that are being talked about were actually dummy cheques. The amount of money will be received after certain conditions have been put into place. However, the Member of Parliament stood here and said the cheques were being torn. They were actually dummy cheques. I was there – (Interruption) -

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, in the Eighth Parliament when you were in that Chair, you caused a directive to be issued by the then Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. Apolo Nsibambi, that no minister should go to a constituency of any Member of Parliament on official Government work without notifying the MP in writing. It is a resolution of this House, under your wise leadership. 

We are thankful for the cheques and would like to see such kind of money going everywhere. However, the procedural matter I am raising is: Is it procedurally right for ministers to sneak into constituencies without informing the area Members of Parliament, contrary to the resolution of this House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is highly discourteous to just go and do work without informing the Members of Parliament. We are elected Members and those are our constituencies. It is a resolution of this House and Government undertook that the ministers will inform the Members before they go.

MS KAMYA: Madam Speaker, it is true that it is courteous for ministers to inform Members of Parliament. Although this was the President’s programme, I would like to say that Members of Parliament from Kampala have always been invited. However, when there are Government programmes, they have never attended them. Tomorrow, I will lay on the Table letters to Members of Parliament of Kampala who have been invited to Government programmes and they have never responded to any of them.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we all know that there is a programme called Tubalemese. I would like to note that today I am happy that the Tubalemese programme is no longer there. Members of Parliament from Kampala will always be invited and they will attend Government programmes. We are moving forward, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much.

3.36
MS PROSSY AKAMPULIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the beneficiaries of the students’ loan scheme for academic year 2018/2019, whose names were published in the New Vision of 14 September 2018.

Madam Speaker, I do not know where the students who were listed come from because when you look at the list of about 3,000 students, there were no schools, districts or even regions attached to the names. This made me wonder what criteria the Ministry of Education and Sports used. 

Further to that, back in our villages, for example Rubanda District which I represent, students call us every day requesting for school fees and they ask about how they can get these loans. When we send them to the banks, they are bounced. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Education and Sports should come out on this. If they cannot move around the entire country, let them make small brochures and send to different schools telling students how to apply for these loans. We do not know because they are saying – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think you have made your point. Can I ask the minister in charge of education to speak? Let me ask the minster. First of all, you are taking issue about the composition and region. 

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, I think the minister needs to take this information. We have talked to the Higher Education Students' Financing Board for some time and they are rigid. 

When students apply for the loans, first the students have to apply to the university to get admitted for a course from the courses that have been listed. After the students have been admitted for the different courses in the different universities, they apply to be considered for the loan scheme. Unfortunately, when the board sits to consider those they are going to select, they go back to the performance of the student. This is irregular because by the time the students have applied to the universities and they have been admitted, their performance is no longer relevant. 

In fact, the consideration should be who is very unlikely to study if we do not give them money. That is what they should consider to give them loans. Unfortunately, they consider the performance. If you have been offered medicine and you have been admitted to Kampala International University (KIU) or Makerere University, they still look at your performance - if you scored AAA – and then they take the best performers. We have argued with them and told them that the criteria should be which student is not likely to study if we do not give them money. The performance or grade is no longer of value.

MS AKAMPULIRA: Madam Speaker, my prayer to the ministry is that as these lists come out, let them tell us the districts these beneficiaries come from. When they are publishing their names in the newspapers, let them indicate the districts and schools they come from as well as the points scored. That will clearly help us to know and even advise our people back in the districts how they should perform for them to get these loans. I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Before the minister comes up, join me in welcoming the district councillors from Serere District. They are in the public gallery. They are here for training at the Institute of Parliamentary Studies. They are represented by hon. Elijah Okupa, hon. Hellen Adoa and hon. Patrick Okabe. You are welcome.  (Applause)

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Chrysostom Muyingo): Madam Speaker, the law that brought the students’ loan scheme into place was passed by this House. The whole idea behind the scheme is to enable Ugandans access higher education, particularly those who are financially unable, and we strictly follow that principle.

Madam Speaker, maybe my colleagues have forgotten but I would like to say that we give these loans to Ugandan students who are financially unable but have been admitted for a diploma or degree course in a public university. We have designed a computerised system that captures the details of the student right from the day he or she started primary school up to the present day.

The information my colleague would like to appear when we are releasing the results is available with us and we can present it any time. Otherwise, I have made it very clear and I want to repeat that in case anyone feels that there is rich person’s daughter or son on that list, they should draw my attention to it so that I can take the necessary action. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we carefully considered that law and it was passed here. I recall we spent two weeks sitting to debate that issue and we tried to cover all the loopholes. Otherwise, if you have any specific loophole, kindly forward it. I think we did a thorough job. Honourable minister, can you lay the list on the Table.

MR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I beg that you give me more time because I did not come with the list today. I can lay it on the Table tomorrow.

3.44
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance.

On the 16th of this month, the people of Pakwach woke up to a tragedy. A lorry carrying traders from Amuru District and parts of Nwoya District was heading to Payimur Market in Pakwach District. The road they were using leads to part of Albert Nile. When they arrived in Pakwach, unfortunately the vehicle lost control and plunged into River Nile. As I speak, nine bodies were recovered yesterday, seven of which were women, including a female baby of nine months, and two males. The other two bodies have not yet been recovered. The eight bodies were taken back to Amuru but one body is still unclaimed.
	
Madam Speaker, the vehicle was a Canter, weighing about four tones, which was overloaded with dry and fresh cassava –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: What are the prayers?

MS PACUTO: Madam Speaker, I have the following prayers:
    1. That the Marine Police currently operating at the border of the Democratic Republic of Congo should be supported with equipment, more training and facilitation. Whereas they rushed to the scene, they were helpless. It was the fishermen who tried to recover the goods that had gone into the river. We, therefore, appeal to Government to attach two divers and a speed boat to Pakwach Central Police Station.

    2. The Police should enforce the regulations and laws on the use of trucks in order to avoid overloading. Apparently, these people were seated on top of the goods and so, when the vehicle plunged into the water, the goods followed them. Actually, before the chopper brought the drivers, the local people could touch the bodies but the goods were still on top of them because of overloading. This truck passed through three districts; definitely, there were policemen on the road who did nothing to stop them. 

    3. Since Pakwach is the gateway to West Nile, we are suffering. We get accidents in the park and the first response call is to the health centre IV, which cannot handle such cases. We are, therefore, appealing to Government to upgrade Pakwach Health Centre IV to hospital status.

    4. The District Police Commander (DPC) of Pakwach should be supported with another vehicle to help in administration. The only vehicle they had was for operations and it was moving up and down to pick the bodies.

I beg to submit and thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Works and Transport update us on the possibilities of further supporting the marine units in the Albert Nile.
	
Honourable members, the works minister was also supposed to come here with a new law. I do not know when the law is coming because it was supposed to deal with improvement on the roads. The other prayers should be handled by the Minister of Health; she is here. 

3.49
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance concerning a son of the soil from Bunyoro called Col. Ndahura Atwooki. He was arrested on the 12th of June this year at midnight and locked up at Makindye Military Barracks. After a lot of struggle, they were able to allow his wife to see him but his lawyer was stopped from seeing him.

Madam Speaker, he is 58 years old. He is diabetic but he has been denied access to his personal doctor. They have also failed to produce him before a competent court, contrary to a court order that was secured before Justice Musa Sekana.

As we speak, the information streaming from Makindye Military Barracks is that this senior army officer is sick. The family members are worried –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what do you want to say? We do not want stories

MR TINKASIIMIRE: We, the people who come from Bunyoro, are very worried that he may die in the cells. Our prayer is that if the state has any case against him, they should produce him before a competent court. Otherwise, it is now 96 days contrary to what is provided by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda - 48 hours. In fact, they are abusing his rights by locking him up in a cell that has no light.

We also pray that he should be released since they have failed to charge him. Section 190 of the UPDF Act provides that when a suspected army officer has been in custody for 90 days and no reasonable charge has been brought against him, he should be released unconditionally. It has been 96 days now; we pray that he is released.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House cannot direct. Can I advise you to apply for a writ of habeas corpus. Apply for a writ of habeas corpus so that he is produced in court - Apply again. 

3.53
DR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, Kisoro District is emerging as a major tourist destination. A lot of tourism-related activities and other economic activities are coming up every other day as a result of the new place that Kisoro has in this nation. 

However, the vibrancy of this is being threatened by a new situation, which is the intermittence of power supply as never before. It is worrying and threatening the tourism industry in that part of our country. Therefore, I pray that the minister explains this new phenomenon we are facing and also offers solutions to what is going on. It is a threat to these new economic opportunities that our people have in the district.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development come and explain to this House next week the plans for stable power in Kisoro District so that our people are comfortable.

3.54
MS LYDIA MIREMBE (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding lightning strikes in schools, which have claimed many lives in Uganda. 

In Butambala District, last year in November during the inter-primary school competitions, lightning struck Kitagobwa UMEA Primary School in Ngando Subcounty, leaving seven pupils dead. There are very many cases that go unreported. 

My prayer is that Government makes it a policy for all schools to have lightning arrestors so that the lives of our students are protected. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think in the Eighth or Ninth Parliament, this House passed that resolution, that arrestors should be installed. I do not know whether the Minister of Education and Sports can update us on that issue.

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that this Parliament decided that we install lightning arrestors in all schools. We embarked on a programme of installing lightning arrestors in all schools, starting with badly-hit areas. 

I would like to tell you, Madam Speaker, that this year, we have been given money. Among some of the schools that are going to be covered include those in Butambala. It is one of those that we have earmarked to cover this financial year. Thank you. (Interjections) It is one of the many. We are going to cover many but Butambala is one of the first districts.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you can get the details from their programme. If we appropriated the money, there is a programme.

3.57
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise. One concerns SBI International Holdings, the company which was contracted to construct Mukono-Kayunga-Njeru Road. Madam Speaker, in March 2017, you visited affected residents in Magala Village, Kayunga District and they raised a number of complaints. One of the complaints was about compensation. I am happy to report that after your intervention, they paid these people and we thank you very much.

However, Madam Speaker, SBI committed to do a number of things. One of them was to renovate Magala Church of Uganda and a primary school called Kikonyogo, which was heavily affected by the blasting. These things were supposed to be done by October last year but they relocated without fulfilling all these pledges. They were supposed to drill four boreholes and widen the access road from the main road to the quarry. They went before completing these things. Efforts to make them comply have been futile.

Last week, I visited this place and the residents told me SBI has returned to start blasting again, without fulfilling the pledges and yet their contract with the community ended in 2017. Madam Speaker, my prayer is that we halt the activities of SBI at Magala quarry until complaints raised by the community are addressed. 

The other issue concerns unknown people who last Saturday went and attacked one village and destroyed crops in about 32 households in Busagazi Village in Nazigo Subcounty. They left the people with nothing to survive on. My prayer is that the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness assists us with some food relief –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Works and Transport, I do not know whether you are able to address this issue. I met with you and Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) over compensation and rehabilitation of those buildings more than a year ago. 

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will take note of hon. Baseke’s concern. I will take it up and interact with SBI on those issues which were left undone and then I will get back to the House and also to him.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please join me in welcoming a delegation from Lwamata Subcounty in Kiboga, represented by hon. Ruth Nankabirwa and hon. Keefa Kiwanuka. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to help the minister and the honourable member because these issues come up almost daily. We passed the Companies Act in 2012 - Act 1 of 2012. In the schedule thereto, we included provisions of corporate social responsibility, which is now part of our legal regime. 

It would be incumbent on the Government, both local and central government, whenever they award tenders and contracts to these companies, to ensure that the provisions of the Companies Act on corporate social responsibility are incorporated in such agreements. Short of that, we will continue to be ripped off by companies and yet the law is there. Therefore, honourable minister, you need to look at that and see how these companies you have given tenders, especially in road construction, have incorporated aspects of corporate social responsibility in the agreements.

4.02
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Some time back, hon. Pentagon Kamusiime, the Member of Parliament for Butemba, and I came on the Floor of this House to raise the concern that our people had produced a lot of maize and they were stuck with it. There was no market; they were selling their maize at Shs 150 or Shs 200. 

My constituency does two things: we produce a lot of maize but we also have a lot of beef products. For the past five months, we have been having quarantine because of the Foot and Mouth Disease. At the same time, my voters, the people of Kyaka South County, are stuck with maize and yet we had hoped that we would get market and be in position to pay fees for our children. 

Government informed us that they had got Shs 100 billion for that purpose. We prepared our farmers to sell their maize to whoever would be sent to them by Government. But up to now, we have not seen anyone coming to buy that maize. Unfortunately, we have a policy that requires us to take seeds to our people. So, when I went distributing these seeds, my voters asked, “We are already stuck with maize, now you are bringing us more maize; what is happening?” (Interruption)

MR NOAH MUTEBI: Thank you very much, my colleague. Madam Speaker, in my constituency of Nakasongola, I told them that Parliament has passed a resolution that Government is going to start buying maize at Shs 500 per kilogramme. People kept their maize and they were sure that they would get money to take back their children to school. 

However, when you go to our constituencies, there are some government agencies which are buying maize but at Shs 250 or 300 Shs. There is no change. 

Madam Speaker, our humble prayer is that Government sticks to its promise to buy maize at Shs 500 and above. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we had several debates on the issue of low price and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives came here saying they had solved the issue. Where is the money? How can we access it? Who has it? What is the key to accessing it?

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, tomorrow we will come to the House with a list of those companies that have benefited from the facility that we put in place to help our farmers. Then, we will also update you on the – but what we did is that anybody who is going to benefit from this agricultural facility in the banks should buy the maize at a minimum price of Shs 500. So, if you find out that they have benefited from this facility – because they are getting maize at a cheaper price – and they are not buying maize at a minimum of Shs 500, then that would be wrong.

I promise that tomorrow, I will come with the list. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us wait for the list to come and then we can ask questions when we have seen the list. 

4.07
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding land grabbers. My people of Buyengo and the neighbouring sub-counties of Lukoma, Nawampiti, Kitayunjwa and Kakira are living in fear after a team claiming to have come from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development approached and told them that the Government is interested in their land after discovering their land possesses minerals. 

They told them that the Government is planning to shift them to an unknown area. They advised my people to sell off their land if they want to gain. Madam Speaker, they went ahead and told my people that if they wanted to get more information, they can consult me as their area Member of Parliament - [MR PETER LOKERIS: “Let me give you information.”] 

THE SPEAKER: You will answer; let him ask the question first.

MR WALYOMU: If they were your people – they advised my people that if they want to gain out of their –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! Yes, hon. Walyomu.

MR WALYOMU: They advised my people that if they want to gain from their land, they should sell it off. Not only that, they even told my people that they should come and consult me; that I am aware of this programme. 

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank my colleague for giving way. 

Madam Speaker, we appreciate that there are investors and a number of them have gone into the mining sector. However, they are doing a disservice to our communities. In my district of Lira, Ngetta Sub-county, there is Victoria Marble Granite and Universal Marble Granite doing a disservice to our people; they are not compensating. They have destroyed crops. They have made access roads and they are not paying anything at all.  

We appreciate their work as investors but they need to rent the land; the land need not be sold. They do not need to take people’s things for granted. So, Minister of Energy and Minerals, your investors are doing a disservice to our people. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Walyomu, please conclude.

MR WALYOMU: Thank you, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, my prayers are: I need an explanation from the Government to allay the fears of my people on whether my people are safe and which minerals were discovered.
Secondly, I request Government that they should inform leaders on any development in their areas of representation before approaching the communities to enable us to differentiate between wrongdoers and Government programmes. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, you are anxious to speak. 

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we access these minerals, we follow laws. In following laws, when you get a licence and it is a prospecting licence, you move through the country in search of minerals that you would be interested in. When you say, “I have got minerals in such an area”, what happens is they give you an exploration licence. An exploration licence is to enable you to go and look for this mineral. However, you take the papers to the Chief Administrative Officer. That person then introduces you to the councillors and all the local leaders that you are holding an exploration licence. That exploration licence does not entitle you to that land. No. You are there and if you are trespassing on an area and destroying some crops, you must compensate the owners. However, the land belongs to the owner. 

Now, you go there and file returns back and say, “I am able to get this.” But if you don’t get anything, just go away and leave the people’s land. If you get something, then they tell you about another requirement called a mining lease. If they give you a mining lease, you go back to the area - (Interruption)

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. These people have been in my constituency and even Iganga for four years. They come and dig pits in people’s land without covering them. When they are digging those pits, they put some funny objects which are very dangerous to our people. They even put some signposts without negotiating with the owners of the land. They will just put a signpost there making our people scared of their land being taken away.

They go to the lower leaders and they fear talking to us Members of Parliament because they know we are more informed. So, they don’t want us to talk to the local people; they instead go to them. 

Therefore, is the minister in order to show the entire country that he does not know what is happening on the ground? That these people are putting signposts without informing the owners of the land and digging up pits without even covering and compensating those people. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we would be interested in knowing a district in Uganda where this matter has been tabled in the district council; to inform everybody that we are getting a new investor for A, B, C, D. Can you table just one?

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, I am telling you exactly how the law is, because when it goes to the Chief Administrative Officer, he is supposed to lay it to the council, inform those people that; “These people are going to carry out this.” If there is an omission which they have made, then we shall do that. I also –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have been on this Floor a number of occasions on this issue. Members have complained that the so-called investors just appear with their cars and security. This is the complaint. The ideal is the law; what is the practice? Members and leaders are not informed. That is how they even take our land. When will the interests of the people of Uganda be given first priority? Tell us.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are reviewing the law as it was drafted so that it comes here and we address that if there are any lacunas. Otherwise how it is drafted, the papers are taken there and should go there. I have always been asking my staff if they go to see these areas and they tell me they have gone to Namayingo and other places to make sure these complaints are minimised.

THE SPEAKER: When is the law coming, since you are amending it?

MR PETER LOKERIS: I may not state the date but very soon. (Laughter) Yes. Maybe in one or two months, it will be here because we are still putting other issues together and we bring to you for debate so that we correct all anomalies which exist.

THE SPEAKER: By the time you come, many Ugandans will be dead. Okay honourable –(Member rose) but he has gone. (Member rose) on what? (Interjections) We have finished the matters of national importance. (Interjections) No, I had the list. Quickly close, then I invite the health minister.

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I notice that day in, day out, we raise issues which have to do with matters over which we have previously legislated or passed resolutions on as Parliament, meaning that the implementation becomes questionable.

I am of the view that you get us an interactive session with our ministers to specifically interact on service delivery so that we can raise these issues. Every time - for example, last week on Thursday, we had questions - (Interjections) - protect me, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MR KAFUUZI: I understand this is the platform but the problem is this: Last Thursday, we had questions that were supposed to be answered by several ministers. One of the questions relates to a road in my district; which question I wrote in March. We are going into October and I have had no answer.

I would like a session specifically which is interactive whether within Parliament or out of Parliament for us to raise issues regarding service delivery.

THE SPEAKER: Let us think about it. Now, let us have item No.3 – Minister of Health - Hon. Kaberuka, you are insulting the role of the Minister of Health. Okay, quickly raise your point and then the minister will come up.

4.19
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would need the Attorney-General not to engage you because this is very important. I stand here to thank you because today, I would like to tell you that your efforts - efforts of the House – have culminated into yesterday’s signing of Rukungiri-Kanungu historical road.

I thank you very much - the entire House and the works ministry  and Gen. Katumba – that yesterday, a company called China Henan International Corporation Group Company Limited signed an agreement with Government of Uganda to work on the Rukungiri-Kanungu Road; 78.5 kilometres at the amount of Shs 207,834,646,967.

Madam Speaker, why I am proudly standing here to thank you and the entire House, is that it has been a concerted effort to deliver this project. I do not know how many meetings you have held here and outside over this same problem.

Madam Speaker, my prayer on this is that the causes of delay of this project since 1988 are avoidable. Therefore, I call upon the ministry to guard against these unnecessary whistle-blowers that are in Government. And also this “Order from above” syndrome is killing the institutional order.

Madam Speaker, as we move forward to achieving our progressive goals, I would think that the tourism network should be incorporated in a plan such that we realise full potential of tourism economic progress. 

I also request that this Chinese company should respect the local content which you have championed yourself so that the people in that area can benefit.

The network to Bwindi should be expedited for the tourism sachet to be complete. I salute you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank you colleagues for this wonderful achievement. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on behalf of the House, we would like to congratulate the people of Kanungu. This road has been a perennial issue in every session in this House. Thank you, minister.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OPERATIONALISATION OF MULAGO SPECIALISED WOMEN AND NEONATAL HOSPITAL

4.23
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Madam Speaker and honourable members, allow me to thank you for giving me this opportunity to make a statement to honourable members on the operationalisation of Mulago Specialised Women’s and Neonatal Hospital. 

In the financial year 2014/2015, the Ninth Parliament of Uganda approved three loans for health infrastructure construction and rehabilitation, these were for: 

i) 	Construction of the women and neonatal hospital 
ii) 	Rehabilitation of Lower Mulago Hospital and 
iii) 	Construction of Kawempe and Kiruddu referral hospitals.

I am here to give accountability for the loan that was provided for the Women and Neonatal Hospital and to invite you all to go and inspect this hospital.

Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you for your passion for this hospital and for steering the approval of the loan at that time. Allow me to also thank the members of Parliament, especially the Ninth Parliament, that passed the loan and all the stakeholders that have supported the construction of this hospital.

As a background to the loan, by 2009 Mulago National Referral Hospital was heavily congested. All the departments experienced the congestion but the situation was worse in the women's section of delivery and management of diseases related to women.

Women were occupying all the beds, the floor and the corridors with increased rates of infection. The situation was not any better in the children's section, with three to four children sharing a bed.

In addition, the population growth rate remained high at 3.3 per cent and the fertility rate then was at 6.2 per cent according to the Uganda demographic health survey of 2006.

Available information shows that the number of deliveries increased from 20,000 in the year 2000 to 33,000 in 2011. In financial year 2013/2014, the antenatal attendance was 48,616; deliveries were 34,411 with a caesarean section rate of 23.5 per cent.

In financial year 2015/2016, antenatal attendance had risen to 60,902 deliveries with 35,071 normal deliveries and the caesarean section rate had risen to 26.8 per cent.

At the same time, the infrastructure had undergone wear and tear and renovation would not support the huge numbers. Maternal mortality at that time remained high and to date it is still high at 336 per 100,000 according to the Uganda demographic health survey 2016, compared to the global rate of 216 per 100,000 live births.

Our neonatal mortality stands at 27 per l,000 live births and it is the greatest contributor to the high childhood mortality at 54 per 100,000 live births.

A decongestion plan at that time was drawn for Mulago, which included referral facilities in all the divisions of Kampala and a separate facility for women and new-borns.

The women and new-borns Hospital will therefore help decongest Mulago National Specialised Hospital, enable women with complicated reproductive health problems to be treated and reduce referrals abroad for specialised reproductive and neonatal treatment. This is anticipated to contribute to the attainment of the health related Sustainable Development Goals

The Government of Uganda, therefore, acquired a loan to construct the hospital, procure equipment and also train a few selected health workers in specialised maternal and neonatal areas.

Construction of Mulago Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital has been completed at a cost of USD $25,148,067. It is a 450 bed capacity hospital with nine floors. The ninth floor is the executive wing with suites.

The hospital acquired equipment for highly specialised health care in the areas of imaging, including mammography, fluoroscopy, X-ray bucky machines and 4D ultrasound. I have attached an annex to my presentation showing the list of equipment. 

We also acquired laboratory equipment and a few that I will mention here include a DNA analyser, haematology and chemistry analysers, In-vitro fertilisation equipment and haemoglobin electrophoresis for sickle cell disease.

We have surgical equipment including laparoscopy, hysteroscopy, surgical sets and endoscopy and critical care equipment ventilators, defibrillators, patient monitors at a cost of USD $8,026,456.7.

The loan was also used to finance the training of a few selected health workers in specialised maternal and neonatal areas where there were skills gaps. I have equally attached a list of the health workers that were trained. 

Training was also carried out in management and clinical excellence including leadership, governance and basic computer skills.

The services to be offered by the specialised hospital have been mapped out. These include:

l. 	Reproductive medicine including assisted reproductive technology, laparoscopic and hysteroscopy surgery. Laparoscopic is where we have the pinhole surgeries.

2. 	Maternal Foetal Medicine where they will be attending to women with high risk pregnancy like diabetic mothers, sickle cell mothers, twin pregnancies and pregnancies with other complications; women who have organ transplants and women with recurrent pregnancy loss as well as in-vitro fertilisation pregnancies.

3. 	Uro-gynaecological services which address the urinary area of the women including ureteric re-implantation, complex fistula surgeries and virginal hysterectomies, reconstructive surgery following Female Genital Mutilation and advanced reconstructive gynaecological surgery.

4. 	Gynaecological-oncology services. These are cancers to do with women that include Cervical, vaginal, endometrial, ovarian and vulvar cancers. 

5. 	The last is the Advanced Neonatal Medical and Surgical Services.

Madam Speaker, the hospital will be financed through monies appropriated by Parliament but we shall also be charging for services offered. A total of Shs 41,437,282,341 is required to operationalise the hospital. Staffing will be as per structures of Referral Hospitals and this has already been worked on.

I have given a breakdown in a table form showing the financial requirement for the hospital where wage is about Shs 8.4 billion, which is 75 per cent of the annual wage catering for the remaining three quarters. I have looked at three quarters because we have already completed a quarter of the financial year.

Recurrent non-wage requires a total of Shs 22 billion. We propose to get Shs 5.9 billion from Government of Uganda and to collect about Shs 15 billion as non-tax revenue. This will also cover for medicine, sundries, specialised staff training and research and support additional expatriates to the hospital.

The third is capital development where we propose about Shs 1.2 billion from Government, Shs 12.7 billion from non-tax revenue giving a total of Shs 13.8 billion. Therefore, the total required for the hospital is Shs 44,437,282,341.

Madam Speaker, I have also attached a Pay Policy since I have mentioned that we shall be charging for services. Regarding this, we have classified the services as Standard, VIP and VVIP services. This does not stop anyone from opting for any of the levels. Anyone is free if they can afford the VVIP, the VIP or the Standard sections; you choose wherever you want to go. 

The clinical services are offered to all patients at all levels irrespective of payment; it wil1 be the same. The difference will be in accommodation, patient welfare and other non-clinical and support services.

The charges were arrived at after examining the costs of similar services within the country and where possible, a comparison with similar services abroad. I have attached a copy of the Pay Policy and I have also included a column, which gives a comparison of services that are being offered within the country. On average – (hon. Julius Ochen rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you allow the minister to finish? She is making a statement.

DR ACENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On average the standard rates are slightly equivalent to 60 per cent of the charges in other hospitals. This means that our charges are much less than the hospitals in the country including Nakasero, International Hospital Kampala (IHK) and many others.

The charges for standard services will be used as a basis for increment for VIP and VVIP services where we shall increase the rate for the VIP by 25 per cent and 50 per cent for the VVIP respectively. However, Diagnostic (Imaging and Laboratory), Intensive Care Unit and Neonatal Intensive Care Unit services will be the same across all classifications.

There will be a waiver system for patients unable to pay for the services. A system for waiver will be put in place. It was recommended that a committee be set up to assess the eligibility of the patients seeking a waiver. The committee will comprise a head of clinical services at the hospital (Deputy Director), a nurse in-charge of the unit, as I have highlighted on the speciality services; a medical social worker and the head of administration. This committee will develop guidelines on the eligibility criteria.

Staff working in the facility who require specialised services in the facility will be given a waiver – these are health workers - except for the In-Vitro Fertilisation (IVF) services.
 
Refugees requiring services at the facility will be paid for by the supporting agencies such as United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) and Office of the Prime Minister. Foreigners will be charged 25 per cent more for services.

Madam Speaker, I have included this because we have been receiving requests to treat refugees and we have been doing this free of charge. However, for this particular unit, we have proposed that they should be paid for.

Patients accessing services should be referred patients from our referral facilities except for those that are exclusively offered at Mulago Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital such as IVF and Laparoscopic surgery. This statement means that for one to access the hospital, they should be referred from the other facilities. 

We have developed a communication strategy to promote the services at the facility. Some of the strategies suggested for marketing the facility will include; hosting teams from referring institutions so that they are aware of this facility. We shall also host stakeholders like the insurance organisations that provide medical and health insurance cover so that they are conversant with what is in this hospital. 

The hospital was opened to the public yesterday, 17 September 2018 and as given by His Excellency the President, free services will be offered to the people until Independence Day. For all patients who started reporting yesterday up to Independence Day, the services are free of charge. Allow me to report that we have already received several patients including those who want In-Vitro Fertilisation. We have received over 20 who want this.

I have given a breakdown of source of funding for the hospital because Mulago Specialised Hospital is not yet open. Mulago has been supporting Kawempe-Kiruddu and Upper Mulago and it will also support the women hospital.

We propose to collect non-tax revenue of about Shs 28.9 billion and we also propose that in addition to the Shs 8.3 billion Mulago National Referral budget, we receive a supplementary budget of Shs 7.2 billion giving us a total of Shs 44.4 billion to facilitate this hospital.

This is to inform you that construction has been concluded and handover to the ministry took place on 13 September 2018 presided over by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister accompanied by Cabinet members. 

Equipping and training of a few selected staff has been undertaken; 75 personnel in management and governance and 33 specialist clinical services.

Steps to operationalise the hospital are ongoing. It is my humble appeal that you take off time together with the honourable members to visit and tour the hospital and assess it for value for money. You will also look at the infrastructure for yourself to see the accountability that I am giving you on paper.

The hospital was opened yesterday, as I have informed you, and we are utilising this week to inform the public about the facility. It will be commissioned as part of the Independence Day celebrations between the 5th to the 7th October 2018. I beg to report.
 
THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister of Health. First, I would like to pay tribute to the National Women’s Council because this idea began with them and then it came here. At that time, we had a Committee on Social Services and we took it up. We would like to thank Government for responding. It has been a long journey but there is now a lot of hope for the people of Uganda. So, the finance minister, thank you for providing the money - (Laughter) - and minister for health, thank you for supervising until the facility has been completed. Let us have just a few comments.

THE SPEAKER: Can we do two minutes for each of us? Let us start with Bundibugyo.

4.43
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to commend the health minister that has just presented a report on the women antenatal hospital. It is the first of its kind in the country. We are really grateful. We thank the Government and all those who helped to acquire the loan. Now those are the efforts and the fruits which we are all ready to enjoy.

I am happy to note that, among the services which are going to be offered, there are also those of reconstructive surgeries which we lacked in the country. My prayer is that people should get more sensitised so that they are aware of the services available. Of course, including handling the different types of cancers which affect the women and which are common these days. 

Also this is going to reduce on the burden of travelling abroad to get the same services. Above all, my prayers are that, we need to get the Shs 44 billion you were talking about, to acquire the necessary equipment and all that is required. This will enable us to maintain the facility and put it to good use. Then, the money that the patients will be –(Member timed out.)

4.45
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend Government, Parliament and all other stakeholders for this service which we are going to get. The minister raised the issue of clients being generated by referral. We need to retrospectively evaluate the status of our health centres.

In many of the health centres, we do not have gynaecologists. If they can address that, this would mean that many of the rural people will also be able to benefit from this service - that is what the women of this country have been yarning for.

The minister said that the charges for the specialised services are going to be low. Madam Speaker, we are going to be the contact persons as usual. Our voters will first call us in order to know the rates. Therefore, I would request that, as she has given us feedback, she should come and tell us the rates as well. It may not be specific, but averagely for each of the services - if the rates have been attached, that is fine.

In addition to the above, she talked about the waivers that will be availed. Waivers have often been abused. Therefore, when the committee is constituted, we need to have the list of the members –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also thank the minister for the statement that she has made before us. I have one or two concerns that I would like to bring forth. The first concern that I would like to bring forward to the health minister is about the seriousness of the ministry. Looking at the SDGs, I would like to read it verbatim, “By 2030, reduce the global maternal mortality ratio to less than 70 per 100,000 live births.”

The minister has just given us a scenario here, that currently the situation is quite worrying. We are having 336 women dying, out of every 100,000 live births. I would like to find out how soon we are going to reduce this - focussing on the SDGs, we were targeting that by 2030, we should actually have less than 70 women dying due to child mortality.

I see that our number is still so high, that we may not be able to meet these SDGs targets. Looking at all the strategies - you spent resources – we got a loan. You have had specialised training for nurses and doctors on this maternal health, but I think that the biggest challenge that we have as a country, whenever we train these people, we never bond them. 

When they get opportunities to go out of the country, we do not even look at it that we actually got a loan in order to have them trained. They just go yet we wasted resources in their training to get these specialised skills. As long as we do not facilitate them, and remunerate them well, they will always go to other countries where they will be paid well. 

We just need assurance from the ministry that these nurses and the doctors that we have given this specialised training will actually remain within the country and be able to –(Member timed out.)

4.49
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for this statement. I also would like to thank Government and Parliament for appropriating this money to build a women’s hospital.

However, I would like to get assurance from the honourable minster about maintaining the equipment and also the hospital. Honourable members, you all know the poor culture of maintenance in this country, and therefore, I would like the minister to assure me that this equipment will be properly maintained.

Secondly, it is very good to have these hospitals and many more health facilities, but building without human resource for health will be wasted. It is not enough to have good buildings. It is equally important to have the health workers available. We all know that the poor remuneration in this country for health workers is a very big concern.

Recruitment and retention of health workers in this country is wanting. Therefore, I would like to call upon Government to look seriously into the issue of remuneration for our health workers. Otherwise, we shall have a very beautiful hospital without these highly specialised workers.

Lastly, my colleague has talked about the high maternal mortality rate in this country. Honourable minster, we still lose 15 women every day in child birth. They die from pregnancy related causes. Therefore, we need to look seriously into reducing maternal mortality in this country and I feel that – (Member timed out.)

4.52
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for the statement. There is a saying which goes that “health is wealth.” I notice that in the statement presented by the minister, the facility is an all-pay one. What worries me is, what happens to the citizens’ right to health, especially through free Government medical services? This is a specialised referral unit and I have noticed, for instance where it is indicated that a plain X-ray will cost Shs 30,000. 

In my district Tororo, that is the cost that private facilities are charging for similar X-ray services and the people there, the peasants, cannot afford it. When somebody is referred to the hospital and the hospital asks the person to do an X-ray at Shs 30,000, it is you, the Member of Parliament, to foot that bill. If you do not, the person just goes back to the village. 

I am seeing a situation here; supposing a patient is referred from Tororo Hospital to come to a specialised unit here and the fellow does not have money. I am aware that there is a waiver system but that does not give guarantee to the poor patient that he/she will get the waiver. There is no guarantee and that may create fear in the patients so we may miss out on Ugandans getting – (Member timed out.)

4.53
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the report. I, however, have the following to say: 

This is a specialised hospital where one has to access services through referrals. I would like to know whether most of these hospitals in Uganda have the required specialists who can pay attention to those various health conditions such that they are able to refer. This is because if these specialists do not exist in other regions, how would those people with these kinds of cases access these services?

I have a problem with the costs here. When you look at 60 per cent of the costs to be charged, looking at it in terms of the private hospitals; the private hospitals are private in the sense that the buildings are private, the equipment’s private, their salaries are being paid privately but this is a Government institution where the building is constructed by Government through law, the workers are going to be paid by Government; the equipment is got by Government. Isn’t this charge too high? For instance, consultation here is said to be Shs 50,000 and this is the same consultation in a private institution. What sets this apart as a government institution?

They are saying at some level, you can pay about Shs 100,000. I know of hospitals where you go, if you want to pay ordinary consultation, you pay Shs 50,000 but if you want, what they call express, you pay Shs 100,000. So, what is the difference here?

When you look at antenatal services, you go there, you are supposed to pay Shs 890,000 – (Member timed out.)

4.55
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate the Ministry of Health and the Government of Uganda upon completion of this facility. I believe it will go a long way in attainment of the Sustainable Development Goal three where we shall have less than 70 mothers dying per 100,000 who give birth. 

For the past six months, we have been requesting the Ministry of Health to bring the maternal mortality audits. I remember in the Ninth Parliament, it was one of the requirements; that after a year, we should have these audits brought to Parliament so that we can deliberate on them. Therefore, I request you look into that, especially now that we even have such facilities to help us move towards attainment of SDG three.

About the services the hospital is going to offer, we have the in-vitro fertilisation. As a country, we do not have a law to govern such a service at the moment. In future, we are going to have issues of, for instance, parenthood. What happens to someone who will donate the sperms? What happens to the remainder of the sperms if one has been utilised? Does the donor have the right of fatherhood? In future, the children might also want to know who the donor parents were. We need to look into such things. As Africans, we also need to know who these donors are because we do not want to promote incest. 

In case some of these issues are not clearly brought out in the law, they might sabotage the services which are going to be offered by such a facility. This hospital is going to be a referral – (Member timed out.)

4.57
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity given to me. I would like to thank the minister for her good report and at the same time, I would like to thank Parliament and Government for having utilised the loan very well.

Now that we have received this facility, Government is going to benefit a lot because we have been having patients from Uganda going to India and paying a lot of money there but now we are going to be paying some little money, much as we need also to look at it. 

My colleagues have talked about the consultation fee of Shs 50,000 which is the same money you pay when you go to private hospitals. It would be better if you could reduce that amount of money.

I would like to inform the minister that it would be better that you consider Ugandans when you are recruiting people to work in that specialised hospital of Mulago. We have young people who are specialised, well trained, well experienced but they are on the streets. It would be better that when they come, you consider them without any hindrances.

Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you again because when this loan was passed in the Ninth Parliament, you used that time and you used this Parliament to allow our people to get that money and now we are enjoying the facility. I would like to thank the ministry and Government at large. I beg to submit.

4.59
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her report and also for inviting us to visit the facility. 

The minister has mentioned in this report that patients accessing the facility should be referred from other hospitals. I think there should be a provision to allow individuals who are able to pay, to walk in and they are treated. We should also keep in mind that these other hospitals do not have gynaecologists.

Another issue is to do with the amount of money that you have put here that you are going to be charging these patients. It appears you have only considered Kampala people. There should be a provision for people coming from upcountry to be able to access this treatment. After all, the facilities have been established using taxpayers’ money and we hope the ordinary person should benefit – not only those who have been going to India and these other countries to access these facilities. They should be purely for the ordinary person because there are many people who have not succeeded in getting children. We hope, by establishing this hospital, they should benefit.

5.01
MS FLORENCE NAMBOZO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the Government for the work well done. We thank you, Madam Speaker, because so many times, it is you who has been ensuring that Government works the way it is supposed to work as you help us deliberate here.

I was looking at the table showing financial requirements for the hospital and the annual budget for the hospital is Shs 44.4 billion and already, the minister showed us that we need a supplementary or one that has already been given to them of Shs 7 billion. Madam Speaker, we are already in the second quarter of the financial year, how is - do we require this Shs 7 billion as a supplementary budget for the hospital to run? 

Secondly, I am looking at the specialised doctors recruited - one of the specialised doctors is called Dr Kazibwe - I think he is now heading Kawempe Hospital - how are we working out to show that what we are presenting here is true? Thank you very much.

5.02
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to emphasize the issue of affordability, knowing very well that in most cases, we have faced the challenge of patients in our constituencies demanding that members of Parliament contribute in order for them to access some of the services. 

As the Government of Uganda – when you talk of HIV prevention – we are now looking at HIV pre-testing. In this report, the minister said that they will charge Shs 25,000 just for HIV screening yet in other facilities, including the private ones, it is free of charge. Looking at other tests, it is going to be very expensive compared to some of these health facilities we have around such as Rubaga and Mengo hospitals.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I pray that we look into the cost effectiveness of this facility. Thank you.

5.04
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for presenting this statement and for supervising the work done in that facility. 

When we visited that facility as the Committee on Health, they told us that there was a component of telemedicine. However, in this report, the minister has not commented about it. I do not know how it disappeared. If it is there, have we already found partners whom we shall work with in order to have that dream realised?

Secondly, where the facility is - I remember there were nurses’ hostels, which were demolished in order to establish that hospital. Therefore, how are we going to accommodate our staff to have that facility operational full time?

Madam Speaker, I also have to re-echo the fact that this facility has been built using a loan and all Ugandans are supposed to pay this loan. Therefore, when it is accessed by the rich only, I feel cheated. I pray that we consider cost-sharing instead of saying it is fully on the burden of the patient. Thank you.

5.06
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Government for this achievement. This facility is the first of its kind in this country. I would also like to thank you, Madam Speaker and God, because this has happened during your leadership. (Applause) This is wonderful!

Madam Speaker, this is a national referral hospital and I presume that all patients that go there, unless otherwise, should have been referred from other health facilities. However, I am seeing a scenario where people are going to be referred from down in Kyankwanzi or from Kamuli but they get stranded around the hospital because they cannot afford this consultation fee. Therefore, since it is a national referral hospital, there should not be need of asking patients who have come when they have the medical referral form to the facility.

Secondly, when you look at the costs - I have been looking at the simplest and a life-saving procedure such as the dilatation and curettage, which is a minor procedure done to help somebody who has had an incomplete abortion to evacuate out the contents of the uterus. This happens majorly because of the numerous teenage pregnancies that we have in Uganda and it requires Shs 250,000 in addition to the Shs 50,000 for consultation. Now for a young person who is in danger of losing life to be treated at a Government national referral hospital at that cost is not an easy thing.

When I look at it, the caesarean procedure done to help a mother deliver costing Shs 2 million - the people of Kyankwanzi and indeed those of Kamuli shall not benefit from this facility. In fact, those who have been able to go to India and other big hospitals in Uganda are the only ones who are going to enjoy yet every Ugandan, including my people of Kyankwanzi, will be sweating to pay the loan. 

I humbly request Government to introduce the national health insurance scheme. All people are – (Member timed out.)

5.08
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the minister for the report and the Government of Uganda together with Parliament, for having appropriated this money to put up this infrastructure. This is a very important facility for the country; a specialised hospital to treat Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, many Ugandans have been going abroad, to India, Kenya, South Africa and other countries for specialised treatment. It is very important to have this facility here to help Ugandans save taxpayers’ money. 

My worry is on the pay policy. The minister has mentioned that Ugandans are going to be paying some money, which is okay. However, my worry is that the money is a little bit higher than a common Ugandan can afford to access the services. I would be happier and more comfortable to revise the figures mentioned by the minister for Ugandans to access these services –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the phone rings, it vibrates into these microphones. Whose phone is that?

MR TUMURAMYE: Madam Speaker, there are many health facilities in this country, which have been built using taxpayers’ money, including those in our constituencies. In Kashongi County, where I come from, there is a health centre –(Member timed out.)

5.10
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, like those who spoke before me, I would also like to thank the Minister of Health, the Government and you, for making this establishment of the ultra-modern hospital for the women to be realised. Congratulations to Government and everybody for that.

The central issue of concern that has been raised is about affordability, especially for the women from the rural areas. The minister told us that the ninth floor of this hospital is going to be a private wing and for the paying patients; those who can afford. 

However, the woman from Kyankwanzi, from deep down in Busongora in Kasese and in the rural areas of Koboko may not afford it. I wish, therefore, to suggest that, first, access to medical care should be automatic without asking for money. Any patient referred to this hospital must first be provided with medical attention before asking for money.

Secondly, those who will not be able to afford completely should be subsidised by these people on the ninth floor – they should be the ones to pay for those who cannot afford. I am sure Government can make that arrangement possible for those who cannot afford to receive medical attention. I thank you.
	
5.12
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for giving me an opportunity. I would like to also thank the minister for this statement, which is a proper accountability. I wish all the ministers reported like this, we would understand the future. 

First of all, despite all the good things that have been done, I am worried that the people of Ngora, especially those who come from the village will not benefit from this facility. In Teso region, the rate of poverty has increased by 17 per cent, which is a big percentage. Given the available figures here, I am sure my people will be locked from accessing this facility because it is a loan; everyone is going to pay. In fact, this is a technical way of discriminating Ugandans, especially the poor. Madam Speaker, the minister should know that we are here because of the poor people. If they did not exist, I am confident that none of us would be here.

Madam Speaker, I am also worried because the minister said they have trained some few health workers. I think a selective team from within Kampala city was trained. I do not know whether those from Kamuli or Ngora and other places were also trained. I am really concerned about this issue.

Madam Speaker, as a Member of Parliament –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I have seen all of you. You will all speak because it is an important matter.

5.14
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am extremely happy about this exciting statement we have received this afternoon. I hope that the excitement we have expressed will be carried forward to the implementation level so that we benefit. I also hope that it is not going to be benefit that will be received by a certain class of people only.
Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that several ministries have made several exciting plans like today. Unfortunately, when it reaches the implementation level, you do not see what excited you. It seems as if you were making a drama and now facing the reality. That is why sometimes things appear to be like the way they are. It is very unfortunate.

To even make matters worse, where money is involved, it makes the entire issue complicated. First of all, the collection of that money is going to be problematic. Secondly, classifying the people who will be receiving the services is another problem. Therefore, I would like to urge that we should have classes just like the Government has different levels of Government; we have the Central Government here –(Member timed out.)

5.16
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the Members on this side said that if it were not because of women, all of us would not be here. I think that there are certain things we cannot compromise on especially, issues to do with the health of women. We must all stand up to say that women must have their rights; whether they have money or not.
	
Madam Speaker, the minister has stated the process in terms of referrals for someone to be able to be admitted to the Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital. The assumption is that when you are referred to the Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital, you should have the capacity to pay, which is not true, Madam Speaker. Otherwise, in the referral system, whether you are poor or rich, as long as your case cannot be handled at the lower level, you should be referred to the facility.
	
Therefore, the question Parliament should be asking is: Among the specialised staff, who would be working there and how will Government motivate them? That is a fundamental matter.

The second question relates to the issue of covering the different regions of this country – I have looked at the list of the staff who have so far attained training. However, you will realise that there are staff - (Member timed out.)
	
5.18
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement she has made and the Government, most especially for this loan. Otherwise, we approve several loans but we do not see the outcome. However, for this particular loan, I think we should appreciate the ministry and Government for work well done.

I would like to request the minister to tell this House clearly how this women’s hospital is going to curb the rate of maternal mortality and neonatal, aware that she has appreciated that it is still high. How will this specialised facility help us? Otherwise, it looks like we are coming from fire to a frying pan. Imagine a poor woman has been referred from Lira Regional Referral Hospital to this facility but she cannot afford to pay and as result, she is not attended to and ends up dying. I do not know how the minister is going to address this area.

The minister said also that Mulago Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital will decongest Mulago National Specialised Hospital and reduce the number of people seeking for medical care abroad. Yes, we appreciate it. However, I would like to ask the minister whether she has given us the number of those who used to access this facility abroad as compared to those who have had it in Uganda? Why can’t we help these people so that we reduce the neonatal and maternal mortality?

 
Madam Speaker, on the issue of fistula – it is the underage girls –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think that is an important point. Could you complete it?

MS JOY ATIM: On the issue of fistula, it is the underage girls who have been defiled but cannot push their babies and end up with fistula. In what the minister has stated, you will realise that in this specialised women facility, they are going to be charged a lot of money. In most cases, our children are taken to Mbarara for treatment and yet the cost of transport and feeding is expensive. 

Madam Speaker, we thought this facility was established to rescue our girls. I note that it is not going to help us. Now, how shall we help our girls and women in this country?

The Pap smear is being charged highly. In fact, the major procedures cost about Shs 2.5 million. Are we saying that the procedures were not done in Mulago such that we can include it to be done in the specialised facility? If we continue like this, the doctors will fold their hands and not work in the Mulago National Specialised Hospital but handle patients from Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital because they will be paid here. Can the minister address this matter before it is late? Thank you.

5.21
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to what the rest of the Members in this House have submitted. I also would like to thank the minister for this fantastic presentation on this facility that has excited most of us when we heard about it, before we went deep into the issues around it.

In this country, we have categories of facilities, for example, we have public facilities but with some private wings. We have purely private facilities too. We have private, non-profit facilities but here comes an opportunity of a public facility.

I would like to learn from the minister whether this is a public-private facility. When one looks at the services that are going to be provided in this facility, compare to the services in the other facilities run by our friends in the private sector and non-profit facilities, for example, Vesicovaginal Fistula (VVF), you realise that they try their best to fundraise and provide a free service - we have services for counselling.

I have been overwhelmed by seeing a fee of Shs 40,000 attached to counselling services in a public facility. HIV screening in a public facility is being charged and here is our President coming in with the first – (Member timed out.) 

5.23
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to also add my voice in thanking the minister for bringing this very important statement to the House. 

I will start with what I would call discrimination, which is now real anyway. When I read about and saw this the other time, I remembered some young girl, just 21 years, who was in Amuru and tried to go to St Mary’s Hospital, Lacor, which is almost one of the best in the region but lost her life and left the baby behind just because of something very small. We have also heard cases where hospitals such as Kawempe and Kiruddu are struggling with simple things like having oxygen, which has cost so many lives. 

My only challenge, which is the clarification I would like to seek from the minister, is whether we should not prioritise, as a country, these Very Important Persons (VIPs) or Very Very Important Persons (VVIPs) when it comes to such normal facilities that also handle the common man and woman.

That takes me to this issue - Madam Speaker, as a country, I think we need to fast-track the national insurance policy so that if my mother in Amuru is referred to this specialised hospital, the insurance policy can take care of her hospital bills. Thank you.

5.25
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to join the rest in thanking the Minister of Health for bringing this update. I think it is encouraging to Parliament because when we receive updates on such projects, it is good.

I would like to start by questioning the basis for the 25 per cent for foreigners, over and above what you charge nationals. I have observed that the figures you have quoted for nationals are a discount of 50 to about 70 per cent of what is being charged on the market. Now, why should a foreigner come here for a service that is Shs 10 million and only be charged between Shs 5 to Shs 7.5 million? Why not 100 per cent or even more? I would like to get clarification on why you plan to charge foreigners only 25 per cent over what you will be charging Ugandans.   

Secondly, it appears to me that we are going to have a hospital within a hospital because this is a specialised hospital but it is also under Mulago National Referral Hospital. That is why Parliament appropriates for Mulago National Referral Hospital but I notice that you are also requesting us to appropriate money to this unit.  Therefore, do we have two entities operating in one? You can clarify.

Lastly, who developed the policy on costing and so what will happen after one year? Who will have the ultimate authority of revising these charges?  For now, we can go for these rates but what will happen when need for adjustment arises due to inflation? Do we have a committee? Will it the minister with the prerogative - who is going to be revising these charges from time to time? If the basis is on the standards that are in the market, supposing the –(Member timed out.)

5.27
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also thank the minister for presenting this statement. However, in a similar vein, I would like to interest the minister in the bigger picture of the objective of setting up this facility. It is good you have said that you have in mind the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). If that is the case, is it possible for you to draw back and see your modus operandi, in terms of achieving those SDGs?

You know, the majority of our people have little access to these facilities because majority of them are poor. Your objective is actually to realise the SDGs but how are you going to achieve them when you are commercialising the operation of this health facility? I think you need to get a bigger picture to guide you, in terms of how you should move ahead during the operationalisation of this facility.

Secondly, we are moving to almost 100 per cent liberalisation, for the simple fact that most of the entities being managed by the Government always have problems. I want the minister to satisfy herself and also us on whether this facility is going to be 100 per cent managed effectively. If it is not, then would the minister consider Public-Private Partnership (PPPs) arrangement for this facility to be effectively managed?

Thirdly, I would like to draw my experience from Gulu –(Member timed out.)

5.29
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for updating us. Honourable minister, your minister of state was here last week and said that doctors are always absent in hospitals because of low pay. In other words, she was officially telling the doctors that they can stay away because of little pay. Therefore, how are you going to ensure that these doctors do not run away to other places where there is money that they are seeing after all, the facility is based on referral? If these doctors are not in those upcountry hospitals, who is going to refer these patients to this facility?

Honourable minister, you are aware that this Government has so many buildings, which were built 10 years ago. By that time, you were at the centre of it, I remember. They were built 10 years ago as health centres II. Those buildings are just there idle yet while Kampala people would be enjoying this facility, villagers would also be enjoying those small facilities but your ministry is not taking care of those small facilities? All the money is being put here in Kampala. The minister of finance should not engage you –(Laughter)– honourable minister, how are you going to ensure that these facilities, the health centres II – (Interruption)

5.32
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also take this opportunity to thank the minister for the statement. I would like to also congratulate Government for putting such a great facility. I think now this medical tourism will stop. The people who travel to India, USA and Canada to get such facilities can now access them here.

Madam Speaker, for that facility to serve Ugandans well, the human resource must be there. We have seen that – You know, the last time I travelled to Kenya, a Kenyan nurse actually earns as much as a Ugandan doctor. How are you going to improve that? It is because now, if I see a good job that will earn me more in Kenya, I will go to Kenya. I will not stay here. How are we going to stop that?

Also, our accommodation for health workers is in a very pathetic state. You find somebody works in a very wonderful hospital but where he or she sleeps is very pathetic. So, I think the Government should also look at the accommodation for health workers. 

Secondly, I am suggesting that the Government introduces such a hospital in all the four regions of Uganda so that all Ugandans can access such a facility. 

Another thing I wanted to say is the issue of –(Member timed out.)

5.34
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. On the waiver system, that is a good idea. I pray the committee will come up with affordable figures so that rural women can also be able to have reconstructive surgery. Hon. Joy Atim has just brought that out clearly; these women are so desperate in their communities. They are stigmatised because they suffer urine leakage. They really need that kind of treatment.

Madam Speaker, the minister has just told us that the facility was handed over to Government on 13 September 2018 and patients started getting treatment on 17 September 2018. 

Madam Speaker, I looked at annex 2 and I saw there is some contradiction. Under annex 2, there are some items which are under installation. I wonder - patients started getting treatment on the 17 September 2018. For example, the incubator is not yet ready. I would imagine that some mothers had gone to deliver and some of them had premature babies. I do not know how you took care of such babies.

Besides, Madam Speaker, don’t you think the ministry is actually preparing a legal battle ground between Government and the contractor? This contractor has not yet finished the installation of some item. Now, I would like to find out from the minister; do you think this contractor, after he or she has already handed over the facility, you will be able to continue with those other incomplete activities?

Finally, Madam Speaker, on supporting the –(Member timed out.)

5.36
MS SARAH WEKOMBA (Independent, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for the statement. However, I find it challenging when the minister says that they trained a few health workers to handle patients in the hospital and they have spent a lot of money in this training. With the Committee on Local Government, we have moved to areas where they trained staff that are not qualified in that position and they have spent a lot of money. At the end of it all, the staff are even running away and Ugandans are not benefitting from the training. 

I also would like to find out from the minister - she said the trained staff are so few and they are going to stay in Uganda. Since you are paying them very little money compared to other countries, don’t you think these very few trained health workers are going to seek greener pastures and leave Ugandans with no treatment? You are the very minister who came here telling Ugandans that you are going to bring in Cuban doctors. 

So, I think we are still going to undergo the same – that these health workers you have trained are going to move out of Uganda and then, Ugandans will have to again face the same challenge. You have trained the few; how about these other health facilities that we have in other parts of –(Member timed out.)

5.38
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayiku County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to once again congratulate the minister and Government upon delivering this facility. I think the invitation to go and tour this facility should not be taken lightly because it is one way of appreciating value for money. There are many ministers here for whom we have approved loans. They have never come on the Floor here to invite us to go and see what they have delivered with that money. Therefore, we must congratulate the minister and also take the invitation seriously.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the minister mentioned other facilities that were constructed under this loan. She mentioned Kiruddu- Programme; it may not be the loan but she talked about Kiruddu and Kawempe referral hospitals. I just want to point out the quality of work. It is because the way Kiruddu Referral Hospital is at the moment, with sewage flowing across the road and inconveniencing the neighbours – I think for a hospital in the vicinity of residences is unhealthy. Therefore, the minister must provide for us a response on what plan they are undertaking to curb that situation.

For the Kawempe one; recently we saw the roof gave way. So, has the ministry undertaken to ensure that quality of work in these other facilities is to standard just the way the facility in Mulago has been constructed?

Last but not least, I would like to emphasise the issue of the welfare of the staff. I have been to Mulago; the nurses are sleeping in flowing sewage. Some of them have to improvise sacks to sleep in. How do you expect a nurse who is sleeping in a sack to attend to you –(Member timed out.)

5.40
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to appreciate the minister for the report and coming out with our women hospital. I was among the Members of Parliament who went to Kenya on the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. We were able to visit the women hospital in Nairobi but it is a little bit different from what I am hearing from the minister. It is because in Nairobi, everything is free. 

So, I am wondering whether this is a public women hospital or a private one. It is because if you look at the prices here, Madam Speaker, for caesarean, Nsambya Hospital charges about Shs 800,000 and yet Mulago is going to charge Shs 2 million. For In Vitro Fertilization (IVF), there are so many women who are dying to give birth and yet they are charging Shs 13 million. So, what is the difference? How will it benefit these poor women? Like women from Pader; I have so many of them. Some of them are even asking for local medicine so that they can give birth.

So, the ministry should come out clean and tell us whether this is a private or Government facility. I thought it was constructed for all women in Uganda to benefit. If possible, we would include women who face domestic violence; some of these women cannot afford anything; that could be one of the centres they would run to. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.42
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I feel very sad when I stand on this Floor of Parliament to listen to legitimate elected leaders discussing contradictory positions which are noncompliant to the UN Declaration on health.

Madam Speaker, the statement made by the minister this afternoon here, is an abomination to this country. We are signatories to the UN and health issues and human rights issues. There is no way this country can do a deliberate discrimination on health in this country and Members of Parliament who are legitimately elected sit here and take a position on this matter.

If even our women and children in health centres II and IV across the country are dying because they cannot afford, and the Parliament of Uganda goes to borrow a loan to build a facility that must benefit a few people who have money in their pockets at the expense of the taxpayers -I will lead a process here to object to the question of payment in this facility. I object it. I would call upon Ugandans to know this is injustice put on them. I will not accept this -(Member timed out.)

5.44
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the Government for the facility. However, the Government has some challenges of planning for operational and maintenance costs. Usually some staff of these facilities - when you check out the way they work, you can hardly identify them from the patients who go to the facilities.

Not until when Government tries to look into the issue of underfunding these facilities such that it doesn’t create unnecessary anxiety, that is when these facilities will be meaningful to the society. I thank you.

5.45
COL. FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Thank you very much Madam Speaker. At times when we are sitting in this House, I am reminded of a muhaya hunter who succeeded with a hunt. When he brought the animal, he told the wife otakyumba, otajokya ngisange ehiire. Don’t cook it nor roast it but I want it ready. We want better facilities, we want to maintain the staff very well but we are also against payment yet we know Ministry of Health is still underfunded. Therefore, what solution as Parliament are we giving to ministry of health?

May I, therefore, suggest that instead of adding another chapter in the book of Lamentation, can we indeed advise the ministry on how they can raise the money to meet these facilities, maintain them, and pay the doctors such that our poor women can access those facilities without paying? Thank you.

5.46
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to differ 180 degrees from my colleague hon. Ochen and thank the Government for putting up the facility; and remind colleagues that this is a specialised facility and not a normal facility to be a referral like the minister said for those patients who will have complications that national referral cannot handle then they will be referred to Mulago. This is the spirit in which we should understand it.

However, secondly, is to raise the attention of the minister. The consideration for waiver in terms of payments for services by patients, needs to be managed very well because its practicability is going to become difficult in the way you segregate on who has capacity to pay and who does not have capacity to pay for the services.

Surprisingly, I see the committee proposed to consider the waiver of fees for patients being headed by the head of clinical services of the hospital. When you have very few technical staff like these, you don’t want to waste the time of a doctor of this calibre into negotiating issues of fees and waivers of fees. Let us take a decision as hospital on whether people will pay a minimum fee or will not pay at all. They take that than considering of waiving and not because it is not going to become practical.

Thirdly, I would like to suggest to the Government and the ministry about building capacity for the specialised medics that you require working in this hospital. We do not have so many gynaecologists or specialised people in the areas mentioned here. I think –(Member timed out.)

5.48
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, the most important thing in any business is human resource. We have seen in this country as Ugandans, we are very poor in maintaining our human resource. 

My colleague hinted on it. Every time we train well qualified doctors, if you move to the neighbouring countries, the majority are doctors from Uganda. We do not know how to motivate our medical personnel.

Honourable minister, you need to put it at the back of your mind that the few doctors who are trained using this particular loan- we need to get a way of maintaining and retaining them at Mulago hospital by paying them well, motivating and letting them love their work.

Secondly, I don’t know the criteria the minister used in comparing the cost. If you look at the list of cost critically on page 9, you find that the HIV viral load at Mulago is going to be at Shs 150,000 and outside market is also Shs 150,000. Taking into consideration that what we have in Mulago, is Government facilities. Outside markets are paying rent, buying drugs yet here we are using our own drugs being bought using taxpayers’ money. Therefore, you have to tell us the criteria you used in this particular comparison because the differences are very small. Thank you.

5.50
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and the minister for that eloquent submission and also the President and your able initiative. I would like to address myself to three aspects. As much as health is human right, it is very important that we try to place it under our local perspective. 

And importantly, I would like to just put the three As: Affordability, Accessibility and Availability. When you talk about specialisation, it will mean that we might have to think outside of what we have in terms of human resource capability. Now, there are a lot of imaginations clinically in a hospital like this one we have to probably upgrade our human resource capabilities. That means we will have to focus more on research so that as we are in the laboratories the health workers know that investigation will be required and that could also require upgraded training that match with new areas for investigations. I would like to see whether this Government could -(Member timed out)

5.53	
MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to add my voice to what my colleagues have already said. I thank the Government of Uganda for supporting the construction of this specialised women’s hospital. 

I wonder whether the Ministry of Health carried out a survey to come up with these prices that have been tagged for the services to be rendered by this hospital. Are the services encouraging the patients to accept referrals or discouraging?

You might find that these prices are higher compared to the prices that are offered by other private hospitals around; therefore failing the operation of our national hospital.

Can the ordinary person afford? For example, in Karamoja, people are referred to Mulago but they are left without services because they cannot afford the prices that are given to them or maybe sometimes they might be told that the drug is not in the hospital. They end up going away without the services because they cannot afford.

There are very many women who shared their experiences related to reproductive -(Member timed out)

5.55
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice in thanking and commending the ministry for delivering a very important product for the women fraternity. This has been a long desired achievement it will deliver services that we have been receiving from elsewhere.

We should also encourage the ministry to move further to see that other services that Ugandans have been receiving from abroad are equally available here.

I would like to support the ministry for charging costs for service delivery because we have to maintain the hospital facility, motivate the staff. If we say that it is free of charge it will be a disservice. They must find the best way to balance to ensure that the poor citizens get access. They must also see that the services will help to address the need that is wide in this society especially in many women who are suffering.

Now that we are aware that reproductive health is a right, there are many people who are in very inaccessible places who would equally love to benefit from these services; how are they going to get them? How are the women of Maracha District going to access these services right at the centre? What referral mechanism has been put in place by the ministry? I would like to share on what I went through -(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this debate was to last only 30 minutes but because of the importance of the subject I allowed 37 members to contribute, they have fairly represented the opinions of the people in the country. Would the minister like to reply briefly? Thank you, Members for the contribution.

5.57
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Madam Speaker, allow me to thank members for their observations and questions. All these questions would have been answered if you toured the facility. This Parliament took a decision that we build an ultra-modern facility and equip it with ultra-modern equipment.

We have acquired the latest 2018 equipment, we need to maintain this facility, pay the doctors well so that they can stay. We are offering services that are not anywhere else which are to support our women to have the services in-country. We have benchmarked prices with our high grade private facilities here and made them even lower. 

When we go outside for medical treatment we pay when we are in country we do not want to pay and yet we want the facilities maintained.

I welcome you all to visit your facility and then you can give me answers on how I can maintain it. As ministry of health we are committed to ensure that the women of this country get the best.

On the supplementary, we did request for this money during the budgeting period but unfortunately it was not there at that time. However, Ministry of Finance had committed that they would provide if the hospital opens and they are ready.

Telemedicine was part and is still under procurement. Mulago was supposed to spread it out to the other hospitals. This hospital will be connected after the construction.

The National Health Insurance Bill is before Cabinet for consideration; we are fast-tracking it and hope that it will be available here.

Specifically on Vesicovaginal fistula; we have so much tried to roll out these services to all the regional referral hospitals because we know that women are suffering. Allow me to tell you that repairing a vesicovaginal fistula and following it up is extremely expensive.

They spend 14 days in hospital; if we are to repair free of charge in this hospital, keep and feed them for 14 days at the same time- we have the state of the art kitchen and we want to offer food, I do not know whether I will maintain the facility.

All laundry is being done patients do not come with clothes-there is everything in this facility. Surely honourable members I need you to come and see and take a decision.

We are working on the sewage in Kiruddu and Kawempe it is no longer leaking on the road. We have a cesspool emptier emptying it and national water is working on a package plant that ministry of Finance has already committed to financing.

Lastly, Nairobi Women’s Hospital is not free it is under national - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister we shall come but the Committee on Health should first start and then I will later lead the others.

6.01
DR MICHEAL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Mubende): Madam Speaker, as we plan to go we would like to appreciate the President, Government and your leadership for achieving this. As you direct us to go, there are very many issues because from what the minister presented, staff structure, salaries are not there and they did not have much time to think about the implementation. That is likely to cause us problems. 

Most of the people who were trained –

THE SPEAKER: You are now opening the debate. I just asked you to arrange to go.

DR BUKENYA: We shall go. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. You go and then come back to us. I will be amending the Order Paper to allow the Minister of Internal Affairs to present a paper.

LAYING OF PAPERS

6.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table a request by Government to borrow up to $104 million from Standard Chartered Bank to finance the National CCTV Network Expansion Project. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. 

6.04
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay at the table the agreement between the Government of Uganda represented by the Uganda Police Force, the Uganda Land Commission and Tip Top Investment Company in respect of “The design construction and equipping the regional forensic referral centre of excellence for the eastern region.” I beg to lay.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for perusal and report back.


LAYING OF REPORTS

            (I) TAX EXPENDITURE REPORT FOR THE PERIOD JULY 2017 TO JUNE 2018 FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

6.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, if you may allow me to confirm that on the Ministry of Health, we have agreed to release the supplementary of the Shs 7.15 billion to support this important hospital for the rest of the period of this financial year. 

Now, I would like to lay at the Table the Tax Expenditure Report for the Period July 2017 to June 2018 Financial Year 2017/2018.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.


II) SPECIAL AUDIT OF THE OPERATIONS OF UGANDA MEDIA COUNCIL FOR THE PERIOD 1ST JULY 2012 TO 30TH JUNE 2016

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask commissioner, Bahati to lay that?

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table a Special Audit of the Operations of Uganda Media Council for the Period 1st July 2012 to 30th June 2016.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back.

Honourable members, I would like to thank you for the work done. I would like to remind Government that the Prime Minister must come here tomorrow to address the issue of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) brutality.

Honourable members, House adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.07 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 19 September 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

